Alan Dean Foster
VOYAGE TO THE CITY OF THE DEAD

They
didn’t call in the
Guard because the intruder was already half dead.

Still, they were upset.

Muttering angrily among themselves over the outrageous
breach of protocol, the members of the Zanur looked to their
leader for direction, but Najoke de-me-Halmur held his peace.
It
was up
to the intruder to explain himself,
and

Hands was be fast.

hovered close to sheathed knives, although it
coming apparent this was no assassination attempt the intruder was too enfeebled to present a threat to anyone but
himself. So Najoke stayed his hand as well as his lips. Seeing
this, the other members of the Zanur calmed themselves.
Two unkempt servants attended the intruder, and they
had their hands full keeping him on his feet. He was completely bald, as befitted his age, but more than age had been
at work on that body recently. Pain was evident even in the
movement of the eyes, and their owner was breathing as if
he’d run a long ways, for all that two younger Mai supported
still

—

him.
Several of the more impatient members of the Zanur started
toward the stranger. De-me-Halmur stayed them with a wave
of one slim, six-fingered hand. “Patience, my friends. Let
[ 1]

us hear what this despoiler of etiquette has to say. Retribution can come later. We are no judges here.”
The leader’s words sparked the withered visitor’s attention. He shrugged off the helping hands of his servants, much
as he continued to push away the clutching hand of death.

Though unsteady and shaking, he stood straight and by himself. “Good members of the Zanur, I beg forgiveness for this
intrusion on the affairs of state. When one has little time
left, one has no time at all for protocol. I have much to tell
you.”

De-Yarawut rose and pointed,

hairless

brows drawing to-

you. You reside in my district.”
The elderly speaker tried to bow to the side, as etiquette!
required, and the effort nearly sent him sprawling. His servants rushed to help but he gestured them back.
gether. “I

“I

know

am flattered by your remembrance, Zanural de-YaraI am Bril de-Panltatol. A humble trader who works

wut.
Upriver.” The drama of the oldster’s intrusion, his unforgivable breach of tradition, was beginning to fade. And he

was known. No surprises were here.
Legends sing of the wrongness of such thoughts.

“No excuse can be made for your interruption, de-Panltatol,” de-me-Halmur said. “You know the penalties.”
as

f.

“Your most excessive indulgence, Moyt, but as I said and!
you can see, little time is left to me.”
De-me-Halmur had not become ruler of a great city-state

without the occasional ostentatious display of compassion.
“You must have bribed efficiently to obtain this entrance,
oldster.

You

are to be admired for that.
to say.”

Say what you have

come
“Good members of the Zanur, I have for most of my life
been a trader of fine woods and metals between our great
city of Po Rabi and the Upriver. Hai, even as far
as Kekkalong. Kekkalong was a very long way Upriver, and many
of the Zanurals had never journeyed beyond the boundaries
of the city. They listened to the rover with a little more
respect.
‘I

am a good citizen and work hard for my city. So I listen

well to any tale or rumor that suggests the opportunity
to
increase my wealth.”


[2]

“As do we all,”
with


Zanural de-Parinti commented. “Get on

it.”

Upriver are those which
speak of a dead place, home to spirits and ghosts and demons
beyond counting, who guard such wealth as could not be
counted in a thousand lifetimes by all the accountants of all

“Among

the

many

tales of the

the city-states that ring the Groalamasan itself.”
“A wonderful story, I’m sure,” another Zanural called

from

his council seat. “I too

have heard such

stories.”

known,” de-Panltatol continued, “that the nearer
to the source of such tales, the more vivid and

“It is well

one travels

—

or else they fade away entirely.
impressive they become
“This particular tale is told over and over again in a hundred
towns and villages of the North. I have listened to it for more
than fifty years. I resolved finally to pursue it to the last
storyteller. Instead it drew me onward, pulling me ever farther north. Sometimes the tale smelled of truth, more often
of village embroidery, but never did I lose track of it entirely.
“I went beyond maps and merchant trails, always up the
Barshajagad, following the current of the Skar and in places

—

completely. I walked I, Bril de-Panltatol
upon the surface of the frozen Guntali itself!”
Now the whispers of interest were submerged by illconcealed laughter. The Guntali Plateau, from which arose
all the great rivers of the world that drained into the single
ocean that was the Groalamasan, was so high and cold and
thin of air that no Mai could travel upon it. Yet the wrinkled

abandoning

it

laying claim to such a feat.
Like his fellow merchants and Zanural, de-me-Halmur
refused to countenance the possibility, but neither did he
laugh. He had not become Moyt of Po Rabi by dismissing

old trader

was

most elaborate absurdities without careful dissection.
“Let this one continue proving himself the fool, but let him
not be convicted until he has finished his story.”
“Up past even far Hochac I went,” de-Panltatol was
breathing harder now, “and my journey was but beginning.
I lost servants and companions until I was obliged to travel
on my own, because none would go farther in my company.
All believed me mad, you see. I nearly perished many times.
The rumors and the river led me ever onward.”

the

[

3]

“Onward

to

what?” another of the Zanural snorted

deri-

sively.

The oldster glanced sideways and seemed to draw strength
from his scoffers. “To the source of all the tales and songs.

[

To the land of the dead. To the part of the world where!
demons and monsters make their home. To the top of the|
world, good Zanural.”
This time the laughter could not be contained. It did not
appear to discourage the old trader.
“I found the City of the Dead. I, Bril de-Panltatol! And
I came away with a piece of it.” He frowned then, and
wheezed painfully. “I don’t remember that time very well.
My mind was numbed by all I had endured. How I stayed!
alive I don’t know, but I drove myself to make another boat.
I

made many

boats,

I

think. It’s hard to

remember.

I dis-l

guised what I had brought away beneath a bale of Salp skins!
and brought it all the way Downriver, all the way back to
my home, to Po Rabi.”
De-me-Halmur’s wide black eyes flickered. “A most interesting and entertaining story, de-Panltatol, but all such
tales of demon cities are entertaining. I hope you are a better
trader than you are a storyteller.” Polite laughter rose from!
the other members of the Zanur.
“Is that

what you broke

into our conference to tell us?”,

snapped another Zanural angrily. “If you can do no better!
than that, I promise you your age will not save you.”
“There is only one thing I can add to what I have told
you,” the exhausted trader admitted. “For it I have ruined
my mind and my self, so there is little for you to threaten
me with. My triumph will be short-lived and I will not buy
the seat on the Zanur that I longed for.” A few insulted!
murmurs arose among the Zanural, loudest from those whose
fortunes were smallest.
“So I will leave my tale to you, together with that one
other thing, and let you judge, Zanural of the city, if I might
have been thought equal in wealth to sit among you.” He
turned and blew on a small bone whistle that hung from a
cord around his neck.
A dozen laborers entered in two columns of six. Between
them they held ropes attached to a low dolly. Laughter gave
way to curiosity and confusion among the members of the
[

4]

Zanur.

The dolly had

six axles

and

fat

rubbery wheels made

from the treated sap of the arer tree.
From his place at the head of the long council table deme-Halmur saw the pile of fine gray Salp pelts piled high on
the dolly. They were valuable but not exceptionally so. Certainly they weren’t heavy enough to require the use of a sixaxle and twelve strong Mai to pull the load. He could see
the way muscles strained against something massive but concealed. He stood slightly, unconscious of the movement, to
have a better view.
The laborers halted and moved aside. With the aid of his
servants Panltatol staggered to the dolly. Disdaining help,
he reached out and shakily pulled the skins onto the floor.
They’d been sewn together and came off as one.
There was something else on the dolly, as de-me-Halmur
a single
suspected, but the sight of it struck him speechless
metal bar reposed on the wooden platform. It was twisted
and bent by some unknown force and was as thick as a large
Mai’s body. But that observation passed quickly. The Zan-

—

ural

were interested

in its

composition far more than

its

shape.

had not been polished and it displayed long gashes and
much pitting, evidence of exposure to powerful chemicals
It

or energies. Its color was familiar.
“I did not actually enter the place of the dead.” Panltatol’
voice was weakening. “I was near, very near, when weather
so terrible it cannot be imagined except in dreams finally
forced me to retreat. This relic I found on the banks of the
Skar, where the river had carried it. This alone I was able
to bring back with me. Zanural of Po Rabi, this is my legacy.”
Forgetting their dignity, abjuring protocol, they left thenseats to examine the massive metal bar. Sensitive sixfingered hands caressed the smooth gray substance. The dull
silvery sheen was a property of the metal itself.
felt like
It looked like sunit. It had the color of sunit. It
sunit. When three of the Zanural from northern Po Rabi tried

and could not, they were positive it was sunit.
De-Changrit, who on the Zanur was second in power only
to de-me-Halmur himself, removed a small ingot from the
money belt that circled his waist. It was a serl the largest
denomination coined by any of the great city-states that lined

to

lift it

,

[

5]

the shores of the Groalamasan Ocean, newly minted in powerful Chienba. He placed it in one of the gouges cut in the
flank of the bar and tried to calculate the worth of the twisted
mass in his head. He was a superb businessmai and his
estimate was very near the mark.
“Several million,” he announced aloud. “At least.” Having already made their own calculations, several of his associates nodded by way of confirmation.
De-Panltatol abruptly sat down on the edge of the dolly,
leaning back against the bar for support. He ran one hand
gently across the cold metal, lovingly, as if it were a woman
reclining in his hammock. There was not a Mai among the
Zanur who did not feel the same love for that bar. It represented a great and compact fortune.
When the murmurs and excited conversations began to
die down it was Changrit who asked the question uppermost
in all minds. “Is there more?”
His tone was respectful now, no longer sarcastic or accusing. Thus vindicated, Panltatol seemed to draw strength
from some unknown source. They were no longer laughing
at him.

“Honored sirs, I do not know. I found only this one piece,
washed up on a rocky and wild shore. But the rumors that
drove me to the top of the world always spoke of more in

j

|

the City of the Dead.”

Many

signs

were made by the Zanural, for they were as

intensely superstitious as the common folk. Daily their lives
were punctuated by the performance of rituals designed to
ward off unfriendly deities and spirits, which all Mai knew
ruled the affairs of each individual from birth to death. At

the rear of the chamber a wide-eyed servant hastily dumped
more incense in the ritual burner, in case the spirits in at-

tendance that day were possessed of particularly large noses.
The air of the chamber was immediately suffused with sweet
fragrance.

“No

actual City of the

Dead

exists,”

one of the Zanural

ventured hesitantly. “It is not a real place.”
De-me-Halmur used his hands eloquently. “No such solid
piece of sunit as this exists, yet it sits there before us.”

“More,” Panltatol mumbled. “More
Dead.”
-

6]

[
-

in the City of the

“How much more?”

asked Changrit with becoming ava-

riciousness.

“They say ... the rumors say

.

.

.

that the city itself is built

of sunit.” Dead silence greeted his declaration, appropriately. “I am sorry I did not go farther.” A thin smile appeared
on his withered face. His right arm lay like brown cloth
against the cold metal. “I am so tired, honored ones. I must
rest a while.”
“Wait!” Changrit rushed forward. With his own arms he
supported the oldster, a sign of the esteem in which Panltatol
was suddenly held. “How do we find the City of the Dead?
How could one retrace your travels?”
“Why, don’t you know?” Panltatol whispered. “There is
no City of the Dead. The journey cannot be made. But I
made it. I, Bril de-Panltatol, went where it is impossible to
go. But you can’t follow, none of you.” He said it with
vehemence as he unexpectedly sat up without aid. “You
can’t follow because only an insane one could make such a

A

sudden
journey. I am mad, you see, and you are not.”
thought made him blink with confusion.
“Very tired.” He leaned back against Changrit again and
closed his eyes. They would not open again.
Changrit gently lowered the thin body. “A true Mai. He
sacrificed everything in hopes of improving his fortune. I
honor him.”
“We all honor him,” de-me-Halmur
his

memory.”
“What of the

the Zanural
on the bar.

who

said, “as

we will honor

sunit?” Lust was apparent in the voice of
voiced the common thought. All eyes were

“You know the law,” de-me-Halmur said sternly, if a trifle
reluctantly. “I covet it as much as any of you, but it goes
to his family and employees.” He made a protective sign in
case certain spirits were listening. “The law is clear.”
Zanural de-Peyetmy was almost in tears. “Couldn’t
bend the law just a little?”

we

Those who
would bend the law ultimately find themselves strangled by
it.” Murmurs of assent sounded from around the table.
“Of course,” de-me-Halmur went on, “there is the matter
of a death tax.” A few smiles appeared. “Also the fact that
“I

am sworn

to uphold

it,

[

and

7]

I

will

do

so.

de-Panltatol undertook this journey without proper authorization, and we still must deal with the matter of his rude

Zanur Chamber.” He studied the bar. “I
would say that perhaps half should go into the city treasury.”
“That still leaves a nice fortune.” Changrit had retaken
his seat on de-me-Halmur’ s left. “No family could be disappointed to receive such an inheritance. Now that the law
has been dealt with, how are we to deal with this remarkable
intrusion into the

story?”
“A great journey,” one of the other Zanural announced
portentously. “One to be enshrined in memory and song. I
myself will commission a song cycle to commemorate it.”
“A thoughtful gesture,” de-me-Halmur agreed, thankful
for the Zanural’s support. His proposal meant that de-meHalmur would not have to pay for the requisite memorial.
Other Zanural cursed themselves for not thinking to make
the clever political move.
“Now who shall volunteer to help equip a new expedition
to journey to the top of the world in search of this rumored
City of the Dead?”
Suddenly every member of the council sought to shrink
in his seat. One, bolder than the rest, said sharply, “I would
not venture more than a thousand legats Upriver for all the

on Tslamaina.”
“Nor would I,” de-me-Halmur agreed. “De-Panltatol was
quite right. None of us is mad. The very idea of setting foot
on the Guntali Plateau is a concept only a disturbed mind
could conceive. To attempt to retrace his wild path would
be impossible.” He gestured toward the bar and the body
lying next to it. “We must be satisfied with this.”
“Not necessarily.” All eyes turned in surprise to Changrit.
De-me-Halmur waited warily for any suggestion his rival
might make. Each had much respect for the other, so much
so that they never employed assassins. Such methods they
left to cruder Mai while they dueled with words and gestures.
“It is true that any journey far up the Skar is daunting,
let alone one to the top of the world. One might undertake
sunit

such an expedition only to perish within sight of one’s goal.
It is more likely any travelers would end up staring at the
inside of a Na’s belly instead of the City of the Dead.”
Zanural s executed signs indicating anxiety.
[

8]

“Or else they would find themselves deceived by the Tsla.
We do not have the means for accomplishing such a journey,
but there are those who do.”
“I don’t see them here,” another Zanural called. Laughter
punctuated his observation.
Changrit gave him a withering look until the laughter had
subsided. “A good merchant knows his responsibility to the
Zanur, to his city-state. He knows also his own limitations.
I am quite aware of mine as you must be of yours.
“But there is something new come recently to Tslamaina.

speak of the visitors from the sky.”
Uncertain mutterings were silenced by de-me-Halmur.
“I’ve heard much of them. What is it you propose, Chan-

I

grit?”

can propose nothing unless recent information I have
received from my agents can be confirmed. Call for the ambassador to Losithi.”
There followed a long delay, made palatable by a regal
midday meal, while Ror de-Kelwhoang, ambassador to Losithi, was summoned from his offices in the Ministry. He
arrived in due course, breathless and puzzled.
“For what reason have I been summoned in such haste,
honored Zanural?”
There was much respect among the members for the skills
of the elderly Kelwhoang, just as there was in the Zanur of
Losithi. Po Rabi’s main rival in trade and commerce, it lay
several hundred legats to the southwest and controlled the
western end of the Skatandah Delta, the great marshland
formed by the emptying of the Skar River into the Groala“I

masan.

Midway between

the

two

city-states but slightly nearer

Losithi lay the station established by the strange visitors
from the sky. Their science was much advanced and gain
was to be made there for those who knew how to ferret it
out.

The

were

visitors

Losithi as well as

carefully courted

by diplomats from

Po Rabi.

“Tell the Zanur,” Changrit instructed the ambassador,
“what you told me several weeks ago concerning the visitors

from the sky. The new

“New

visitors?”

visitors.”

De-me-Halmur frowned, as did several
[

9]

”

other Zanural. “You mean that more of the large bugcreatures have arrived on Tslamaina?”

Kelwhoang looked toward

sponsor Changrit uncertainly, but received a gesture of openness by way of reply.
“All are friends here today, Kelwhoang. Speak freely.”
The ambassador nodded. “There came upon us a day
rainy and cold, which forced me to
De-me-Halmur interrupted him. “Our time is valuable,
Kelwhoang. Spare us the poetry.”
“Forgive me, Moyt. I was taken aback by this sight.” He
indicated the monstrous bar of sunit.
“Understandable. Your attention to potential profit marks
you well in our sight. Still, make your tale concise.”
Kelwhoang gestured in agreement. “Members of the
Zanur. As you know, I make it my business during the long
journey between our city and Losithi to take note of all of
his

—

interest that transpires within the Delta. The visitors from
the sky keep to their building-that-walks-the-water, but I
have cultivated
acquaintance with them.

my

“Thus did

I

learn that five

weeks ago

allies

from the sky

among them. I was astonished to learn that these
newcomers look not like those who built the sky-station, but
much like us.” That bit of news prompted gasps of astonarrived

ishment from the Zanurals.
“You mean,” Guptinak asked, “that they are not as horrible to look upon as the large bug-things?”

“No,” said Kelwhoang, gratified by the reaction his revelation had produced. “They are much like Mai, only taller,
taller even than a Tsla but not so large as a Na. They
have
more body hair and their features are sharper and more pronounced, rougher and not as beautiful. They suffer from our
climate much as does a Tsla, unlike their bug-thing friends
who are quite comfortable in the Delta. One male and one
female, similar enough to us that at a distance one could

almost think them Mai.
“I did not meet them myself, only saw them conversing
with the Moyt of the station, the one called,” and he struggled
with the difficult alien name, “Porlezmozmith. Later I was
able to talk with her ancf she remarked on the similarity
between us and the new visitors. Truly the resemblance is
striking

between

us.

These newcomers’ faces have smaller
[10J

visible
eyes, larger ears that are great curved winged things
their
even at a distance. Oh yes, they have but five digits on
hands and feet instead of the normal six, even as the bugextra pair of
things have but four, though they have that
arms and legs. It may be that these new visitors are more
we share our
akin to us than the Tsla or the Na, with whom

world.”
“All fascinating,” de-me-Halmur said, “but
profit

how does this

us?”

“Tell

them what the bug-thing

told

you

his

new

guests

have planned,” Changrit prompted.
“Ah. I was told they brought with them a wondrous magmore freely than the
ical boat which walks upon the water
depend on wind or
station the visitors first built. It does not
was
muscle for power but carries its own energy inside it. I
Upriver, against the
told that it can travel at great speed
current of the Skar.”
More mutters of astonishment rose from the assembled
by
members. “We’ve heard much of the wonders brought

I sense your
the visitors from the sky,” de-me-Halmur said.
sell us this
thought, Changrit, but surely they would not
amazing craft?”
.
,
,
told
been
have
I
admitted.
“Never,” the ambassador
many times by the Moyt Porlezmozmith that they can have
they are foronly the briefest of contacts with us and that
tools
bidden by their own laws to sell us any of the advanced
.

and instruments they have brought with them.
“No profit in that,” one of the Zanural grumbled.

Truly

these visitors are alien.”

con“These newcomers who are like us,” the ambassador

intend to make
tinued, “are scholars, not merchants. They
which cradles our
a study of the Barshajagad, the canyon
river Skar.”
“Now that

makes sense,” de-me-Halmur commented.
made a sign
“There is always profit in good scholarship.” He
insight, but finally had
to invoke the spirit of knowledge and
to ask, “What is in your mind, Changrit?”
world.
“These visitors from the sky still know little of our
Beyond the Delta they are ignorant, for all their knowledge.
Hotiek
They know nothing of the ways of the Skar, or of the
They know
or the Aurang or any of the lesser tributaries.
[ 11 ]

nothing of the peoples
need guides.”

who

inhabit the canyon.

They

will

“Ah!” De-me-Halmur’s expression was fed by enlightenment. “Friendly locals to show them the way.”
“Yes, to show them the way.”
“And good friends that we are, it behooves us as the rulers
of Po Rabi to find volunteers to assist them?”
“Every chance we can find,” Changrit agreed firmly.
“How do we know that these strange creatures have any
interest in traveling up the Skar farther than the town of
Xbe?” a Zanural wondered aloud.
“We do not,” Changrit admitted. “How does one divine
the intentions of aliens? Yet if they are as similar in appearance to us as Ambassador de-Kelwhoang says, who is
to say that their motivations are different?” He looked away
from the table. “You’ve no idea how far they intend to go
Upriver, Kelwhoang?”

“No. The bug-Moyt was not too

clear.

He

did say a long

journey. Certainly farther than Ibe.”
“Then our course is clear, Zanural.” De-me-Halmur leaned

forward the better to emphasize his words and gestures. “We
must do our utmost to ensure that these visitors make use
of our good intentions and accept the aid that the people of
Po Rabi will freely extend to them.”
“Assuming they accept,” said another member. “What if
they do not travel to the region of our hopes? What if they
reach Kekkalong and decide they have journeyed far

enough?”
“Then perhaps,” Changrit murmured quietly, “they might
at that time be persuaded to loan us the use of their wondrous
craft. Fm certain that the loquacious Ror de-Kelwhoang will
employ all his admirable verbal talents to ensure that the
immediate requirements of the Zanur are met.”
“I shall do my best, of course.” The ambassador performed an elaborate gesture designed to invoke the spirits
of all the great diplomats of the past. He glanced sideways
at the huge, gleaming mass of solid sunit.
‘However, if I am to do my best, honored ones, it would
help if you could explain to me the reasons behind my mission. Would I be remiss in assuming it has something to do
[

12 ]

with the astonishing wealth that
the center of this chamber?”

lies

next to a dead Mai in

“Seat yourself.”
Gesturing his thanks at the honor, de-Kelwhoang joined
the table as Changrit related the events of the morning.
The subsequent discussion and laying out of plans lasted
well into the evening. The heat of day was followed by the
heat of night and still the Zanur sat in extended session.
Bureaucrats and guards gossiped and wondered, but still the
rulers of Po Rabi remained sequestered in their chamber.
early hours
It was only when they finally adjourned in the

“You would

not,”

de-me-Halmur

said.

of the morning that someone thoughtfully directed attendants
memoto remove the stiffened corpse of that soon to be
had
rialized merchant— explorer Bril de-Panltatol. Great care
already been taken to ensure that a proper share of his legacy
safely transported to the city treasury.
Greater care and craft might make possible the seemingly
impossible task of securing for the Zanur of Po Rabi the rest

was

of his legacy.

[

13 ]

fill
Etienne Redowl was sick of measuring current flow. He
was sick of taking samples from the river bottom. Recording
the ebb and flow of sandbars and mudbanks no longer interested him, nor did watching the analyzer spit out graphs
listing gravel composition mineral by mineral.
But there was nothing else for him to do at Steamer Station.

seemed as

they’d been waiting for permission from
the native authorities to begin their Upriver expedition since
the beginning of time. Anyone who thought the bureaucracy
of Commonwealth Science and Exploration difficult to penIt

etrate should

if

have to cope once

in his life with the

byzantine
machinations of the Mai of Tslamaina. The station’s location
between the rival city-states of Po Rabi and Losithi only
made it tougher to obtain the necessary clearances.
There was no pushing the matter, however. Where a Class
Four-B world was involved, Commonwealth policy was strict.
Porlezmozmith, the officer in charge of Steamer Station, was
sympathetic to the Redowls’ plight, but not to the point of
[

14 ]

challenging regulations. So the husband- wife team sat and
sweated and waited.
Etienne paused on the ladder long enough to adjust the
thermo-sense on his fishnet shirt and shorts. Minuscule cooling units woven into the material struggled to cool his skin.
He checked his wrist telltale. fairly mild afternoon, with

A

the temperatures hovering around a hundred and twenty
degrees and the humidity a mere ninety percent. He longed
for the coolness of their quarters on the station platform

above.

The thranx found the temperature a mite hot, but the
humidity suited them just fine. That was why they’d been
chosen to staff the only Commonwealth outpost. For them
it was almost like home. For humans it was pure misery.
Survey should have named it misery, Etienne thought.
Instead it had been named for its geology. That geology and
the unique civilization it had produced were the reasons why
Etienne and his wife Lyra had braved endless application
forms and sweltering weather in order to be the first humanx
scientists allowed to work beyond the boundaries of the
outpost. Or such would be the case if the native authorities
ever gave them the okay to travel Upriver. Until that happened they were stuck at the station. Months of waiting for
permission to arrive, endless days spent battling the terrible

heat and humidity had sapped his initial enthusiasm. Lyra
was bearing up better beneath the day-to-day disappointment, but even she was starting to wilt.
He forced himself to see Tslamaina as it looked from
high orbit. The refreshing, cooler image reminded him again
why they’d come to the world its discoverers had named
Horseye. Lyra had no room for flippancy in science and
preferred Tslamaina, the native name, but the image certainly fitted.

collided with a meteor of truly
impressive dimensions. In addition to creating the vast circular basin that was now filled by the Groalamasan Ocean,
the concussion had badly cracked the planet’s surface. That

Eons ago the planet had

surface, high above the single world-ocean, comprised the
Guntali Plateau.
Water running off the Guntali for hundreds of millions of

years patiently enlarged those surface cracks, eventually re[

15 ]

canyons ever encountered. The combination of geological and climatological
factors necessary to produce such awesome scenery had not
been duplicated on any other of the explored worlds.
Of all the river canyons by far the greatest was the Barshajagad, which in the Mai language meant “Tongue-of-theWorid.” More than two thousand kilometers wide at the
point where it finally emptied into the ocean, it reached
northward from its delta some thirteen thousand kilometers
suiting in the

most spectacular

river

to vanish in the cloud-shrouded north polar wastes.

From

the edge of the Guntali, a few hundred kilometers Upriver,
to the surface of the slowly moving river Skar, the Barshajagad dropped approximately eight thousand meters in elevation. Where mountains rose from the plateau, the disparity

was even greater.
So wide was the Barshajagad at its mouth, however, that
a traveler on the surface of the river could not see where
the gradually ascending slopes finally reached the plateau to
east and west.
The result was an astonishing variety of life forms organized into ecological regions not by latitude but by elevation,
as nature made use of the different temperature and moisture
zones that climbed the canyon walls.
Three different intelligent mammalian races had appeared
on Tslamaina, each confined to its own portion of the river
canyons. The intensively competitive and primitively capitalistic Mai ruled the ocean and the river valleys. Above
them in the more temperate zone between three thousand
and fifty-five hundred meters were the Tsla. Clinging to the
frozen rims of the canyons and freely roaming the Guntali
were the carnivorous Na. Or so the locals claimed. None of
them had ever seen a Na, and since Mai society was infused
with a healthy respect for and belief in thousands of spirits,
demons, and ghosts, Lyra Redowl, circumspect xenologist
that she was, was reluctant to give instant recognition to the
existence of this legendary third intelligent race.
Temperature and pressure and not national or tribal
boundaries kept the races of Tslamaina separated. That made
for a sociocultural situation every bit as unique as the local
geology, as Lyra was fond of pointing out to her husband.
Their hope, the dream that had brought them across many
[

16 ]

was to take a hydrofoil all the way up the Skar
source, making a thorough study of the geology and

light-years,

to its

the people of the planet as they advanced. But Tslamaina
was a Class Four-B world. That meant they could only proceed with the natives’ permission, and that permission still
was not forthcoming, despite repeated anxious requests.
So Etienne had been confined to examination of the delta
soils and the geology around the station which was, in a
word, flat. Lyra was better off, able to visit with those fisherfolk who sometimes stopped at the station to chat and to
attempt to steal anything not bolted down. Station personnel
never ventured reprisals for the attempts. For one thing the
attempts were always unsuccessful. For another, it was part
of the local culture.
Six months had passed since the shuttle had deposited
the Redowls at Steamer Station and Etienne was close to
calling off the expedition. Only the knowledge that they would
be the first to make an Upriver journey kept him from booking passage out on the next supply run.
It would help if Lyra would learn to keep her frustration
to herself, but no, not her. She’d declaim long and loud to
anyone within earshot. The thranx were too polite to tell her
to shut up, and Etienne had tried many times and failed.
After the first month he simply gave up and tuned her out.
It wasn’t hard. He had been doing it for twenty years. Eight
or nine years ago the conflict might have ended in divorce,
but now they had too much invested in each other. Convenience and familiarity balanced out a lot of bickering,

though sometimes he wondered.
Something was itching sharply on the back of his neck.
Holding onto the ladder with his right hand he reached up
and back with his left, coming away with something soft and
flexible. He eyed it with intense distaste.
It was as long as his hand and thick as his thumb, completely transparent except for the dark maroon color spreading slowly backward from the head. As he held it firmly it
wiggled and twisted in search of the blood so recently discovered and quickly vanished.
The dangui was an elegant local bloodsucker related to
the annelid worms but possessed of a cartilaginous backbone
which when flexed allowed it to jump at its intended host.
[

17 ]

turned red as it filled up with blood. It looked like a glass
leech and seemed to find human plasma perfectly palatable,
much to Etienne’s enduring disgust.
Forcing down the gorge rising in his throat he flung it as
far away as he could, heard the faint plop when it hit the
murky green water. He felt the back of his neck and his hand
came away bloody. First stop inside the station would be
It

for antibiotic spray.

The metal

on which Steamer Station rested carried
a mild electric charge to discourage infestation by such local
pests though they rarely troubled the thranx because of their
stilts

tough exoskeletons. Etienne dealt in smooth, hard surfaces

and clean stone and didn’t care much for biology, particularly when it chose to get personal.
High thin clouds blocked out some of the ultraviolet, but
Etienne was still grateful for his naturally dark coloring, a
legacy of ancient Amerindians. A lighter-skinned human
would quickly fry under Tslamaina’s relentless sun. Though
he’d been outside less than ten minutes, the sweat was pouring off him. The cooling meshwork shirt and shorts were all
that kept him halfway comfortable.
Even the climate might be bearable if only they’d receive
permission from the native authorities. The frustration of
waiting was worse than any heat, he mused as he made his
careful way up the ladder.

Behind him tall fat pseudopalms thrust enormous green
fronds over the lazy water. Table tree roots exploded sideways from their trunks before dipping down into the mud.
Nappers, tiny crustaceans with multihued shells, filled the
air

with their doglike barking.
Little relief beyond the shade

was available
inside the station since the internal temperature was set to
accommodate thranx and not humans. A hundred was certainly cooler than one-twenty, but the humidity was unchanged. Only when he entered the rooms reserved for less
it

offered

tolerant visitors did the humidity begin to drop.
he reached their quarters, station machinery had

By the

time

lowered the

temperature forty-five degrees and sucked out more than
half the humidity.

Lyra Redowl barely glanced up

at him.

a chair studying her clipboard viewer.
[

18 ]

She sprawled

in

“Anything interesting?”
“Glass leech bit me.”

“Bad?”

He moved

and removed a tiny
spray can, dosed the back of his neck. “The Skar flows into
the Groalamasan, the Groalamasan goes round and round
and it comes out here.” He gestured toward the lavatory.
She put her viewer aside, spoke coolly. “I don’t blame
you for being upset, Etienne. I’m as pissed off as you are.
But there’s nothing we can do except wait. Make an effort
not to take it out on me, okay?”
“I’m not taking anything out on you,” he said exasperatedly. “Why do you take everything I say so personally?
Can I help it if this damn delay’s got me running around like
a monkey chewing his tail?”
“You have to work on your self-control. You’ll end up
with an ulcer.”
“I keep control of myself!” He struggled to match his
“I doubt it.”

to a cabinet

tone to his assertion. “I haven’t got time to argue with you,
Lyra.”
“I agree.” Her eyes moved back to the viewer.
He sighed, counted quietly to eight, then plopped down
in one of the thin chairs. “What are you buried in now?”

“Varofski on multiple societal interactions.”
“Haven’t you read that already?”
“Twice. This is my third time around. What do you suggest I do? Squat here and watch thranx shadowplays on the
tridee?”
“It

would be a change, but

I

don’t want to argue about

it.”

do. That’s why I’m always amazed how regularly you end up doing so.” Suddenly she looked up at him
and smiled. It was a little forced, but welcome nonetheless.
“Listen to us, fighting like a couple of idiot children.
Etienne, I’m just as frustrated as you are. What the hell is

“You never

keeping those Moyts from giving us travel clearance?”
“Who knows.” Rising from the chair, Etienne crossed to
the kitchen area and thumbed the switch on the left side of
the refrigeration unit. It dispensed fruit juice, heavily salted
and sugared. The cooking facilities were nearby but rarely
utilized. The Redowls preferred to take most of their meals
[

19]

cold Tslamaina didn’t encourage consumption of piping hot
food.
Glass in hand he walked over to stand behind his wife’s
chair, rested a hand on her shoulder as he sipped at the icy
;

liquid.

“Truce, Lyra?”
She reached up to pat his hand. “Truce. Can’t we do
something, Etienne?”
“Not a damn thing. You know the law. We’re wholly
dependent on the whims of the locals.” She nodded, returned
to her reading.
He never tired of looking at her. After twenty years he
still found her physically alluring. Lately she looked even
better than usual, having lost weight since their arrival. Tslamaina would sweat you down to skeleton size if you weren’t
careful.

“I don’t understand the delay,” she said. “I’ve talked to

the local flsherfolk and traders and they just give me the
local variations of a bemused shrug. From everything I’ve
been able to learn both these city-states are hotbeds of new
ideas and rapid development. You’d think one or the other
would be eager to grant us permission to travel Upriver.”
“I’m sure they would,” Etienne agreed, “if we could
promise them something solid in return. Unfortunately, the
regulations protecting Class Four-B worlds prohibit any!
commerce with natives. No introduction of advanced tech-!
nology allowed from external sources, and that’s what they
want to buy from us. The usual nasty cycle. The Moyts
would like to grant us clearance for Upriver travel but they
want payment in return.
can’t pay them what they want
because regulations forbid it. So here we sit, and sweat.”

We

“Too

true.

How’s your neck?”

He felt at the

shallow bite. “Filthy little monsters. I don’t
mind dealing with something big and toothy, but I hate parasites.”

“Let me give you another shot of antibio.” She put down
her viewer and reached for the spray. A cool dampness
caressed his neck a second time.
“There,” she said with satisfaction. “This is no place to
pick up an infection, no matter how interesting. We’ve been
lucky so far. Not that we’ve spent all that much time out120 ]

side.”

She

hesitated. “Etienne, I’m ready to start

chewing
Tell you

—

the furniture again. We’ve got to get out of here
what. Why don’t we check out the boat?”
He made a face. “We’re going to wear it out before

we

get started, checking the systems so often.”
“No, I mean really check it out.” There was suppressed
excitement in her voice. “Let’s take it out for a run on the

open sea. It’s always cooler on the Groalamasan.”
“Porlezmozmith will be miffed. She’ll call us down for
undue exposure of advanced technology to a presteam society.”

“Crap. The local fisherfolk have seen us testing

it

lots of

times.”

Etienne grinned down at her. “Woman, you have a devilish sense of humor.”
“It helps, when you spend your life trying to make sense
of other people’s cultures. Come on. It’ll be fun. And a
change.”
Etienne was feeling better by the time they left their
quarters. They threw together a cold lunch of native edibles.
The consistency of the flat, crackerlike bread was unusual
but the taste was delightful.
From their quarters it was a short walk down to Level
Three, the lowest of the station, where the hydrofoil hung
silent in its bay, a sleek delta-shape built of ultralight metals.
A compact electric jet protruded from beneath the stern,
looking like the mouthparts of a dragonfly nymph. The hydrofoil was an exquisite bit of engineering and despite its
fragile appearance, could take a considerable pounding. Inside, the craft was spacious and efficient.
Ignoring the occasional stare of passing thranx maintenance workers, Etienne operated the bay controls. With a
soft whirr the double doors parted, revealing the turgid mix
of fresh and salt water that lay twenty meters below.
Bow and stem couplers lowered the hydrofoil toward the
water. Lyra was already on board, stowing their lunch and
running the autoprogram through diagnostic functions. Disdaining the ladders, Etienne wrapped arms and legs around
one of the coupler cables and slid down to the boat. A touch
on one switch sent the couplers upward, leaving the boat
floating free on the water of the delta.
[

21 ]

A plexalloy dome enclosed the cockpit where Lyra waited
The engine came to loud life as the photovoltaic coating of the boat worked to ensure that the fuel
cells which supplied power were fully charged. The air conditioning greeted him with a blast of deliciously cold air.
Lyra nudged the accelerator and turned the wheel. They
slid from the shade of the station and headed south. Soon
they were clear of the last platform trees and high marsh
grasses and out on the open ocean.
in the pilot’s chair.

[

22 ]

I'"l
trade breeze caught them, and the humidity
on deck dropped quickly to a tolerable eighty percent while
the temperature plunged to one-oh-five. Etienne took advantage of the much cooler weather to move out on deck.

The steady

Occasionally he turned to smile and wave to Lyra, who
remained inside the transparent dome handling the instru-

ments.
Intakes mounted on the front of each foil sucked in water
and fed it to the electric jet astern. The jet forced the water
through twin high-pressure nozzles, sending the boat skimming over the surface at high speed. The hydrofoil had been
designed to function as a river runner but could handle open
ocean reasonably well as long as the waves didn’t crest dangerously high.

Behind them the Skatandah Delta was a long line of green
marking the horizon. Lyra sent them flying southwestward,
toward the great city-state of Losithi. They were careful to
stand well out to sea, clear of the heavy commerce that
crowded the waters beyond the harbor.
A thousand kilometers and more to north and south, the
[

23 ]

eight-thousand-meter-high cliffs of the Guntali Plateau probed
the sky. From the Losithi-Po Rabi area, distance and planetary curvature made them invisible, though there were places

where the cliffs dropped sheer to the sea, a sight unequaled
on any other inhabited world. Only where rivers like the
Skar had cut their way to the ocean were cultivation and
urbanization possible.
Lyra’s voice sounded through the intercom membrane
built into the cockpit dome. “I’ve got something on the scanner, a few degrees to starboard. Want to run over and check
it out?”
“Sure, I want to check it out. What Porlezmozmith doesn’t
know won’t hurt her.” He clung to the railing and watched
the foils slit the surface of the sea.
Lyra smiled back at him as she angled the boat slightly
to starboard. The moving dot on the scanner was soon within
sight
a triple-decked trimaran, a big merchant cruiser and
a fine example of Mai shipbuilding. Her three hulls rode low
in the water, bursting with trade goods gathered from her
journey around the circular sea. If she wasn’t based in Losithi she would have just arrived from distant Ko Phisi and
before that, Suphum. From here she would move on to Po
Rabi on the other side of the Skatandah, thence around to
Chienba and points east.
She was making good speed with the wind at her back.
The trade winds moved eternally clockwise around the circumference of the Groalamasan. Only in the vicinity of the
warm southern pole could a native captain test confused
winds and sometimes shorten the homeward journey around
the great ocean.
Gesturing and chattering, sailors were already lining the
upper decks and scrambling into the rigging for a look at the
strange alien vessel. More exciting to a Mai seaman than the
hydrofoil’s silhouette was the fact that it moved at impossible
speed and against the wind, not to mention without sails.
As Lyra raced the hydrofoil around the massive merchantman for a thorough look, Mai sailors and passengers rushed

—

from deck to deck to keep them

in view.

After recording the merchantman for their journal, the
Redowls passed among a fleet of shallow-hull fishing boats
[

24 ]

reaping the rich harvest of life that thrived where salt water
mixed with fresh.
As they slowed to thread more easily between the first

and clusters of pseudopalms, one large craft suddenly
moved toward them. Its occupants brandished eager expressions together with long gaffs, axes, and pikes. The Mai
would gladly have slit the throats of the two humans in order
islets

to gain possession of the invaluable hydrofoil. Etienne ex-

perienced unscientific thoughts as Lyra nudged the accelerator and left the would-be pirates in their wake.
“Nasty little bastards,” he muttered as he stared astern.
“That’s not being very understanding of a primitive culture, Etienne,” Lyra said disapprovingly.
“All right, so they’re primitive nasty little bastards.”
“Avaricious, not vicious,” she insisted. “You must try to
view them in light of their society’s laws.
typically primitive plutocratic culture where personal wealth signifies an
individual’s social standing. You can’t let your own viewpoint affect your observations.”
“Like hell I can’t. Porlezmozmith feels the same way

A

about the Mai.”
“She’s an administrator, a bureaucrat, a byte-pusher who
knows nothing of xenology and cares less.”
“All I said was that some of their ingrained habits could
stand

some

modification.”

“Environment dictates their actions, not personal choice.”
“What environment?” He made a sweeping gesture toward the nearing line of high trees. “This is a warm, lush
land. How do you go from that to a highly combative society?”

“They sublimate most of a natural aggressive drive in
competition for commerce and trade. Isn’t that better than
organized war between the city-states?”
“It’s healthier, sure, but from the standpoint of what’s
civilized there’s something to be said for slugging it out with
your neighbor toe to toe instead of trying to steal him blind.”
“Their attempts at thievery are governed by a strict code
of rules, Etienne, which is more than you can say for war.”
“Leave me to the structure of the planetary crust, not
Mai society. It’s cleaner.”
“You mean simpler, don’t you? There are so few variables
[

25 ]

easy for you, but I don’t envy you.
There’s no personality, no joy in studying the daily activities
of a rock.”
“Oh no? Let me tell you ...”
It went on in that vein for another few minutes before
Lyra finally ended it, as she always did. So many of their
discussions lately seemed to end that way.
“Well if you’re going to act like that then I’m just not
going to talk about it anymore.” And she turned her gaze
resolutely away from him, directing her attention to the scanin geology. It

makes

it

ner.

He fumed

silently all the

way back

to the station.

A

services officer was waiting for them in the boat bay.
Etienne shinnied up a cable, prepared to send down the
couplers. The officer moved to stand next to him.

“Excuse me.” Her symbospeech was rough and unpolished, a good sign that Horseye might be her first off-world
post. She clung with tru and foothands to a nearby pillar and
her four legs were spread wide. Her whole body shied away
from the open bay.
That was understandable. Thranx were good floaters but
poor swimmers and their breathing spicules were located on
the B-thorax below the neck. A standing thranx could drown
in shallow water while still being able to see and hear clearly.
That was the only reason why Tslamaina was not a popular
duty station among the thranx. The climate was perfect but
much of the terrain threatening.
So Etienne didn’t ask why the officer was clinging to the
pillar for dear life, understood why nothing more was said
until the hydrofoil had been drawn up into the bay and the
double doors closed beneath it.

“What

is it?”

he

finally inquired as

Lyra moved to join

them. She adjusted her halter top, did not look at him. Her
expression was frosty.
“An ambassador from Po Rabi is due to arrive shortly,”
the officer announced. “Word has come ahead via courier
boat. You have been granted permission to travel Upriver
through the Delta along those branches of the Skar controlled
by the Moyt of Po Rabi.”
Etienne let out a whoop and did a back flip, much to the
interest of the thranx working in the bay area. Such a gym126 ]

was beyond them. Lyra stood and smiled at the
officer. The argument that had accompanied them back to
the station was completely forgotten.
“It’s about time,” she murmured. “Did the courier say
nastic feat

anything about the long delay we’ve suffered, why or for
what reason?”
“Nothing additional was mentioned,” the officer said,
adding a brief gesture of negativity coupled with third-degree

empathy.
“I’ll

bet

I

know what finally happened,” Etienne declared.

“Steamer Station’s actually situated a little closer to Losithi
than it is to Po Rabi. They must have decided that it was
time to forget about hard bargaining and grant clearance
before we struck some sort of deal with the Losithians.”
“I am sorry to dump dirt on your theory,” the thranx said
apologetically, “but it would appear they still insist on some
kind of token payment.”
“But we’ve been through that a hundred times,” Lyra
pointed out. “They want advanced technology and we’re not
allowed to give it to them. Don’t tell me they’ve decided to
accept our nontech trade goods?”
“No. Commander Porlezmozmith has devised a method
of satisfying them without contravening any of the regulations governing commerce with Class Four-B natives.
“Many areas of high ground do not benefit from seasonal
floods of the Skar and so do not receive deposits of fresh
or yield the crops they otherwise might. The commander
has reviewed this with representatives of Po Rabi and they
understand the implications quite well.
“Salvenkovdew, who is in charge of the station’s chemistry section, has agreed to rig equipment to produce highquality natural fertilizers for such highland fields. Under current regulations this type of fertilizer does not qualify as a
high-tech commodity, so it can be traded to the natives, and
the Po Rabians have agreed to accept it as payment.”
“Good old Porlez!” Etienne exclaimed. “She’s been working on our problem all along and never breathed a word of
silt

it.”

^

“Probably didn’t want to get our hopes up,” Lyra said.
“I hope the form of payment isn’t to be taken as a comment
on the value of our expedition.”
[

27 ]

“Who

way

Thanks,” he told
the officer. Twin antennae dipped and bobbed by way of
gracious reply. “When’s this ambassador supposed to get
cares? We’re on our

at last!

here?”

“The courier could not be certain. Perhaps tomorrow,
perhaps several days from tomorrow. I am much gladdened
for you both.”
“Thanks again. We’ve been ready to leave for months,
though I suppose we can find a few last-minute things to
take care of.”

you will excuse me.” The thranx officer released her
iron grip on the support pillar and slowly backed clear of
the closed bay doors. She looked much happier after she
had moved well away from the potential gap.
Deep in conversation, Etienne and Lyra returned to their
quarters. Working smoothly they began packing a motile
with personal belongings and other last-minute items. They
were going to be away from civilization for a long time and
there would be no returning for a forgotten chip or bit of
“If

clothing.

At

least they could

consume native foods. That

left

a

lot

of room on board for other equipment, extra medical supplies, and tridee cubes.
Stowed in one of the bottom compartments was their coldweather gear, untouched since its arrival on Tslamaina. They
would need the suits when they entered the north polar latitudes. After the relentless heat of the lower Barshajagad,
both looked forward to some cheerful freezing.
Two days passed before the ambassador’s ship appeared.
His retinue was as modest in size and appearance as the
vessel which bore them. Ror de-Kelwhoang looked disappointed when he was informed he could not bring any of his
escort onto the station, but accepted the determination with

i

j

i

j

;

I

|

diplomatic grace.
In its own modest way the ambassador’s official craft was
impressive enough. Hired rowers held their double-bladed
oars at attention as the ambassador debarked, though they

were unable to keep

from wandering toward the
stood high above the water on mas-

their eyes

strange alien castle that
sive metal legs.

The meeting took place on a deck
[

that encircled the sta-

28 ]
!

lower levels. Etienne and Lyra waited in their briefs
and tops. Tslamaina was no place for formal wear.
The ambassador wore little more than the curious humans. His cache du sex was opaque, as was the custom,
and his upper garment of silver and copper-colored threads
concealed little despite covering him from neck to ankles.
It made for a very flashy nonexistent costume:. As Lyra had
explained, the composition of the material as well as the
intricate weave told a knowledgeable onlooker much about
the wearer’s status, as well as the time of year and what
holiday it might be. A good Mai tailor could make much out
tion’s

of

Httle.

Lyra found such

details of native life fascinating. Etienne

bore her enthusiasm stoically.

He was interested in minerals,

not millinery.

The Mai ambassador spread his arms wide and turned a
slow circle. The movement was fluid but slow, reflective of
his advanced age. Porlezmozmith, who had met him before,
performed the formal introduction. Her Mai was competent
but could not match that of the Redowls; that was due to
the.thranx larynx, not a lack of linguistic talent.

“Ror de-Kelwhoang, our visitors who would travel your
lands, Etienne and Lyra Redowl.”
“It is our pleasure to greet you,” Lyra added. “We look
forward with endless delight to exploring your magnificent
country. We are endlessly grateful for the permission to do
so granted by your Zanur on behalf of your most powerful
and respected city-state.”
The ambassador acknowledged the elegant tribute, which
Lyra had rehearsed unto boredom, with a slight gesture signifying acceptance. His soft, perceptive eyes seemed fixed
on Lyra. That was understandable. She stood eye to eye
with the ambassador, which made her tall for a Mai female
but not a grotesque scarecrow of a giant like her husband.
It was the first time the ambassador had set eyes on the new
aliens and he was evidently entranced by the similarities.
Etienne had to stifle his amusement at the ambassador’s
unabashed preoccupation. By Mai standards Lyra’s proportions were nothing short of awesome.
“It is with delight that I bring greetings and good wishes
from Najoke de-me-Halmur, Moyt of Po Rabi. It has been
[

29 ]

1!

decided after much careful discussion and agreement on a
contract of exchange for certain materials to permit you free
passage throughout all the vast territories controlled by our
city-state.”

“I’m glad everything’s worked out,” Etienne replied. His
Mai was more colloquial than Lyra’s, but the ambassador
didn’t seem to mind the informality of the alien’s speech.
“What route will you be taking?”
Etienne smiled disingenuously. He and Lyra had debated
the possibility of treachery by the locals and had decided it
would be better to appear a little impolite and conceal the
exact details of their itinerary.
“We’re not certain. Here and there— we travel where our

knowledge draws us.”
Experienced diplomat that he was, de-Kelwhoang did not
react to the probable evasion. “I envy you your freedom.
Alas, my work rarely allows me to vary from a designated
course. I have been told of the marvelous devices you possess which enable you to find your way at night and in bad
weather as clearly as in cloudless daytime. Nevertheless, we
would be remiss in our duty and it would be an offense to
our honor if you were come to distress attempting to work
your way into the main channel of the great Skar.” Etienne
was immediately on guard.
“It is also necessary that you carry more than signed
documents, which can be forged, to prove that you travel
under the protection of all Po Rabi. That way the ignorant
bandits and suspicious villagers you may encounter, many
of whom have not mastered the art of reading, will allow
you to pass freely through their lands.”
The ambassador turned and called over the railing toward
his boat. A moment later two Mai appeared at the top of the
stairs. Their fishnet attire was plain and their attitude defthirst for

j

i

|

j

I

erential.

Etienne’s first thought was that they constituted some
formal part of the ambassador’s entourage, but such was not
the case.
“These will be your guides as well as your guarantors of
safe passage,” de-Kelwhoang announced. He bade each
turn step forward and make gestures of obeisance before the

i

m

humans.
[

30]

}
I

the female’s Irquit. No
honorific “de” prefix, Etienne noted. Both wore simple face
makeup and had their long hair bound back in single braids
in contrast to the ambassador’s elegant but thin coiffure.
After bending and turning, both extended their hands outward toward the Redowls, palms upward.
After a moment’s hesitation Lyra reached out and pressed
her own palms to each proffered pair, palm down. The much
longer Mai fingers extended well up against her wrist. Each
of the six fingers ended in a soft fleshy pad. There were no
nails, no residual claws.

The male’s name was Homat,

Then she stepped back and drew her husband and Porlezmozmith aside, spoke in symbo speech. “What’s your
opinion, Commander? I don’t really want these two along,
but I don’t want to offend this ambassador either, especially
since we’re not yet on our way.”
“You are the xenologist, Lyra. But it would be bad diplomacy to refuse this offer of aid. They come to you as
official representatives of their city. They do not look threatening to me and may indeed prove usefiil on your journey.
Your mastery of Mai customs is far from complete.”
“If it was we wouldn’t be disappearing Upriver for a few
months. Etienne, what’s your opinion?”
“If it was up to me I’d rather not have them along, but
as Porlez says, this is in the nature of an official presentation
and I don’t see how we can decline. I’m sure they’re being
sent along to learn everything they can about us for their
Zanur, but I don’t see much harm in that. They’ll have to
stay out on the stern deck anyway, away from any sensitive
controls.

them

in

The

main cabins would kill
make them damn uncom-

air conditioning in the

a few hours, or at least

fortable.”

“All right then, they can come along. As you point out,
Porlez, they may be of real help. If they cause trouble we
can hold the Po Rabian Zanur directly responsible. Instru-

ments aside,

it’ll

be nice to have along a couple of locals

are familiar with the territory. Maybe they know how
to cook. It would be nice when we enter colder climes to be
able to enjoy a real hot meal instead of what the exciter oven

who

throws up at us.”
“I guess it’s settled then,” Etienne said, and couldn’t re13 1]

adding, “Nice of you to ask for my opinion. Porlez, can
you add anything?”
An inflexible thranx face cannot look thoughtful, but the
sist

station

commander somehow managed to convey that feeling

nonetheless.
“Just remember that when you pass above communicator
have no aircar here
range you’re entirely on your own.
and it would be hard for me to muster a rescue party to come
out after you under the best of circumstances. We do not
care for travel by boat, as you are aware.”
“We’re aware of the dangers, as we were before we accepted this opportunity,” Lyra reminded her. “We’re looking
forward to our independence and we’re quite used to being

We

on our own in difficult country.”
“I know, I know,” Porlezmozmith said. “I did not mean
to sound as if I were chiding you. Once you pass out of
communicator range I am no longer responsible for your
concern nonetheless.”
Etienne was touched. Such compassion was a widespread
thranx attribute and one of those characteristics that had
deeply endeared them to humankind, but it still had the
safety, but I feel

power

to surprise.

“All the more reason then,” he replied, “to have native
help with us that we can count on. We’ll have ample time
to establish the reliability of our guests before we’ve gone
beyond communicator range.” He nodded toward the two
slightly nervous guides.
“It would seem you are aware of what awaits you,” said
the commander. “I can think of nothing else to add.” They
all turned their attention back to the waiting ambassador.
For his part, Ror de-Kelwhoang had listened with interest
to the harsh alien babble, which contrasted sharply with the
rapid-fire sibilant singsong phrases of his own tongue.
“We thank the Zanur,” Lyra said carefully, “for its kind
thoughts and accept this offer of assistance with open hearts.”
Expressions of relief appeared simultaneously on the faces
of de-Kelwhoang and the two guides. It would have gone
hard on all if the offer had been refused.
Lyra couldn’t resist adding to her knowledge of Mai cus-

toms. “Etienne and I are mated in the sight of the Ocean
and the Oceans of all worlds. What of you?”
[

32 ]

“We are not mated,” Irquit replied,

instantly establishing

herself as senior of the pair. “Neither to each other nor
others. The Zanur feels,” and she made a deferential gesture

toward the ambassador, “that in light of the many dangers
that may lie in wait for us Upriver, it would be best if those
with no family ties were honored by the opportunity to assist
you.”

“How

encouraging,” Etienne said dryly.
“I’m curious,” Lyra persisted, “did you two volunteer for
this, or were you ‘honored’ by choice of the Zanur?”
“Both apply.” De-Kelwhoang stepped in gracefully. “Not
all are qualified to serve as guides on such a momentous
journey. Both these two have traveled far past the Skatandah. They have knowledge of its currents and its winds as
well as many of the peoples you will encounter. I assure you
that we have gone to great lengths to provide the most competent helpers Po Rabi has to offer.”
Not wanting to risk impugning the Zanur’s motives, much
less its methods, Lyra switched to more mundane matters.
“Irquit, we have some storage space available on our boat.
What will you need to bring with you?”
“Very little. Some simple kitchen utensils and a single
change of clothing. We will eat your food or purchase our
own along the way. The Zanur has provided us with money.
We can also cook for you, if you wish.” Etienne looked
pleased. “Both

Homat and

are accomplished foragers.”
Foraging was a word with many meanings in the Mai
language, Lyra knew, referring to the ability to bargain
sharply, scavenge efficiently, or steal without getting caught.
“We also,” Homat said, speaking for the first time,
“brought no weapons with us, having been told that should
we meet hostile peoples you would manage our defense.
did not wish to bring killing instruments with us.”
“Very thoughtful of you.” Clearly Irquit is in charge of
the little company, Lyra thought. But there was a natural
shyness about Homat she found appealing. “That’s all settled, then. If you would like to come help us with our
I

We

loading

—

“No thank you,” Irquit said hastily. “If you do not object
we would much prefer to remain outside.” She was staring
with wide Mai eyes at the imposing alien structure. “If
[

33 ]

we

are not to depart until tomorrow

we can

sleep outside, here,

on mats.”
“Are you afraid?” Etienne asked thoughtlessly.
Lyra shot him an angry glance, snapped in terranglo,
“Don’t you have any empathy for alien psychology? Can’t
you see they’re trying to cover their fear gracefully?”
“I only thought that since these two are going to spend
the next several months exploring strange country on a strange
craft,

they ought to start getting used to strangeness as soon

as possible.”
“They are not afraid,” the ambassador said. He was picking his words with unusual care, Lyra thought. “There is

something else.”
“What something else?” Lyra asked, still upset over her
husband’s lack of sensitivity.
Ror de-Kelwhoang looked uncomfortable. “I would rather
not say.”

“Don’t worry. We’re scientists, here to study and learn
about your ways and your world. We’re just as interested

what you dislike as in what you like.”
De-Kelwhoang did not look in Porlezmozmith’s direction.
“It is a question of appearances, you see. We place much
value on appearance. There is truth in appearances. It is
.”
only that we have certain evil spirits cast in the form of.
“There is no need for apology.” Porlezmozmith knew
where the ambassador’s desperate circumlocutions were
heading. “We are used to shape prejudice.” She spoke to
the two guides. “Remain by yourselves outside, if it is your
in

.

wish.”

How

could the Mai fear the
thranx simply because of their shape? Lyra would have told
him to read his history.
“We do not mean to give offense,” de-Kelwhoang said
Strange, Etienne thought.

quickly.

“None taken,”

the

commander assured him. “This

is

something we are used to dealing with. I and my assistants
will withdraw. It was a delight to meet you, Ambassador.
You and your fellows are welcome anytime at Steamer Station. As are those,” she couldn’t help adding undiplomatically but with ill-concealed enjoyment, “of great Losithi.”
[

34 ]

The ambassador

mention of Po Rabi’s
rival but, good tactician that he was, retained his composure.
“Thank you.”
Porlezmozmith and the rest of the thranx contingent departed, leaving the Redowls alone on the deck with the Mai.
“We wish you much delight and good fortune in your
studies,” de-Kelwhoang said earnestly. He did not look at
the two guides. “We of Po Rabi hold scholarship in high
regard, unlike the rulers of certain other city-states. We hope
you may see your way clear to sharing your knowledge with
stiffened at the

us after you return.”

“That is our intention,” Lyra told him. “This is your world
and we are guests upon it, and we are thankful for your
assistance.” She performed a gesture indicating great appreciation.

Reassured, de-Kelwhoang turned and walked slowly down
the stairway ramp. Waiting hands helped him back into the
boat. On command the oarsmen dipped their paddles and
pushed away from the support pillar where they had tied up.
The Redowls watched for a while as the boat turned eastward. Then their attention shifted to their unexpected guests.
Homat and Irquit waited patiently, their small bundles of
cooking utensils and personal effects looking humble indeed.
“You’re sure you want to sleep out here?”
“Please, de-Lyra,” said Irquit, “we would feel more comfortable and would be out of everyone’s way.” She ventured
the Mai smile, a thin parting of the lips that barely revealed
the small fine teeth beyond. The comers of the mouth did
not turn up.

“As you

“When

prefer.”

are

we

to leave?

We have heard so much of your

wondrous boat and are most anxious

to begin this great

adventure with you.”
Homat smiled too but said nothing. Not the loquacious
type, Etienne decided. Not that it mattered. The two Mai
weren’t coming along to provide casual conversation.
“Tomorrow morning,” he informed them. “We’re almost
ready and it’ll take just a few minutes to put our boat in the
water.”
Irquit looked puzzled. “It is not in the water now?”
“No. It waits suspended by,” he tried to shape his thicker
[

35 ]

bulbous cheeks to form the correct expression,
“you’ll see tomorrow. Showing is better than talking.”
“Yes, better than talking,” Irquit agreed. She looked nervously toward the dark building beyond, abode of grotesque
bug-things. “We will be left alone out here?”
“Yes.” Lyra assured her. “Though our friends are used
to a life beneath the ground and have a more flexible worksleep cycle than we do, they still prefer to sleep during the
hours of darkness. No one will disturb you out here and you
won’t be in the way.”
Irquit smiled again. “I am much delighted that we are
going with you.”
“And we are much delighted to have you along,” Lyra
replied. “We’ll see you again in the morning.”
“Come morning.” The two females exchanged the palmto-paim caress a second time, though Lyra was convinced
she’d never be able to compensate properly for the lack of

lips

and

a sixth

less

digit.

The sun was barely
into the

aloft as the hydrofoil

calm water beneath the

station.

was lowered

The readout

that

indicated air temperature clung desperately to the hundreddegree mark, and there was no chance it would drop any
lower. The Mai stood at the base of the loading ramp which
had been dropped to the boat’s stem deck, looking chilled

and uncomfortable.
Afire with excitement that had been lost during months
of waiting, the Redowls ignored them. When the last supplies
had been taken aboard and stowed, they thought to offer
moral assistance to their suddenly reluctant passengers.
Homat and Irquit boarded warily, eyes darting anxiously
about in search of sails and oars. When Etienne tested the
engine, both dashed for the rail and clung tightly to the
unyielding metal.

Lyra wiped morning sweat from beneath her sun visor
and tried to comfort them. “It’s all right, it’s only our engine.
The device that moves the boat. It’s loud, but harmless. The
within are fully contained,”
“There are no sails,” Irquit observed cautiously.

spirits

[

37 ]

“Or oarsmen,” Homat added.
“No, there aren’t. We move by taking water in at the
front of our craft and pushing it out the back much faster
than

we

take

it

in.”

the water?” Irquit asked, slowly releasing
her grasp on the railing; it was undignified. Homat continued

“What pushes

to

hang on

tightly.

“Our engine. It would take a long time to explain. Maybe
once we’re on our way I’ll try.” She left Irquit with a reassuring smile and descended the ladder to the upper cabin.
“De-Lyra, I am fearful!” Irquit gave Homat a disapproving look, but

Lyra paused and eyed him pityingly.
then, come on inside. But you won’t like

it.”
“All right
Homat followed her, Irquit tagging along because she didn’t
want to miss anything. Once below, the truth of Lyra’s words

became immediately apparent. At a cabin temperature of
eighty degrees, both Mai found themselves shivering.
Etienne greeted them in the transparent bubble of the
cockpit, left explanations to Lyra. Though she used simple
terms and kept her science as basic as possible, it soon
became clear that such concepts as electricity and light-emitting diodes were beyond the comprehension of their guests.
Before long Homat confessed, “I think I would rather be
fearful than frozen,” and he led the retreat back toward the
stem.
outside he hopped around for a few minutes until
his system warmed, then busied himself arranging personal
effects on the deck. The Mai would sleep where they cooked,
away from the terrible arctic climate their hosts appeared to

Once

favor.

Reassurances and explanations notwithstanding, it took
Lyra another hour of quiet coaxing to convince them that
the boat wasn’t going to devour them if they let loose of the
rail when Etienne raced the engine and sent the hydrofoil
leaping forward. She showed them how the boat lifted clear
of the surface on its twin metal blades, explained how that
enabled them to move Upriver at seventy kilometers an hour.
As time passed and the smoothness and exhilaration of
the ride overcame initial fears, both Mai not only relaxed
but began to enjoy the journey, though from time to time
[

38 ]

Homat made

keep them from striking a
helplessly toward the clouds.

signs designed to

submerged log or drifting
Villages crowded the shores of tiny tree-covered islets.
Astonished children barely had time to shout before the hydrofoil had raced past their disbelieving elders. The boat’s

scanner picked out fishing craft ahead, enabling Etienne to
steer safely around them long before they came into view.
Larger islands appeared as they moved farther Upriver.
There the water had receded from the floods sufficient to
permit planting of grains and other foodstuffs. Some villagers
were engaged in crude but effective aquaculture, from the
raising of crustaceans to the gathering of waterfowl. All looked
askance at the spirit boat that roared past their homes and
scattered birds and amphibians in its wake.

There seemed no end to the villages. According to the
initial satellite surveys, the Skatandah Delta was the most
densely populated section of Tslamaina, which was why it
had been chosen as the site of the first Commonwealth outpost.

As they

traveled toward the equator the temperature intensified, if that was possible, and no occasional sea breeze
battled the humidity. Despite months of acclimatization, the
Redowls spent the majority of their time sequestered in the
air-conditioned interior of their craft. Merely to step out on
deck risked a shock to the system. Homat and Irquit were
right at home on the stern deck, however, and readily exchanged muted comments about the fragility of the human

system.

Homat made a game
sitting on the bow and

of trying to outguess the scanner,
staring at the water in search of
submerged rocks or other obstacles. He always lost, but the
acuity of his eyesight impressed both Etienne and Lyra.
By analyzing the current and the debris the water carried,
the hydrofoil’s computer could make a decision on which
branch to take, but it was still nice to have Irquit confirm
the choice. Without the computer or their guides they could
have spent years wandering through the Skatandah in a futile
attempt to locate the main course of the Skar.
As the days slid past in superheated study, the Redowls
found themselves more and more grateful for the presence
of their two passengers. Having completely overcome their
[

39 ]

Mai had revealed themselves as efficient,
and good company. Lyra derived an added benefit

fear of the boat, the
helpful,

from being able to study their reactions to new discoveries,
additional information on Mai society which she regularly
entered into her scientific log.
They also turned out to be excellent cooks as well as
sharp bargainers at the villages where they stopped to purchase supplies, and except for periodic raids on the salt tablet
and vitamin stores, the humans’ stock of packaged food
remained nearly untouched.
Irquit and Homat didn’t try to hide their delight. Not only
were they enjoying themselves, but Lyra knew they must
be anticipating the honors that would come their way after
they returned home. Their careers were made. She was
pleased for both of them.
It was clear that those Mai fortunate enough to make their
homes in the delta were more content than their urbanized
relations. Government control so far from Po Rabi was lax,
food was abundant, and there was little to inspire conflict.
The social setup would change, Lyra suspected, once they
left the lush Skatandah region behind and emerged into the
main channel of the Skar. Farming above the delta would
require more effort and extensive irrigation. Competition
would be tough, as it was within the city-state boundaries.
The heat, the friendliness of the villagers, the lazy days
passed in discussion and study produced in the Redowls a
feeling of inner security. It was left to Homat to remind them
that they were traveling on an alien world and not Earth’s
relatively benign waters.
Etienne had gone over the side and was leaning back
against one of the curving support struts that ran from hydrofoil to hull, trailing one leg in the cool water and letting
the spray from the foil wash over him. They were traveling
fast enough to alleviate concern about glass leeches and he
was completely relaxed beneath the refreshing spray.
He gave Homat a curious glance as the Mai started to
descend alongside him, carrying a metal prod. Now that he’d
overcome his initial fear of the strange vessel, the shy native
clambered nimbly over it while displaying an agility Etienne
could only envy.
It was the prod that caught his eye. “What’s that for?”
[

40 ]

Homat gestured with the metal. Etienne wiped spray from
his face

and looked behind him.

Attached to the foil just beneath the glassy surface of the
water and slowly creeping toward Etienne’s feet was a thin
dark shape, three meters long and as thick as his arm.
“Sandrush,” Homat said curtly as he worked his way
around the strut until he was holding on behind Etienne.
“Poisonous? Parasite?”
“No. Inhaler.”
“What does it inhale? Blood?”
“Inhale you.” Etienne watched with interest as the Mai
used the prod to pry open the creature’s wide round mouth.
The teeth were small and curved inward. The jaw dislocated
itself and Homat spread the gape wider still. As they watched
the sandrush began to fill helplessly with river water until it
had swollen to four times its normal size. The dull green
membrane was evidently capable of expanding to hold prey
larger than itself, and the meaning of Homat’ s words became
ghoulishly clear.
Eventually the pressure of the water proved too much for
the powerful suckers that lined the sandrush’ s ventral side.
It

relinquished

its

grip

and

fell

away

astern. Etienne

was

suitably impressed.

Homat

explained
unnecessarily. “It won’t let go unless it dies and sandrush
is very hard to kill. Swallow you whole.” He turned to climb
back up toward the lower deck.
Etienne wondered at the flexibility that would allow an
“If

it

gets a hold of you, very bad,”

animal to expand so far beyond
thoughtfully

removed

his legs

its

normal

size

from the water.

even as he

He wondered

what other charming native fauna lurked just beneath the
surface of the river, following the boat hungrily.
Since there was little here for him to study he did most
of the piloting, leaving Lyra free to record her impressions
of village life and culture within the Skatandah. While the
communities there differed little from those clustered around
Steamer Station she continued to take her usual copious
notes. Even the tiniest change in social structure or clothing

or fishing methods was occasion for excitement.
Gradually the marshlands and islands of the delta began
to fade behind them. Fewer platform trees and pseudopalms
[

41 ]

were seen, more open water and less land. An unknowing
observer might have concluded that the Redowls had taken
a wrong turn and were heading once more out into the open
ocean.

But the water they skimmed over was now almost entirely
fresh. They had entered the main body of the Skar, a river
large enough to make the Amazon or Nile or any of the other
known rivers of the Commonwealth look like a meandering
the center of the river it was impossible to tell
you weren’t traveling on a freshwater sea, because there was
no sign of land to starboard or port. Beyond invisible banks
the cliffs that marked the edge of the Guntali rose unseen
creek.

From

toward a cloud-flecked sky.
Etienne eased the hydrofoil to starboard until the shoreline hove into view. Thereafter they were able to cruise on;
autopilot, allowing Lyra to concentrate on her note-taking]
and leaving Etienne free to stare through the telescope]

mounted atop the observation mast. Numerous villages dot-i;
ted the bank. Farther inland he saw farming communities
and small commercial centers. At the extreme range of the!
scope’s resolving power he could discern the first gentle
slopes, evidence that they really were traveling up a river

canyon.
While the temperature crept toward the hundred thirty!
mark in early afternoon, the humidity fell slightly. It required]
an effort to remain outside the boat’s air-conditioned interior]
for longer than half an hour. Lyra spent much of her time]
outside chatting with the owners of the small trading boats
that pulled alongside whenever they stopped. While she dictated notes, Homat and Irquit bargained for provisions. Irquit did most of the trading while Homat attended to the
cooking, having mastered the electric oven the Redowls in-]
sisted he use instead of the wood-burning stove he had brought!
1

:

I

on board.
They were then a thousand kilometers north of Steamer
Station and the mouth of the delta, cruising the smooth back
of the river Skar at a steady ninety kph. They had barely
begun their journey.
Everywhere the Mai citizenry was friendly and open,
though more primitive than those of the advanced societies
of the city-states that ringed the great world ocean. All wasi
[

42 ]

i

i

not peaceful and pastoral along the river, however. The presence of village stockades and other fortifications hinted at

sporadic conflict, and there were those who were less than
overawed by the peculiar visitors’ advanced technology.
“Hon, I think you’d better have a look at this.” Etienne
kept his gaze on the scanner as he took the boat off autopilot.
“What is it?” Lyra’s voice sounded over the intercom in
the cockpit.

“Ships ahead, lots of ’em. Fishing boats by the computer
image.”
“What’s notable about that? I’m busy, Etienne.”
“Lyra, there are at least a hundred boats. That’s not usual,
is

it?”

“No, it’s not.” The intercom went quiet for a moment
and when she spoke again her tone was thoughtful instead
of impatient. “Are you sure?”
“I’m quite capable of following the readouts,” he said
sarcastically. “It isn’t normal, is

it,

for a fishing fleet to attain

that size?”

“Not from what we’ve seen thus far, no, but maybe it’s
normal up here.”
“Why don’t you ask Irquit?”
A sigh whispered at him from the grid as she put her
beloved work aside. “I suppose I’d better.”
Irquit sat on the open rear deck of the hydrofoil, cleaning
vegetables for the next meal. Purple and maroon predominated, but that didn’t detract from the tastiness, Lyra knew.
Homat peeled tubers by hand.
“Irquit, my husband says that there are at least a hundred
fishing boats in the river ahead of us.” Neither of the Mai
expressed surprise at this calm revelation, having already
become familiar with much of the hydrofoil’s instrumentation. They called the cockpit scanner the iron eye.
Irquit looked uncertain. “That is more than I have ever
heard of fishing the river. There are never so many grouped
together down by Po Rabi. Is de-Etienne certain they are
just fishermen?”

“We can’t tell that through the iron eye. What could they
be doing except fishing?”
“It could be a war fleet,” Homat suggested tentatively.
[

43 ]

—
“Out to attack one of the villages? This doesn’t seem to
be a poor area.”
“It is sometimes simpler,” said Homat with innocent wisdom, “to take rather than to work, no matter how easy the

work may be.”
She could have argued the point but

it

was not the time

engage in idle sociological speculation. “Tell that to my
husband, Homat.”
He made a sign of acknowledgment and worked his way
around the boat until he was standing outside the transparent
dome of the cockpit. He could see Etienne clearly. Condensation was banished from the clear acrylic by the silent
efforts of special air circulators. He leaned toward the speakto

ing

membrane.

“De-Etienne,

I

fear the

many

vessels

you say

lie

ahead

of us.”

any way you can tell what they’re up to by
looking at them?”
“Yes. If they have their gill nets out I think they’re just
fishing and not ready for war. Gill nets cost too much to risk
“Is there

in a fight.”

Etienne considered. “Better tell Lyra to come forward,
then. The iron eye can’t distinguish something as wispy as
nets. We’ll need somebody to make visual confirmation.”
“I’m already here, Etienne.” The membrane picked up
his wife’s voice before she stepped into view. Irquit was
with her. “You don’t have to tell me my job.”
“I wasn’t telling you your job,” he snapped, “I just
never mind. We’ll be on top of them in a minute.” He examined the crowded screen. “I’ll have to slow down or we’re
liable to run over somebody.”
“We’ve never run into more than four or five boats fishing
together before. Too much competition,” Lyra murmured.
“It doesn’t fit the established pattern.” Masted wooden shapes
were appearing on the horizon ahead.
The roar of the electric jet dropped to a rumble and the
hydrofoil’s speed dropped radically until the hull once more
broke water. As they began to pass among the component
vessels, the fishing fleet was even more impressive up close
than it had appeared on the scanner.
The craft that plied the warm waters of the Skatandah
[

44 ]

j

Delta rarely required the muscles of more than three or four
fishermen. These great bargelike vessels each boasted two
dozen crew or more. They lay across the Skar in three rows,
blocking a decent part of the river’s considerable breadth,

and were roped together.

To

Etienne’s relief they clearly saw the huge gill nets
strung between the ships. Since they didn’t drift with the
current they must utilize heavy anchors to hold them in
place. Women and children manned the nets and lines alongside the men.
Every tenth barge was a vast floating platform nearly as
big as some of the ocean-going trimarans they’d encountered
out in the Groalamasan. The reason for their extraordinary
size, as well as for the number of fishing craft, soon became
apparent. It had to do with the size of the catch.
Some twenty vessels were swinging close together, bumping sides and full of organized confusion as their crews strained
at nets and lines. The water between began to froth and
bubble, was finally broken by the emergence of an immense
rainbow-hued head. More glowing color breached the surface and the fisherfolk redoubled their efforts to haul in their
whale-sized catch.
“Arwawl!” Homat exclaimed excitedly. “I’ve tasted its
dried flesh but never seen one before. They run only in the
main river and come nowhere near Po Rabi’s shallows.”
The chanting of the fishermen was a steady, triumphant
chorus now as they hauled in the huge interlocked nets. As
they did so ten ships passed to port of the immense barge,
ten to starboard. The barge crew lent its muscle to the task
and long gaffs, attached to winches, were brought into use.
Slowly the arwawl was hauled onto the deck, bending the
stem beneath the surface of the river for long moments before the silvery tonnage could be better distributed.
The single catch was enough to feed many villages, Etienne
mused, but the fleet apparently wasn’t satisfied. Still other
nets were out, trailing from the less fortunate boats. He

admired the fisherfolk’ s persistence.
It was left to Irquit, less mesmerized by the efficiency of
the fleet, to sound a warning. She moved closer to Lyra,
who was intent on recording the fishing with her instruments.
[

45 ]

!

Irquit

performed a diminutive half bow. “Forgive

me for

troubling you, de-Lyra, but I think we are in danger.”
“What?” Lyra strained to refocus her attention. “What’s
that, Irquit?”

and pointed over the bow.
have been watching those four ships.” Lyra raised her

The Mai stepped
“I

gaze,

to the railing

saw nothing unusual about the quartet of fishing

craft

dead ahead.

“What about them? They

are fishing, like their

compan-

ions.”

“Not like their companions,” Irquit argued. “They are
moving toward us. They should be anchored in place, holding their nets against the flow of the Skar. They are drifting!
downstream.”

“Maybe they’re trying to reposition themselves in a better
spot. Fishermen move all the time.”
“I’m sure they are moving to a better spot, but not to
catch

fish, I think.”

Lyra frowned. “What makes you think so?”
“Two drift to our left, two to the right. Their nets lie'
between. If we continue on this course they will soon ensnare
us.”

“I’m sure it’s not intentional,” Lyra replied, but inwardly
she wasn’t so sure. The boats were very close now and the
big gill nets lay concealed by the rolling water. “We’ll warn

them clear.”
“The nets of the Upriver

wondrous strong,
de-Lyra,” Irquit said anxiously. “I don’t know that even your
spirit boat could escape from them. There is something more.

j

fisherfolk are

See how busy the crews are?”
Lyra squinted, peered through her recorder’s telephoto
for a closer look. “I see. Isn’t that normal?”
“I am no fisherwoman, but I have visited this part of the
Skar before. To travel downstream is simple. One simply
raises the anchors and drifts with the current. Never have I
seen so much activity surrounding so easy a task. When one
works that hard at something that simple, one usually has
something to hide.”
Lyra thought a moment, leaned over to call toward the
cockpit. “Irquit thinks the four fishing boats coming Downriver toward us might be trying to ensnare us in their nets.”
[

46 ]

j

i

|

Etienne wished the hydrofoil’s scanner could provide more
detail. “What’s your opinion, Lyra?”
“I don’t know what to think, but I don’t want to take any
unnecessary chances. I’d like to find out so that we’ll have
a better idea what to expect in case the same situation reoccurs in the future. Let’s do our guesswork now.”
He nodded. “We’ll let them play all their cards, then. Tell
Irquit not to worry. I can handle it.”
“Handle?” Irquit was trying to divide her attention between the stocky human female and the suspiciously active
fishing boats dead ahead. “What does de-Etienne mean ‘handle?’” The boats were near enough now for the otolk wood
floats to stand out clearly against the water.
“He means he’s ready to deal with any hostile moves.”
“But you must move away, move to avoid them while
there is still time! I know that the spirit boat can move quickly
to the side, and ...”
“Have a calming, Irquit. Etienne knows what he’s doing.
Everything’s under control.”
gentle shudder ran through the hydrofoil’s hull as the
bow made contact with the heavy nets and two of the oblong
floats. As they continued Upriver, pushing the net with their
bow, the four fishing boats were drawn toward each
other
and the hydrofoil was caught between them.
Explosive roars of triumph sounded from all four Mai
vessels and all pretense vanished. It was suddenly clear that
they were interested in tougher quarry than fish. Gaffs gave
way to long pikes and spears, and the chanting that accompanied the appearance of these weapons was very different
from that which had provided a quaint backdrop to the landing of the arwawl.
Homat began to moan and rock from side to side. “Doomed
we are. These river primitives will show us no mercy!”
Irquit merely looked resigned. “I warned you, de-Lyra.”
“And you were right,” the xenologist replied calmly as
she turned again toward the cockpit bubble. “We’ve established their real intentions, Etienne. I’ve made my recordings.” She paused as something whizzed past overhead. “Let’s
not hang around. They have bows.”
“Don’t you want to observe native weaponry in action?”
She ducked as a wood-and-bone shaft splintered against

A

.

.

.

[

47 ]

the deck. “Don’t get funny, honey. If you want to linger,
we can switch places first.”
“Never mind.” He grinned at her as he gunned the engine.
The jet nozzle pivoted a hundred and eighty degrees until it

was facing toward the bow.
“Hold tight,” Lyra warned the two morose Mai. They

i

barely had time to reach for handholds before the hydrofoil
shot backward in full reverse. Suddenly nothing kept the
four fishing boats apart. The nets fell limp into the river.
The chanting subsided as the would-be pirates watched
their quarry vanish astern at sixty kph. Then crews rushed
to the oars as all four crews realized there was nothing to
stop their momentum. Frantic yells and curses replaced the
warlike chanting of a moment earlier.
Etienne slowed and reversed direction once more, watching with interest as the four fishing boats, still linked together!
by their nets and lines, slewed inexorably toward each other,
Loud snapping sounds filled the air as hastily manned oars
were splintered against colliding hulls. Curses were drowned
by shouts of confusion and conflicting orders as nets became
tangled with rudders and broken oars.
Keeping well beyond arrow range, he edged the hydrofoil
easily around their would-be captors, toward the center of
the river.
few of the unhappy fisherfolk, unable to attack
with their short bows, settled for bombarding the spirit boat
with ferocious insults. Homat stifled his laughter at their
plight long enough to translate those couched in the local
dialect or too complex for Lyra to understand. She patiently
entered them all into her journal under a subheading drolly
labeled mai invective—local variants and dialects. All
grist for the xenological mill.
Etienne half-expected some of the other fisherfolk to aid
their brethren in the attack, but he was pleasantly disappointed. Instead of joining in, the Mai who’d stood to the
side to watch were lining the sides of their own vessels and
cheering the spirit boat’s escape.
“That’s not the reaction I expected,” he shouted toward
the speaker membrane. “Irquit, what’s going on? They don’t
seem angry at our escape.”
“Why should they be? They chose not to participate in
the attack on us. So they do not share in its failure. They

;

i

I

A

J

|

[

48 ]

admire the successful, no matter where they come from. So
they applaud our escape.” Irquit leaned over the railing to
peer astern. The four badly entangled fishing boats continued
their steady drift Downriver.
“By the time they get themselves separated, de-Etienne,
they will have a long hard row Upriver to return to thenhomes. That will give them time to think anew about trying
to capture a spirit boat. I hope not many were hurt. There
is

much confusion.”
“And I hope half fall overboard and drown.” Homat

over the side. “Let the river eat them.
their

own urine! We

have slain us!”
Lyra paused

spat

May

they stew in
meant them no harm and still they would

in her note-taking. “It’s difficult for

poor

people to turn down the chance to acquire great wealth,
Homat. I’m not defending their actions, understand, but I
can empathize with their feelings.” She had to use four connected nouns to make the idea of empathy comprehensible
to the

Mai

guide.

“Do you

think we’ll be subject to

more

such attacks?”
gesture of uncertainty. “Who can predict?
As you say, de-Lyra, your spirit boat represents power and
wealth to all who set eyes upon it. Your property will be
coveted from the Skatandah to the region of ice.” Another
thin smile. “Clearly any who try will have much difficulty
Irquit

made a

in taking it.”

“We

can take care of ourselves,” Lyra assured her.
“That is proven. I will not dance with worry next time.
None can threaten the spirit boat.”
“Oh, we’re not omnipotent,” Lyra corrected her, “but
we’re far from defenseless. If necessary we can do more
than just dodge gill nets.”
“Yes. I have seen the weapons that rest in the holders
alongside the round tiller de-Etienne steers the spirit boat
with.”

“Those are only for use in dire emergency,” Lyra said
firmly. “We carry them to defend us against dangerous animals, not intelligent peoples. My Zanur would be very upset
with us if we used them against your people.”
[

49 ]

“My

people are the people of Po Rabi,” Irquit replied,
indicating with gentle bloodthirstiness that it wouldn’t bother
her in the least if it became necessary to shoot a few
riverfolk. Lyra sighed inwardly. Once upon a time, back in
few throwthe tribal days, her ancestors had felt similarly.
backs still did.

A

beneath the hydrofoil’s keel by the
hundreds, the Skar still running wide and slow, the distant
walls of the Barshajagad still rendered invisible by haze and
distance. Lyra began to enjoy the bargaining for supplies
that took place whenever they pulled in to shore.
“You can learn a lot by watching Homat and Irquit,” she
told Etienne on more than one occasion.
He would nod politely, but the methodology of native
barter didn’t intrigue him. Instead, he spent the trading time
sequestered atop the observation mast with one eye glued
to the telescope, studying the nearing lower slopes of the
canyon with their irrigated fields and elaborate terraces.
As a precaution, they spent each night well out in the
middle of the Skar. The hydrofoil’s autoalarms would alert
them to the presence of any potential danger.
Occasionally, Etienne would vary the routine by climbing
the mast to turn the telescope skyward, quizzing himself by
trying to identify the strange constellations overhead. On
this particular early morning there was no rain and few clouds.
The humidity was lower than usual and the temperature had
plunged into the nineties. He was very surprised to see Homat’ s wide-eyed hairless face appear outside the transparent
scope enclosure. The guide looked nervous, and not from

The kilometers

slid

the height.

Etienne unfastened the plastic to admit the edgy Mai.
“Something wrong, Homat?” he inquired solicitously.
“I—I must talk with you, de-Etienne.”
“Must be important to bring you up here from beneath a

warm

blanket.”
“It is, very important.”
“Just a second.” Etienne

swung the telescope aside on its
gimbaled mount to make more room, thoughtfully shut off
the blower that was pouring refrigerated air into the enclosure.
[

50 ]

As soon

as the temperature had warmed, Homat entered
and sealed the entrance behind him. In the cramped space
atop the mast Etienne was more conscious than ever of his

bulk compared to that of the diminutive native.
“What is it?” Beyond Homat he could see two of Tslamaina’s four moons gleaming on the river. The other two
would appear within the hour, he knew.
“For a long time I have meant to do this, but I did not
know how to do it and have not had a chance to do it.”

“Do what?”
“Warn you,

You and de-Lyra

de-Etienne.

are in great

danger.”
Etienne leaned back in the narrow swivel chair and smiled
at the native’s concern. He swung one leg idly back and
forth.

“We’re in constant danger, yes. The fisherfolk we just
ran into Downriver demonstrated that.”
“No, no!” Homat whispered intently. “Not that. The danger of which I speak is nearer and more insidious.”
Etienne studied the guide’s face closely. “Homat, what
you’re so frightened of?”
“I am not bold by nature,” he explained anxiously. “I
have traveled as widely as I have not because I desired to
but because I was ordered to ao so by those who employed
is it

me.

“Now

have found that I cannot go on without telling
what I know, de-Etienne. Something within pushes me to
make confession. All my life I have been a small person,
one who scrapes and nods and follows the orders of others.
You and de-Lyra have treated me most fair, better than I
have ever been treated by any other employers. I have come
to like you very much. For the first time in my life, someone
makes me feel important. It is a feeling I want to keep.”
“Why shouldn’t you?” Etienne found himself taken aback
by the unexpectedly emotional confession.
“Because of Irquit.”
“Irquit? What can she do to you?”
Homat’ s wide eyes darted nervously around the plastic
enclosure. “Are you sure no one can hear what we say?”
“Of course I’m sure. The intercom’s not on and we’re
high above the rest of the boat. Homat, explain yourself.
I

[

51 ]

Why

are you so afraid of Irquit all of a sudden? I hadn’t
noticed that she’s been treating you badly. She’s been very
helpful.”

her task. To be helpful until. .” he hesitated.
“Mai-with-Hair, remember that what I am about to tell you
Irquit is the direct representative of the
is worth my life
Zanur of Po Rabi.”
Etienne was beginning to lose patience with his visitor.
His viewing time was slipping away and he wanted to get in
some sleep before sunrise.
“We already know that, Homat. You are, too.”
“No! I am a hired guide. She is responsible only to the
Zanur itself. Tell me, de-Etienne, have you not remarked on
her intense interest in your spirit boat and its functions?”
“Naturally. Do you think we’re only attuned to technology? My wife is particularly sensitive to the actions of,” he
almost said primitive peoples, but quickly changed it to “other
individuals. Irquit’ s interest is only natural. Lyra ought to
know. She’s studied guests on other worlds beyond this;
M
one.
“I know what that means, de-Etienne,” Homat replied
somberly. “Tell me: on those other worlds did she ever encounter any assassins?”

“That

is

.

—

[

52 ]

Etienne’s smile vanished and he sat up straighter in his
chair. His impatience was replaced by sudden interest.
“Would you mind explaining what you mean, Homat?”
The guide shifted nervously. “Your wonderful craft makes
use of many impossible-to-understand spirits, de-Etienne,

but it seems to me not so difficult to command them.”
“Operation is highly simplified for users not technically
oriented, yes.”
“Simple enough for Irquit to operate?”
“Maybe, if she were to stick to basic go- stop type di-

What about it?”
Homat gestured forward, past the moonlit bow. “Tomorrow we are to stop at the village of Changrit to restock our
larder. Changrit has an alliance with Po Rabi.”

rections.

“I didn’t think

Po Rabi’s

influence extended this far north,”

Etienne told him.
“Changrit is independent.

a trade alliance only, but
that is enough when much is at stake. Long before Ambassador de-Kelwhoang delivered us to you to serve as your
guides, river riders were sent racing north to Changrit. An
[

It is

53 ]

understanding was achieved with the Moyt of Changrit.” He
brushed absently at the single knot of long hair that trailed
from the top of his head.
“The ambush is to take place at night, while you are
anchored out in the Skar and less on guard. Your spirit boat
is to be taken so that its secrets and treasures may be shared
by Changrit and Po Rabi.” He hesitated only for a moment.
“You and your mate, of course, will not survive.”
“I see,” Etienne said quietly. “Suppose Irquit proves unable, despite her studies, to operate the boat?”
“All is planned for. In that event it is to be loaded upon
a barge and shipped Downriver.”
“I don’t see any problem, Homat. We just won’t stop
near Changrit for supplies. Even if they’re lying in wait for
us out in the river we can simply run past them.”
“It may not be so easy, de-Etienne. Even now word is
relayed along the riverbank marking our progress. The fighters of Changrit will be ready to challenge you no matter
when you try to pass their city.”
“I’m curious. How did the Zanur plan to explain our disappearance, in the event our friends back at Steamer Station
learned of it?”
“You have been watched and studied. Not all who sought
to talk with your mate while you waited to travel were simple
fisherfolk. Changrit was chosen because it is the northernmost city with which Po Rabi has an alliance and it was
believed to lie beyond range of your talk-through-air spirits.”
“That’s right enough.”
“There is no reason why your friends should connect your
disappearance to Po Rabi or any other city. For all they will
know you perished when your boat sank in the Skar, as
many boats do.”
“And what if our friends come looking for us and find our
boat in the possession of the Zanur, or the Moyt of Changrit?”

“Then it is to be said that you were swamped by an arwawl, that this was seen from shore, and that your boat was
towed to safety but not in time to save its crew. I am not
privy to

the details, as Irquit is.”
“But they had to tell you this much so that
at the critical moment.”
all

[

54]

you could help

“Yes.”

Homat dropped

his gaze, unwilling to

meet

his

benefactor’s eyes. “My ancestors are ashamed.”
“All right, you’ve told me about the proposed attack. That
doesn’t make Irquit an assassin.”
“She will become one only if it proves necessary,” Homat
explained. “She is there to make certain the attack does not
fail. When it comes she will pretend surprise and will appear
to aid you, but if it looks like the attack may fail, she is to
choose a moment when you are not on guard to push you
overboard or put a knife in your back. Have you not noticed
her skill on things bigger than vegetables.” He looked away.
“I just thought she

was a

deft cook,” he muttered.

“Deft indeed, de-Etienne. I have seen her demonstrate
her skill on things bigger than vegetables.” He looked away.
“I was to help in all this, of course.”
“Of course,” Etienne said dryly. He reached out and

pushed a button.

A tired moan came from

the grid.

“What is it? I was just getting into a really decent dream.”
“Would you come up here a minute, hon? I’m observing
something

think you’d find intriguing.”
on, Etienne. Maybe tomorrow night.”
I

“Come
“It may be less visible tomorrow night. I wish you’d come
up now. Our position tomorrow will be radically different.”
“All right, all right,” she snapped back at him. “This better
be good.”
He waited

nervous Homat until
a sleepy-eyed Lyra had ascended the mast to join them.
There was very little room to move around with three of
them atop the platform.
“What now?” She was still blinking sleep from her eyes,
but her expression turned to one of conftision when she
in the enclosure with the

noticed Homat.

“Where’s Irquit?” Etienne asked her.
“Irquit? What’s she got to do with? ... On the stem deck,
I would imagine, blissful in the arms of the local representative of Morpheus. What the hell’s going on up here?”
“Homat has something to tell you.”
Lyra listened quietly as the guide repeated the tale he had
told Etienne. She considered quietly for several long moments once he’d finished.
“We could turn back. We’re scientists, not soldiers-of[

55 ]

s

fortune and not hard-contact explorers. We’re not prepared
to deal with large-scale local antagonism. If this town is
linked by treaty and duplicity to Po Rabi, we can apply for
clearance and protection with the Zanur of Losithi.”
Etienne looked doubtful. “Wouldn’t work. Word will reach

Po Rabi and they’ll know we found them out. That could
put them into open conflict with Losithi. We don’t want to
be responsible for starting a major local war. Besides which
there’s no guarantee we’d fare any better with the Zanur of
Losithi than we already have with Po Rabi. Better the devil
you know, et cetera.”
“They are as envious of your technology as is the Zanur
of Po Rabi,” Homat agreed.
“Then there’s the distance we’ve already come. Returning
and retracing our steps would take at least a month, even if
we were lucky enough to obtain immediate permission from
Losithi. We’ve passed the equator and we’re above the worst
of the climate. Not that this oven has suddenly become comfortable, but it’s bound to improve.
“I’ve no desire to retrace our steps, restudy what we’ve
already thoroughly recorded, and I’m sure you don’t either,
Lyra. And there’s always the chance that Losithi could arrange a similar kind of ambush when we resumed our journey, and they’d be better prepared for us than these
Changritites are likely to be. The geology’s finally starting
to get interesting, Lyra. I don’t want to go back to taking
mud samples for an additional two months. Despite Homat’
fears I don’t imagine we’ll have any trouble passing through
whatever barrier of nets and ropes the locals can erect.”
“I know that,” Lyra agreed. “It’s not that. I just don’t want

harm any natives. You know what a resident commissioner would have to say about that.”
“There’s no resident commissioner on Tslamaina. Not
advanced enough yet. No one’s going to know anything, and
even if we were found out we’d just tell them that we had
to

to defend ourselves,

which

be the truth.”
Lyra turned her attention to Homat. “What happens once
we’re safely past Changrit? What about the next town? Could
it be in alliance with Po Rabi too?”
Homat spoke with conviction. “No. Changrit is the only
far north city allied with

is

likely to

Po Rabi. Beyond Changrit much
[

56 ]

is

unknown and

are independent of the city-states that line
the Groalamasan. And Changrit was chosen because it alone
can muster enough strength for such an attack.”
“Everything you’ve told us makes sense,” she murmured.
“It’s what you haven’t told us that worries me.”
all

do not understand your words, de-Lyra.”
“Why are you so eager to betray your own city?”
“I have told you that I have come to like you, and that
you have given me a sense of self-importance and true worth
that I have never felt before.”
“That’s not good enough.” For emphasis she added a
powerful Mai gesture of disbelief. “You could have kept
silent and fulfilled the dictates of your masters. If we had
succumbed to this trap you would have enjoyed much honor
in Po Rabi, and if we had escaped you would still be safe.
Why risk the one by throwing in so openly with us when
you’d have been safe both ways by keeping quiet? I’m glad
that you ‘like’ us, but I’ve studied Mai society for too many
months now to believe that you’re doing this out of the
goodness of your heart.”
“I

|

Homat looked

uncertain, turned to Etienne for guidance.
“You’d better tell us the truth, Homat.”
“Don’t you believe me, de-Etienne?”
“Yes, I do, but my wife’s a bom skeptic. Unlike intelligent
beings, rocks and minerals aren’t intentionally deceptive.

You’re going to have to convince her to convince me.”
Homat nodded. When he spoke again much of the nervousness and all of the soft deference had vanished from his
voice.
“I told the truth ahout coming to like you, and about not
wishing to be a party to such a vile deception. But de-Lyra
suspects me rightly. I have another reason for confessing
this

now.

“It is true I

would

risk nothing

by keeping

my

silence,

but also would I gain nothing. Po Rabi is my home, but I
have traveled widely and have come to think of the world
as my home. There are many great city-states where one
may make a fine life. In Po Rabi I have little chance to rise
above my station. True, if the attack on your spirit boat were
to succeed I would return home to a fine reward, but in you
off-worlders I see the chance to do much better. With the
[

57 ]

knowledge I can gain from you I can make myself valuable
beyond mere ‘rewards.’ Thus far only Losithi and Po Rabi
have dealt with your hard-shelled friends. Suphum would
welcome my knowledge and make me a member of their
Zanur, as would Tolm and many others. I could not hope
to rise so high in Po Rabi on the results of my labors as an

;

assassin.

have provided you with information which may save
your lives as well as your expedition. In return for this information and for my loyalty, I expect suitable recompense.”
Lyra looked satisfied. “Now I believe you, Homat.” She
added to Etienne in terranglo. “Typical power- wealth decision. Very Mai. The fact that we’re not of his race doesn’t
enter into the equation. Business takes precedence over;
vague feelings of loyalty to home and kind.” She switched;
back to her very fluent Mai.
“You are a more complex person than you’ve led us to
believe, Homat. You’re a very effective deceiver.” This last
was, in Mai, a compliment, and Homat looked quite pleased
“I

j

j

with himself.
“All of us carry deceptions. They are worth little. Truth
is all that can be sold. I am only a simple one seeking to lift
himself from the depths in which he was born.”
“Having deceived us this long, how can we be certain
you won’t try to strike your own bargain with some village

Moyt?”
“If you do not return safely to your Steamer Station, I
gain nothing from helping you now. I do not wish to take
the spirit boat. I believe I have more to gain by helping you.”
“A straightforward enough commercial decision,
Etienne
devoid of sentimentality. I’d rather rely on that
than on his fondness for us. Having made his confession and

—

his choice, it’s

now

in his best interests to see to

our con-

tinued health and safety.”
“Delightful so,” Homat agreed. “Then you believe
about Irquit and the attack?”

me

“We’ll find out for certain tomorrow,” Etienne told him.
He turned his attention to the telescope. “Now if you don’t

mind, Homat,

have some observations of the sky
want to make and Lyra needs her beauty sleep.”
I still

[

58 ]

I

j.

j

j

j

Homat gaped at him. “But you are to be attacked! You
must make preparations to defend yourselves.”
“Maybe we won’t have to fight, Homat.”
Lyra murmured uneasily. “Selfdefense or no, if word ever got back to our sponsors that
we’d engaged in a running battle with Class Four-B natives
we’d never get another grant in our lives.”
“Don’t be so damned concerned for the welfare of the
charming, considerate locals. What are you worried about?
Is Homat going to appear before the Research Advisory
Board to announce that we knew about the attack in advance?” After months of fighting with his wife, Etienne was
more than ready to fight something else, and to hell with the

“We’d

better

not,”

regulations.

i

Besides, Po Rabi’s deception grated on him. He remembered the ambassador’s politeness, the warm feelings of contentment and achievement they’d felt just before setting out
Upriver. If Homat’ s confession proved true, that meant all
those kind words of help and assistance and talk of mutual
sharing of knowledge was so much dung.
Maybe Changrit was the last city in league with Po Rabi,
and maybe it wasn’t. It wouldn’t hurt to send a lesson not
only to the Zanur of Po Rabj but to any other Mai who
coveted the spirit boat, that the peaceful human visitors
weren’t to be trifled with. Yes, they all but owed it to the
Mai to show what scholars could do when aroused. In so
doing they might quickly discourage all future such assaults,

thereby saving lives.
“It still bothers me to have to fight,” Lyra said softly.
“I understand.” He was quite willing to be understanding
now that he’d made up his mind how to handle the Changritites.

“But

if it

comes

to that,

it’s

self-defense.

Anyway,

fighting we’re only adhering to local custom. Remember
how the rest of the fishing fleet cheered us on our way?

by

Maybe some timorous board member would disapprove, but
not the rest of the Mai.”

She spoke

in terranglo again while

blankly, desperately wishing he could

Homat looked on

comprehend the

alien

babble.

“We

could just use repellers.”
“Dangerous if they managed to get a net or two on us.
[

59]

You know how

unstable the boat is on repellers. That’s a
last resort. Besides, if we don’t invite some kind of reaction,
we’ll only have Homat’s word about Irquit. What if she’s
no assassin, merely a guide? What if their orders are only
to stand aside and let the Changritites do all the dirty work?
Maybe he’s just trying to shut her out of the bit of business
he’s working with us. By watching her reactions we’ll have
final proof of his words. If she doesn’t make any threatening
moves, once past Changrit we’ll have a new problem to deal
with.”

Lyra sighed, shook her head
plicate the hell out of

“If that’s all

my

sadly. “This

is

going to com-

notes.”

we have to worry about as we pass Changrit,”

he countered, “we’ll be well

Besides, think of the potential opportunities for studying the behavior of the Mai in
off.

battle.”

She responded with a rude noise which even Homat could
understand.

The following night on the Skar was equally cloudless and
clear. As the sun began to shrink behind the distant ramparts
of the canyon wall, Etienne peered through the cockpit bubble at an anxious Irquit. He nodded to himself as he studied
her expression. Point one to Homat.
The guide was talking to Lyra, who stood watching the
western shore.
“We are almost all out of meat, de-Lyra. I thought we
were to stop here at Changrit.” She gestured with a sixfingered hand toward the dots of light which marked the
riverbank. “We will soon be past the harbor.”
“We’re not stopping tonight, Irquit,” Lyra replied. “We
have ample supplies of our own foodstuffs down in the hold.
Maybe we’ll stop in a couple of days. It’s such a beautiful
night, Etienne thinks we should enjoy the weather. I agree.”
“But Changrit is such a wonderful place!” Irquit protested. “There is so much to see, so much for you to put
into your records, de-Lyra.”
“Oh, that’s okay. I’m sure we’ll find other places to stop
that are just as interesting. We can stop and study there.”
“None are so grand on this part of the Skar as is Changrit.”
[

60 ]

Irquit

was glancing nervously past Lyra, apparently studying

the river ahead.

“Something wrong?” Lyra asked innocently.
“No, no. I only wanted so much for you to see so powerful
.”
and beautiful a city. I felt that
Etienne tuned the pleading voice out and concentrated on
the scanner by his right hand. He knew what Irquit was
looking for, out there atop the dark water. The green screen
.

.

with bright shapes of many sizes strung out in
three parallel lines across the Skar. It must have taken the
Changritites weeks to gather the enormous flotilla.
He lost speed as he studied the scanner, looking for the
place where the boats were spread thinnest.
There were more boats ahead than he’d expected, and
the danger was greater. Some of his initial enthusiasm for a
fight evaporated. The capture was no game to the local Mai,
and despite superior technology there was something still to

was

filled

be said for commanding overwhelming numbers. He made
certain the repellers were functioning, just in case they had
to employ them.
Pick your way through, he suddenly decided, and take
care not to get entangled in those damn nets and heavy
wooden floats. Above all, don’t let any of the locals on board.
Surely they wouldn’t have any real difficulty breaking
through.

was failing at not looking Upriver. She knew about
the ambush. That much of Homat’s story was obviously
Irquit

accurate.
“Please, de-Lyra,
at Changrit tonight. I

we can

—

would be so much better to make port
can shop very cheaply at first light and

it

“Go astern, Irquit,” Lyra ordered her sharply. “We’re not
tired or hungry,

we don’t need to stop for supplies, and we’re

going on tonight.”
The guide started to object again, then thought better of
it and followed the rail sternward. Etienne wondered what
she’d tell Homat, whom she still thought of as a partner in
deception, and how well Homat would hide his true feelings.
Then he made out a dim irregular shape off to port, through
the transparency of the cockpit bubble, and he no longer
could spare the time to worry about the Mai already on
[

61 ]

board. None of the four moons were aloft yet and the river
ran clear and unslivered beneath the hydrofoil’s keel.
half dozen tiny objects appeared suddenly on the scanner, heading for the hydrofoil. “Spears, Lyra!”
She dropped to her belly on the foredeck, behind the metal
dome over the heavy-duty fishing equipment.
couple of
sharp points whanged off the bubble and he flinched involuntarily. They did no damage to the tough plastalloy.
Large shapes hove into view, lying where the scanner had
predicted their presence. Etienne turned off the sensitive
audio pickups. They weren’t necessary. He could hear the
shouting and excited hailing of the boat’s crews quite clearly
in the still night air.
Arrows and warcries followed the first volley of spears,
then something long and heavy flew over the bow and clung
there as Etienne turned sharply to port to avoid a small
fishing barge filled with gesticulating, wide-eyed bowmen.
Arrows splintered or glanced off the clear cockpit bubble,
but the larger affront remained. It was a heavy fishing net
attached to huge bolts which had evidently been fired by
several catapults or large crossbows operating in unison.
Several such nets, flung one atop the other, could seriously
obscure his vision. He could still run on instruments, but
not if the thick mesh was entangled in the engine nozzle.
Putting the hydrofoil on autopilot and entering evasive
orders, he took his pistol from its charging socket near the
pilot wheel and headed for the stem. Lyra met him halfway
through the cabin.
“Who’s driving?” she asked curtly.
“Multiple K.”
“Not good enough. Too many boats.” She eyed the weapon
in his right hand. “I came down so I wouldn’t have to do

A

A

that.”
“It’s to

bum

that net, not Irquit.”

“What net?”
“You’ll see when you take over.” He pushed past
slipping the safety off the asynaptic pistol.
He was halfway to the foredeck when something

her,

buzzed

him like an apoplectic wasp. The fast-moving, elegantly agile
hydrofoil made it difficult for the Mai marksmen to aim but
occasionally an arrow or spear would spang against the hull
[

62 ]

or whistle past overhead. Despite their inaccuracy, the sheer
volume of primitive projectiles made moving around out on
deck dangerous.
Dropping flat and utilizing the slight inward curve of the
metal gunwale for protection, he crawled toward the bow.
Once alongside the cockpit bubble he rose and carefully
began burning away the net that covered the plastalloy.
The bow section was aerodynamic so there were few projections for the nets to catch onto, and he had half of the
net cleared away before a sudden burning made him glance
down at his left arm. A small stream of blood dripped from
where a passing arrow had dug. Etienne made a mental note
to ask Homat if the Upriver inhabitants ever used poisoned
barbs in their fishing. He turned back to the work at hand.
Lyra appeared to be fully occupied with the task of steering them through their assailants while causing as little dam-

age as possible. She was darting rapidly from side to side,
working with unexpected animation. He frowned, leaned
close to the bubble. Yes, she was very active, and so was
the second figure she was grappling with.
The hydrofoil lurched abruptly to starboard and nearly
threw him overboard. Only his grasp on the remaining Mai
net kept him from a fatal dunking. As he struggled to his
feet he identified the second figure in the cockpit: Irquit.
But that was impossible. Because of Homat’ s warning
they made doubly sure to lock the cabin door every time
either of them entered or left. Irquit should have been stuck
outside, on the stem deck where she slept with Homat
Lyra was heavier than the Mai and probably a good deal
stronger, but if Homat was to be believed Irquit was a trained
killer. Lyra’s experience ran to more genteel pursuits. From
what he could see, his wife was having a hard time fending
off a wicked-looking blade. He shouted at her, aware as he
did so how useless his words were.
Without Lyra at the instruments and with the autopilot
turned off, the hydrofoil was beginning to slow. That was a
safety override, designed to keep a boat with a disabled crew
from running into the shore. As the whine of the jet faded,
Etienne saw shapes begin to close in on them. They’d run
past most of the Changrit armada, but were still near enough
to be overtaken by determined oarsmen. He could hear them
[

63 ]

—
chanting in the dark as they strained to overhaul the

spirit

boat.

they were allowed on board, asynapts wouldn’t be
enough to cope with the sheer weight of numbers. His first
thought was to get back inside. He could lock any boarders
out, and with their primitive weapons they couldn’t break
in, but they could certainly disable the engine or clog the
water scoops.
Bowmen were close now and suddenly found themselves
presented with a relatively stable target. They kept him pinned
down by the fishing dome, unable to move through the shower
of arrows.
Suddenly he saw a third shape inside the cockpit. For a
moment he despaired. If Homat had lied to them, if he’d
been a willing ally of Irquit’s and of the Zanur all along
he screamed Lyra’s name.
But if that were the case, then why the trembling expiation
last night up on the telescope platform? As Etienne watched
he saw Homat edge carefully around the pinwheeling combatants, climb up into the pilot’s seat, put both six-fingered
hands on the wheel and nudge the accelerator.
Again he found himself thrown to the deck, only this time
it was due to the hydrofoil’s sudden leap forward. Shouts
of dismay and anger reached him from the two fishing boats
that were almost within boarding range. Two Mai actually
made the jump and landed aboard.
The asynapt flashed twice in the darkness. There was a
brief bright blue flash where each charge struck flesh, the
smell of ozone in the air, and a single splash as the first
victim tumbled overboard. The second fell near Etienne’s
sweaty face, curved knife locked in a stilled grip.
Etienne scrambled erect and ran to the nearest entryway.
When Irquit saw the other human enter the cabin she broke
free and rushed astern, trailing curses in her wake. He just
missed her in the main corridor, collided with Lyra instead.
It was a timely collision, since his impact knocked her aside
and clear of the knife that whistled past them.
He fired wildly and seared a section of ceiling, as a funny,
high moan sounded from the direction of the cockpit. Homat
fell away from the wheel as Lyra moved to help him.
Another pair of fishing nets clung to the boat, and Etienne
If

[

64 ]

pushed a few tangles aside as he cautiously emerged on deck.
Irquit was unarmed, however, except for her mouth. She
snarled something that Etienne translated crudely as “Death
to the Faceless One!” Whether the curse was aimed at Homat
or himself he had no way of knowing and likely never would
know, because their former guide and cook threw herself
over the side and instantly vanished astern. No doubt her
Changritite allies would fish her out of the river and send
her on her way Downriver toward Po Rabi.
Etienne was gratified that they’d put their trust in Homat.
Certainly he had burned his bridges behind him. There was
no way the Mai could ever show his face in Po Rabi again.
If he didn’t live, though, it wouldn’t make any difference.
Etienne remembered that surprised moan as Irquit ’s knife
sailed past his ear. With the Changrit flotilla rapidly falling
astern, he turned and hurried back into the cool interior of
the hydrofoil.

The

was unoccupied and he

behind the
wheel, made a fast check of the instruments. The scanner
showed only a few small logs floating to starboard, in contrast to the thick cluster of shiplike shapes behind them. In
a minute or two those distant threats would slip off the screen
pilot’s seat

slid

altogether.

Homat was

on the floor moaning. Lyra had pulled
the knife out and was working to stanch the bleeding. The
weapon lay near her right leg, a very large blade to have
struck so small a humanoid. A couple of centimeters to the
left, and they’d have found themselves continuing their journey without either of their guides. Lyra had removed hei
halter and bound it over the hole. The halter’s air-conditioning system was still operating full blast, and he thought
to ask why when it occurred to him that the cold would promote coagulation. On rare occasions it struck him that he’d
lying

woman

of more than average intelligence.
With the flow of blood slowed she disappeared astern, to
return a moment later with a handful of vials and spray cans.
“I don’t know how well this is going to work on you,
Homat. It wasn’t designed to be used on a Mai, but it’s all
we have and I don’t know what else to try. Can you under-

married a

stand

me?”
[

65 ]

”

He nodded slowly, his small sharp teeth grinding together
in pain.

“You’re fully mammalian and from what I’ve been able
to learn your physiology’s close enough to ours so that
“Screw the biology lecture, Lyra!” her husband snapped.
She glanced sharply up at him, but this time only nodded.
Her unvoiced admission of his rightness gave him no pleasure. He was too worried about Homat.
The freeze spray on top of the effect produced by her
halter’s cooler stopped the rest of bleeding. Homat gasped
at the chill and tried not to look at the intimidating alien
machines they were using on his body. Then she took a small!
curved device that cupped the curve of her palm, adjusted
it carefully, and held it over the wound as she removed the
bloodied halter. As she passed the device over his shoulder
and upper chest it hissed softly. A faint bright yellow light
poured from its underside.

—

Homat writhed in pain, but when she pulled her hand
away and snapped off the surgiseal he could see that the cut
had been closed completely, and sterilized in the bargain.
There would be a permanent scar, but Lyra was no surgeon
and there hadn’t been time to consult the computer.

“Any poison?”

“No, de-Lyra,” Homat whispered at her, staring at his;
chest in amazement. “A clean knife for a clean death.” Etienne
received this information with relief. His arm had ceased
bleeding and now he could stop worrying about his own
wound.
“You’ll be all right now,” Lyra assured their guide. “Just
take it easy for a few days and try not to use that arm too
much.” He was shivering steadily and it occurred to her it;
wasn’t from shock.
“He’ll freeze in here, Etienne.” The cabin thermometer

|

registered a temperature of eighty degrees.
get him back out on deck.”

“We’ve got

to

well clear now. I’ll help you.” He allowed the autopilot to resume control of the boat and moved
to lift Homat in his arms. The slim Mai was a light burden
and once he had been placed on his sleeping mat, Etienne
turned back to the stem gangway. It didn’t take long to

“Go ahead, we’re

[

66 ]

discover how Irquit had made her way inside to attack Lyra.
A small wad of sikreg gum, a local product Irquit employed
to help thicken her stews and soups, had been jammed between the center seal and the door, preventing the lock from
functioning.

Thoughtful of Irquit, to have made such a study of how
the doorways operated. Undoubtedly she’d been studying
hard ever since they’d departed Steamer Station. It was their
own damned fault, Etienne told himself. They were going to
have to cease thinking of the Mai as ignorant primitives.
The thought made him frown as he turned to stare at
Homat. Their remaining guide was sitting up now, propped
against the low bar of the railing that ran around the top of
the gunwale. The Mai had operated their boat!
“That was very quick thinking of you, Homat. Taking
control of the boat while Lyra was fighting with Irquit. Another couple of minutes and the Changritites might have

overwhelmed us.”
“Yes, I was standing here watching them close on us, deEtienne, and I thought to wonder what was wrong. I saw
the door there by your hand swinging open, and with heart
in hand crept inside despite the cold to see what was the

knew we should

not be slowing.
“I have watched for a long time now, through the round
glass, as you and de-Lyra ran the spirit boat. While I still
have no idea what controls the spirits that make it go, it is
not hard to see how you control those spirits. I told you that
Irquit thought she could do it, so I saw no reason why I also
could not do so.
“You turn the wheel to change direction and push the
little button to increase the speed.”
Etienne relaxed a little. “Put that way it doesn’t sound
matter, for

I

How

are you feeling?”
“Your wondrous tools have delighted my side. Much better, all thanks from my ancestors and me to you.”
terribly

complex, does

it?

Etienne nodded. “Did you hear what your former companion said as she took her leave of us?”
“No.” He gave a shaky Mai smile. “I can imagine it was
not very polite.”
“Not very. Enough to insure that you’d better never go
within a dozen legats of Po Rabi again.”
[

67 ]

“I

had already committed myself to

believe

that.

Did you not

me?”

Etienne looked uncomfortable. “It is hard on a strange
world to know what to believe and what not to believe,
Homat. Forgive me if I seem insensitive.”
“Do not feel so, de-Etienne. They say that the people of
Suphum do not pause for midday rest but work straight
through ’til sundown. That is also hard to believe. Truly is
the Everything filled with wonders. I do not regret my decision, though I might have had I died under Irquit’s knife,
may her flesh rot in the river. I do not need a home, now

have you and de-Lyra as my friends and protectors.”
“Don’t worry, Homat. You’ll have your reward when we
get back to Steamer Station.” Lyra was adjusting a clean
halter top. “I don’t care what the regulations say. We’ll slip
you something that should make you wealthy for life.”
that I

In true Mai fashion Homat instantly pointed to the interior
of the boat. “That machine you used to heal me. Could I

have one of those?”
Lyra laughed. She hadn’t laughed

a long time,
Etienne thought, surprised at how sharply it pierced him.
“The surgiseal would wear out before very long and you
wouldn’t be able to have it fixed, Homat. There’s nothing
worse than a magician whose magic unexpectedly deserts
him. Don’t worry, we’ll find you something suitable that will
like that in

last.”

“I

arm

am not worried,” Homat replied calmly. He moved his

gingerly. “Truly a delightful instrument, though.”

“Hadn’t you better check the autopilot, Etienne?”
“We’re okay. We’re back out in the middle of the river
and the scanner will sound if there’s anything ahead it can’t
deal with. Maybe we ought to start thinking about replenishing our stores. Irquit was right about our being low.” He
looked down at Homat. “You’re positive Po Rabi’s influence
doesn’t extend any farther Upriver than Changrit?”
Homat sighed. Sometimes you had to tell this peculiar
folk the

“The

same

thing several times before they believed you.
next major trading town beyond Changrit is Kek-

have never been there but
thrives independent of any ocean-city’s rule. It
three thousand legats north of Changrit.”
kalong, de-Etienne.

I

[

68 ]

I

know

lies

it

some

Lyra did some fast mental

hundred kila major port,

calculating. “Five

We can hold off that long.

Since it’s
maybe we can tie up there for a couple of days, take a rest.
I can do some intensive research. I’m certainly not going to
have the chance to do any work in Changrit.”
“A most delightful major port,” Homat agreed. “Not as
big as Po Rabi or Losithi, but nearly as large as Changrit.
Beyond Kekkalong all is unknown country, unknown to me
and to any living trader of Po Rabi. None have journeyed
so far Upriver from the Groalamasan.”
“Then you’ll be the first,” Etienne said. He turned apologetically to his wife. “Two of them got on board. I had to
use the asynapt on them. There was no time to shoot to
incapacitate, Lyra.”
To his surprise she didn’t bawl him out. Perhaps Irquit’s
assault had made her a tad less protective of the people she
ometers.

had come to study.
“Only two? That’s not bad. Probably not enough to

start

a blood feud with the Changritites.”
“That’s good, because when we return we might have to
deal with the same situation all over again.”
“Our return’s a long ways away yet, Etienne. We’ll worry
about it months from now. By that time the Changritites may
have grown bored with watching the river and sent Irquit on
her way. At least we won’t have to watch for any on-board
threats.” She glanced down at Homat, who was rubbing his
miraculously healed shoulder.
“I apologize for doubting your story, Homat.”
“No, no, no reason to apologize, de-Lyra. I would have

doubted you

your place. Doubt

healthy.”
She stared out into the damp night. Occasionally a light
from a house on shore would flash dimly in the distance,
like a star. All was calm and quiet.
“I’m beginning to think that it is,” she murmured softly.
if in

[

69]

is

Kekkalong turned out to be all that Homat had promised.
A natural harbor had been scooped from the shore of the
Skar by powerful currents. As they entered, small fishing
boats and pleasure craft clustered like whirligig beetles in
the hydrofoil’s wake.

As was the

style in the great oceanic cities, half the build-

were contracted below the surface, the other half above.
There was the expected profusion of tall, thin towers. Unlike
the structures of ancient human cities, which they superficially resembled, these narrow cylinders reached deep into
the earth. Some served to convey cool water to the surface
while others allowed hot air to rise from the town’s subterings

ranean levels. The Mai flourished in a brutally hot climate,
but they enjoyed a cool breeze as much as a human, even
if their idea of a cool breeze was a gust of damp air at ninety
degrees.

The townsfolk were friendly and did

their best to restrain

about their tall, hairy visitors. As Kekkalong
was ruled not by a single Moyt but by a coalition of merchants, there was something of a respite from the overtheir curiosity

170]

powering urge to compete that drove the inhabitants of the
southern cities. Lyra took notes as fast as she could address
her recorder.

With the

Homat’s bargaining abilities were
brought to the fore, and he proved himself an adequate replacement. As soon as he overcame his ingrained shyness
he proved quite adroit at dickering for supplies in the
loss of Irquit,

marketplace.

They were walking through the

central market, buying

samples of the local carvings for their stock of primitive
specimens, when Lyra called to her husband. As usual he’d
left the trading to her and Homat, being more interested in
the stones that had been used to pave the street.
“What is it? Lyra, did you know that some of this might
have been quarried out of a pegmatite dike?”
“Sure I did,” she replied sardonically, “but I’ll try to
forget it for now. Come over and listen to something.”
She stood before a very old Mai. Trying to muster some
interest, Etienne observed that the wrinkles on the Mai face
formed whorls with age instead of lines.
“Only two hundred legats up the Skar,” the oldster declaimed, “lies the place where it is joined by the great Aurang.”
“He says,” Lyra told him, usurping the old one’s tale,
“that the Tsla have a major town not far up the Aurang.”
Etienne eyed her uncertainly. “How far is not far?” She
gave him a figure in legats and he converted the native measurement in his head. “Between eight and nine hundred kilometers. That’s a hell of a ‘not far.’ Our itinerary calls for
us to follow the Skar to its origin, mapping and taking notes
along the way. Nothing was said about making any major
detours.”
“It would give us the chance to study a wholly new race,
Etienne, examine an entirely different culture. We have to
make contact with the Tsla sooner or later.”
“I thought the plan was iater.’”
“But it’s such a wonderful opportunity! I’m told the Tsla
build very few centers and that this Turput is one of the
main ones.”
“It would still mean a radical change in our plans,” he
argued. “Lyra, not a day’s gone by since we set down on
[

71 ]

world that you haven’t been able to wallow in your work,
whereas I'm still waiting to reach the point where the Barshajagad narrows enough for me to do some serious research
and studies in my specialty.”
“If we go to this Turput, you’ll have that chance, Etienne.
They can’t live in the river valley.” She exchanged some
rapid-fire chatter with the oldster. “His description of Turput’s location fits what we’ve learned about their ecological
niche. Turput’s at least three thousand meters above the
Skar. Apparently the Aurang hasn’t cut nearly as deep a
canyon. You should be able to dive into your studies sooner
if we visit Turput than if we avoid it.”
He considered carefully. “I know that we’re supposed to
make detailed studies of the Tsla as well as the Mai, but the
plan was to do that during our return journey, after we’d
attained the other major objectives.”
“Etienne, my primary interest in coming here is to see
this

how

several entirely different cultures coexist side by side
in separate habitation zones. To do this I need to observe
how the Tsla live and react to the Mai.”

wait until we’re on our way back?”
“We owe ourselves the detour. At three thousand meters
above sea level the temperature will drop at least forty degrees from what it is here on the Skar, with a corresponding
fall in humidity. For the first time since touchdown we can
slip into real clothes and dispense with air conditioning.

“Can’t

it

Doesn’t that interest you?”
He had to admit that it did, but there were other factors
she hadn’t mentioned, possibly by design.
“From what this old one said, Lyra, Turput lies only eight
hundred kilometers upstream from where the Aurang enters
the Skar, right?” She nodded. “Okay. That means climbing
three thousand meters up the canyonside over a short distance. Too steep a slope for the boat to navigate and too far
to run on repellers.”
Lyra pointed to the old trader. “Ossanj says there’s a
decent-size town at the confluence of the two rivers, called
Aib. He says we might hire them to watch the hydrofoil as
well as find porters to ferry supplies up to Turput.”
“Really? Does he happen to have any relatives in Changrit?”

72 ]

[

“Etienne!” She sighed with exasperation. “We’re far beyond Changrit’s influence. You know that.”
“Maybe so. Pardon me if I seem excessively cautious.
It’s just that we haven’t done so well where local help’s been
involved.”
on! You know we can take enough precautions to
insure the safety of the boat.”
“Granted that we can. I’m still not sure I’m ready for a
three-thousand-meter hike. That’s going to make hash of our

“Come

itinerary.”

graven in stone, Etienne. If the
weather’s bad when we come back down the river we might
not be able to make the climb at all. We can’t pass on the
chance. The weather’s favorable now. Surely we can hire
some kind of local transport so we don’t have to make the
entire climb on foot.” She turned back to the trader. “Tell
him about Turput, Ossanj.”

“Our

itinerary’s not

“A most delighted wondrous place,” declared the oldster.
“Mysterious are the workings of the Tsla.” He made a gesture to protect himself from any interested spirits. “Their
fields climb the sides of mountains. They grow there delighted fruits and vegetables that wither here by the river.”
“How do you know all this, Ossanj? I thought the lands

of the Tsla too cold for your people to tolerate.”

“With much clothing to keep warm, we can

visit

there for

short times.”
“And we’ll be comfortable, Etienne,” Lyra added encouragingly. “Doesn’t that sound inviting?”
“Not as inviting as continuing Upriver.”
“But that’s just my point. Here’s a chance for you to see

some

real topography.”
“Lyra, I’m sick of river valley,

you know

that.

But we

ought to stick to our itinerary.”
She drew away from him. “I see,” she said coldly. “Fine.
You continue Upriver with Homat. I’ll take enough of the
trade goods to tide me over until you return and I’ll go up
to Turput myself. Meet you on the way back.”
He sighed. “Lyra, you know that’s no good. What about
I supposed to do your
the cultures Upriver from here?

Am

fieldwork as well as my own?”
She shrugged. “Okay, then take a month or two and go
[

73 ]

where you wish, study what you want, and come back for
me. But I’m going to Turput tomorrow, Etienne, while I
have the opportunity and while the weather’s good.”
“Damn you,” he said quietly. “You know the dangers in
splitting up. You get your way, as usual. I’ll come with you.
But I won’t like it and you’ll have to listen to me bitch about
it all the way up the canyon.”
“I’ll suffer it.” She smiled triumphantly at him. “Consider
it serendipity instead of an enforced detour. Many important
discoveries are

made because

of serendipity.”
“Bullshit. You’ve just decided that you want to go now."
That prompted a glare that chilled the air in the marketplace. She didn’t speak to him for the rest of the afternoon.
Homat would have voted for staying on the river. Though
he had eaten the produce the Tsla traded with the river
dwellers and had heard much of their marvelous accomplishments, he’d never seen one and didn’t care if he ever did.
He thought that de-Etienne should have argued more powerfully with his mate, and if that had failed, given her orders.
But it would seem that male-female relationships among the
off-worlders were very different from those among the Mai.
He spent a whole morning making signs and attempting to
propitiate the proper spirits before they set off Upriver once
again.

wasn’t long before the hydrofoil’s instrumentation
warned them of the approaching confluence of the Skar and
the Aurang. Ahead, the Skar executed a sharp bend westward while the Aurang flowed into the main river from out
of the north. Given the Aurang’ s immense flow and orientation, anyone not knowing which was which would have
proceeded up the tributary, thinking it the Skar.
Making landfall on the eastern shore of the river just above
the town of Aib, they dispatched Homat to inquire about
the availability of transportation and porters. Despite the
high rate of pay offered, engaging help turned out to be
It

difficult.

“They are reluctant

to leave their

homes

to travel to the

land of the Tsla,” Homat explained.
“Why is that?” Lyra inquired. “I thought that trade went
on daily between Tsla and Mai, and has since ancient times.”

“That

is

truth,”

Homat

agreed. Behind them, fisherfolk
[

74 ]

and farmers gathered curiously around the anchored hydrofoil, engaging in the usual futile hunt for sails and oars. “But
that does not mean that the Mai are anxious to go up there.”
He held up something oval that resembled a cross between
a grapefruit and a sick lime.
“This is a gououn. It cannot grow below the level of
Turput.” He bit into the shiny-skinned fruit with gusto and
spit out several purple seeds. “This and much else can be
grown by the Tsla alone. This makes many Mai fearful of
them.

And there are other things.” He made hasty protective

signs.

“The Tsla trade with the Mai, but they

also trade with

Na of the

Guntali.”
“Then they’re not rumors,” said Lyra with excitement.
“Oh no, very real, de-Lyra. Too real.” He shuddered.
“Skins of strange creatures they bring down from the Guntali, and much serash .” Etienne knew serash to be the word

the

for the local equivalent of ivory.
“We Mai never see the Na, for

we would

freeze in modifficult to breathe and we

ments in their lands. Their air is
would grow dizzy with fear.
“But some will come for hire. There are always some who
will come, if the pay is sufficient,” he said with assurance.
“I wish muchly though, my des that you did not have to
,

leave the spirit boat behind.” He looked at the curious to
make sure they weren’t being overheard.
“Aib is little better than a large village. The Oyts of such
towns have few morals. Better to have left it behind in Kek-

kalong.”
Etienne made the Mai movement for negation, glanced
sourly at his wife. “We’re already taking too much time out
of our schedule for this side trip, Homat. Leaving the boat
at Kekkalong would’ve cost us several weeks of overland
travel. Don’t worry though. The spirit boat will be quite safe

we return.”
Homat looked

until

watching the crowd. “I cannot dissuade you, friends from across the ocean of night,
but I do not think this a wise decision. Even the porters I
have hired have come down to us from Upriver and not from
doubtful,

Aib. I fear treachery.”
“Relax. We’ll have our

still

weapons with
[

75 ]

us.

No one’s going

to bother the boat in our absence. You’ll see.”

He

indicated

dock where they’d tied up. “Has not the Oyt of
Aib promised us that he’ll keep the dock sealed off and all
the curious away? None will be permitted to come near and
he’s said he’ll utilize his personal guard to insure that. We’re
paying him a handsome amount to see to it that any locals
the fishing

stay clear.”

“The sum

not so handsome as the spirit boat itself,”
Homat grumbled. “As for the guard he will post here, would
that it had come from Kekkalong. Still, if you are satisfied,

Homat

is

There was no satisfaction in his tone,
however. He found it a struggle to understand these peculiar
creatures. In many ways they were unimaginably sophisticated and in others, childishly naive.
“We know what we’re doing, Homat.”
“Could you not at least take it a safe distance up the
Aurang?”
“And dock it in the middle of the river, exposed to unknown currents and high winds?” Lyra asked. “It’s safer
here. Besides, anyone who wanted to find it could do so just
as easily a few dozen legats up the Aurang. We’ll worry
about our property, Homat, and you worry about the cooking and the guiding.”
“As you say, de-Lyra.”
In truth, he greatly enjoyed giving orders to the half dozen
porters. It was the first time in his life he’d been able to
exercise any power over his fellow Mai. Power gave rise to
wealth, to new knowledge and capabilities. Power was the
measure of an adult. He enjoyed himself so much he managed to forget his fears about the safety of the spirit boat.
The Oyt of Aib, a bucolic youth named Gwattwe who
fancied himself something of a dandy, personally saw them
safely on their way. He had his own spirit doctor cast a spell
is

satisfied.”

for their healthy return.

From Aib they would

ride

on lowagons northward

until

they encountered the Aurang’ s southerly flow, then turn
northeast following the trading trail into the highlands.

“May you return in delighted safety,” Gwattwe told them.
“As one who has traded often with the Tsla, I would go with
you myself to serve as guide and
Oyt must watch over his people.”
[

76]

interpreter, but a village

“We understand,” Lyra assured him. “We know that you’ll
take good care of our property.”
“Have I not sworn the oath?” Gwattwe looked injured.
“Have I not given promise upon my mate and children and
most of all, my fortune? Not to mention that I do not receive
the second half of payment until you return.”
I trust that , Etienne thought as he listened to the Mai’s
speech, more than any other assurance. Among the Mai,

money was as blood.
As they turned to

enter the waiting lowagons a boredlooking chorus of small children launched into an irritatingly
atonal chant of farewell. They kept it up until the little line
of porter-driven lowagons had moved beyond the first bend

then scattered before the blows their chorus
master dispensed impartially.
Gwattwe watched the strange visitors depart, then turned

in the road,

eyes to the dock where the hydrofoil bobbed lazily
at anchor, tethered to the landing by two wondrously strong
metal cables.
“What do you think on all this, wise Enaromeka?”
The spirit doctor eyed the alien craft thoughtfully. “Give

glittering

them

days before taking possession, Gwattwe.”
purse itches feverishly. I don’t know that I can wait

six

“My

days.”
“Better caution than confrontation. I do not think they
suspect, but it would be awkward if they were to double
back along the road to see what we were doing. Patience.
We shall be masters of all the Skar. Even the oceanic states
will do us homage ...if we can make the spirit boat obey
six

us.”

cannot,” Gwattwe said, “we can make the
hairy ones pay a huge ransom for its safe return. If they
refuse, surely there are many items of great value within the
craft that can be removed and sold. These are no wizards,
no gods come among us, Enaromeka. Lightning does not fly

“Even

if

we

from their fingers, no matter what the Downriver rumormongers would have us believe, and the rocks do not shake
beneath their tread. They are like unto the Mai, save for
toes
their size and hairiness, and they have fewer fingers and
to drive them through life. If cut, I am sure they would bleed,
[

77 ]

and

they bleed, they will die. I understand them, and I
think with care we can come to understand their spirit boat.
“Besides,” he added with a smile, “they will be gone long
to the city of the Tsla and long returning. We will have ample
time to study and experiment with their vessel.”
“It shall be a legendary triumph for you, Gwattwe,” the
spirit doctor declaimed with becoming unctuousness.
if

“And
you

falls

you also, my good friend and advisor, for to
the honor of extracting the secrets of the spirit

for

boat.”

Enaromeka suddenly felt ill. “What? To me?”
“Are you not the smartest of the Aib?”
“The cleverest, but you, great Oyt, are the smartest.”
“Your flattery is unnecessary. I know when I am beyond

my

depth.”

Enaromeka looked

resigned. “It will truly be a delightful
great honor. I will enlist the aid of my most precocious students. In time, we will learn all that can be learned.”

They observed and measured, discussed and debated for
six long days. By that time Gwattwe was trembling with
impatience to step aboard and claim possession of the spirit
boat for Aib and his family line. Word filtered through the
town that the day of Taking had arrived and many of the
villagers put aside their daily chores to gather on shore above
the dock. All wished to partake of their community’s triumph,

would benefit by the successful “repossession,” as
the town adjudicator had described it in a moment of florid
for

all

rationalization.

The power and wealth that accrued to Aib would be shared
by all, and the name of Aib known all along the river.
Enaromeka made certain everyone heard him clearly. “I
claim the honor of being the first aboard.” Gwattwe responded with a gesture of deference. This was as rehearsed
and part payment to the spirit doctor for his services.
The gunwale was bumping gently against the wooden dock
as he stepped gingerly over the side onto the exposed rear
deck. Nothing happened. Enaromeka turned a slow circle,
looking quite pleased with himself until a voice rumbled in
perfect

Mai:
Visitor, you do not belong on this boat. No permission
for visitation has been granted. You have twenty anats
in
if slightly stiff

[

78 ]

which to vacate this boat or you
quences. You have been warned.”

will suffer dire conse-

paralyzed, while Gwattwe blinked
and tried to see through the transparent bubble enclosing
the cockpit. The warriors arranged nearby forgot their positions as they searched the windows for the invisible speaker.

Enaromeka stood

as

if

So did Enaromeka’ s assistants.
There was no sign of life within the boat. Nothing moved
beyond the transparencies and the boat itself continued to
bob on the breath of the current.
Enaromeka overcame his initial panic and moved cautiously to where he could look down into the boat. “I see
no one.”
“Nor do I,” Gwattwe said from the dock.
“I will go inside and look.” Enaromeka reached for the
door handle and pulled. “I can’t move it.”
“That is to be expected,” said Gwattwe. “It is not to be
anticipated that they would trust us enough to leave their
vessel unlocked. Would a long knife help?”
Enaromeka put his face to the window that comprised the
upper half of the doorway. “It is strong. Little lights inside
are blinking on and off, like the fires of hunting parties up
the side of the canyon. Perhaps the lights have something
.”
to do with the lock. Fire spirits. Give me a zhaloo
From within the ranks of warriors a heavy spiked club

was passed forward. One of the spirit doctor’s students
handed it across to Enaromeka.
“Five anats ,” the voice announced dangerously. “Leave
boat now.”

this

“I

know what

it

is,”

Enaromeka declared suddenly, un-

moment of glory to an unseen specter.

willing to

abandon

“A

spirit

voice locked within the boat,

He

“I,

us.”

his

spoke boldly.

Enaromeka,

here to frighten
not frightened by

left

am

learn the secrets of this craft despite all the
voices that shout at me. I am not afraid of voices!”
Taking careful aim with the club, he brought it down over
brilliant exthe transparency covering the blinking lights.
plosion of light momentarily blinded the watching crowd and
there was much screaming. Women and children fled for the
spirits. I will

A

safety of boulders and sun shelters. Several of the warriors
lined up in stately procession along the dock broke formation
[

79 ]

!

to sample the cool waters of the Skar.

Gwattwe had enough

presence of mind to note their names and former rank.
When his sight had recovered somewhat from the effects
of the unexpected flash, he turned back to the spirit boat.
It still rode easily on its lines. Curled up on the rear deck
was the object that an instant earlier had been his spirit
doctor. Smoke rose from the skull and sides of the fetal shape
while the leather sandals burned ferociously.
One of Enaromeka’s students jumped onto the boat.
Gwattwe held his breath but nothing happened to the scholar
as he beat at the fire consuming his instructor’s feet. With
great presence of mind, the student yelled instructions. There
was movement among the onlookers. A bucket was located,
filled with river, and carefully handed over.
As the student dumped the water on Enaromeka’s corpse,
a solemn voice intoned, “Visitor, you do not belong on this
boat. No permission for visitation has been granted. You
have twenty anats in which to vacate this boat or you will
suffer dire consequences. You have been warned.”
“I’m not leaving!” the student announced, making a sign
to ward off the most dangerous of unknown spirits. Reaching
down, he picked up the ineffectual zhaloo hefted it angrily
as he moved toward the doorway that had defeated his in,

structor.

Gwattwe was not as surprised by the light this time. The
student was barefoot, and the water in which he stood did
not protect him from the fire spirits. His departure from
existence was much more spectacular than Enaromeka’s.
Swallowed by the burst of energy, he gave a tremendous
convulsive twitch and leaped or was thrown over the side
of the

craft.

Two warriors reluctantly doffed their armor and dove into
the river to pull him ashore. Gwattwe examined the student’s
body with much interest. It was broken and distorted, though

from Enaromeka’s. The soles of his feet had been
carbonized and black streaks ran up both legs. The smell of
burnt flesh was strong in the morning air.
But there had been no fire, only a burst of light and a
loud crackling sound. Pungiram, one of the elders of Aib,
had come down onto the dock.
differently

[

80 ]

I

i

j

i

“It would appear,

are not so

dumb

my Oyt Gwattwe, that the hairy strangers

as they first seemed.”

would appear.” Gwattwe showed no distress at
having been abruptly deprived of the services of his spirit
doctor. He eyed the boat with more interest than ever. “In
this first test of trust and friendship, they have come out
ahead. But I am persistent, old one. There must be some
“So

way

it

to drive the protecting spirit out of this boat so that

we

can take possession of it.”
Pungiram decided to speak up. “You will not find many
ready to do battle with unknown spirits, especially spirits
that slay as efficiently as do those guarding this boat.”
“I am not afraid of spirits,” Gwattwe said as he hastened
to shield himself with a couple of quickly executed signs,
“that are of this world, but it is a new thing to try to deal
with a spirit that comes from beyond. However, I am not
so sure that we are dealing with a spirit here. This boat is a
thing of metal and other strange substances. It is not a proper
spirit house.”
“Do we have any idea what other spirits consider a proper
abode?”
“Perhaps we may learn. I will not give up and walk back
to my house.” His gaze rose, turned to the trade road which
had swallowed up the tall hairy ones. “A long way to Turput,
a long way back. We have much time left to us.”
The surviving students had clustered around the Oyt. He
frowned at them. “What ails you?”
“We must do something about the Teacher.” The speaker
gestured toward Enaromeka’s blackened body. “He must be
given a proper burial.”
“He must have his wood and his journey to the sea,”
another insisted.
“I agree,” Gwattwe said. “Which of you will honor him
by being the first to step onto the spirit boat to remove the

body?”
Rapid glances were passed among the scholars. They decided it would be best to discuss the matter in depth before
making any firm decisions. They drifted away toward the
town, arguing vociferously among themselves.
His peace and quiet restored, Gwattwe again considered
the object of his dreams. He had never been to any of the
[

81 ]

wondrous city-states that traders told of, had traveled only
a short distance Downriver. But he’d visited Kekkalong and
had admired its wealth. The spirit boat was no more than
another new thing to be studied and understood, as he had
come to understand power and wealth. He would make a
massive effort to be patient. He would have to be or he
would quickly run out of advisors.
He would make a speech praising brave Enaromeka. Then
everyone would go back to work. Tomorrow he would consider the problem anew. That was all that was required;
careful thought and sufficient tomorrows.
But he would have to cajole as well as order his advisors.
The odor of a colleague’s burning flesh was a powerful deterrent to curiosity.

[

82 ]

fvnl
“De-Etienne, de-Etienne, we must stop and rest!”
Etienne halted, staring ahead to where the trading road
climbed still another of the endless vertical walls in a series
of laboriously cut switchbacks. The roar of the Aurang catwas
aract was a constant buzz in his ears, even though it
out of sight far off to their left.
want to spend an“We’re nearly there, Homat. I don’t
’
other night on the road. Tell them no.
gestured at the
“It does not matter, de-Etienne.” Homat
“They say they
line of heavily laden porters behind them.
given time to put on
will go not a step farther until they are
their

warmest clothing.”

face as he checked his wrist instrumenand holding. Detation. The air temperature was eighty-four
to hide
that, several of the porters made no attempt

Etienne

made a

spite

their discomfort,

was manfully

and two were

For his part, Homat
that wracked his own

shivering.

trying to hide the chills

body.

.

“Very well, but tell them to be quick about
reach Turput before dark.”
[

83 ]

it. I

want to

;

1

“We should, we should, de-Etienne,” Homat said gratefully. He turned and relayed the information to the porters.
They responded with a babble of thanks, dropping their packs
with fine disregard for the contents in their rush to help one
another on with heavy coats and hats.
Lyra watched with interest. It was strange to see a Mai;
clad in long-sleeved and long-legged attire. The cold-climate
gear was made of double layered cottonlike fiber stuffed with
some puffy plant material.
“In the land of the blind the one-eyed man is king,” Lyra
murmured.

i

j

“I don’t see

how

that relates to our present situation,”

Etienne commented.
“In the land of the bald, the hirsute man is king.”
“That’s a lousy analogy.”
“You never did have much of a sense of humor.” Shol
turned away from him.
The distant Skar was now only a faint silver thread lying
against the western horizon. A considerable walk indeed.
The fact that the air at three thousand meters was almost
Earth-normal was a great comfort. Down on the Skar, they’d
been forced to breathe mud. Or so their lungs had persistently told them.
The thinner air did not seem to have troubled the porters,
but the drop in temperature had been affecting their perfor-

mance

for several days.

Bundled up

in their

heavy clothing,

they looked much more comfortable.
Etienne had to admit that he was enjoying himself. The
multicolored strata they passed as they made the ascent were
an unending source of wonderment. Tslamaina was an ancient world, and its entire history lay exposed within the
canyon walls. He wished only that he could see across the
canyon, but at the confluence of the Aurang and the Skar it
was still well over a thousand kilometers wide.
At least the road had been wide and clear, with no rough
places, and they’d encountered few of the vertical walls with
their leg-straining switchbacks. Wind and water had turned
the steep walls here to a manageable slope.
For the first time he could see the edge of the Guntali
Plateau, revealed in the distance from time to time when the
high clouds cleared. The uneven rocky rim rose another
[

84]

j

j

three thousand meters higher than Turput, sharply defining

the original surface of the planet.
At this altitude the strepanong dorril, and
,

came more than distant circling dots,

maiming betheir enormous soaring

shapes resolving into living creatures with five- to eightmeter wingspans. The great scavengers rode the superheated
air that rose from the floor of the Barshajagad and rarely
scoured below the two-thousand-meter line. This according
to the porters, who were nonetheless terrified of them.
They’d climbed past the last Mai village days ago and
since then had seen only an occasional solitary hunting party
swathed in heavy clothing. Etienne was enjoying the comparative silence.
“Billions of years,” he murmured. “That’s how long it
took the rivers to cut those canyons.”
Lyra turned from her study of the porter’s cold weather
gear to grin knowingly at him. “Then you’re glad we made
the detour?”

He was

unwilling to grant her the small triumph.
“Certainly it’s more interesting than the section of the Barshajagad we left, but I’d still prefer that we’d kept to our
still

original itinerary.”

“Can’t give in gracefully, can you? You can’t ever
win. Why can’t you admit when you’re wrong?”

when

I

me

am

wrong.”
“Sure. You’re the stubbornest
“I will,

let

man

I’ve ever met,

Etienne.”

“Then why did you marry me?”
“Always the same question. Always

never con.” she turned and
tent. One of these days I’m going to
walked away, mumbling to herself. She always stopped before finishing that sentence, for which he was grateful. Or
at least, it used to be that he was grateful. Ten years now
.

testing,

.

she’d put off finishing that sentence.
Homat hurried up alongside him as they resumed their
climb. “The porters pass on their gratefulness. They are still
cold but it leaves their bones.”
“Should be warm enough,” Etienne snapped, unaware of
the sharpness of his tone.
to

“Took them damn near an hour

change clothes.”
“They are not used to such cold, de-Etienne.” Homat
[

85 ]

tugged at the rim of his own hood, trying to cover as much
of his bald pate as possible. “Nor am I. They dressed as
rapidly as they could.” He tried to see into Etienne’s eyes.
“Truly, you and de-Lyra are not cold?”
The geologist wore modified lederhosen and a heavier
shirt over his mesh briefs. “Not only that, Homat, I’m still

on the warm

side.”

Homat considered this. “Our bodies do not appear so very
and while you and de-Lyra have more
fur, much of you still is bare skin, as are our bodies. I would
not think that you would still be warm here.”
different, de-Etienne,

“Different environments induce difference adaptations,

Homat.”
“Truly,” Homat confessed.
“If you’re through lording it over the natives,” Lyra said
in terranglo from her position farther up the road, “maybe
we can make a little progress before nightfall?”
“I wasn’t ‘lording it,’” he shot back angrily, “I was just
explaining to Homat that
” but she’d already turned away
from him to resume her climb. When she did that it made
him mad enough to spit wood. Short of grabbing her and
forcing her to listen to him, however, there was little he
could do, and he didn’t want to engage in a shouting match
in front of the porters. So he swallowed his anger, convinced
it would go straight to the ulcer he was building in his gut,
the painful cavity that had his wife’s name written all over

—

it.

It

was

early evening

when they

finally crested the last

them knew what to
expect. A smaller version of Kekkalong, perhaps. They were
ridge overlooking Turput. Neither of

pleasantly surprised.

Neat narrow streets paved with gray flagstone ran down
to the fast moving Aurang and continued on the far shdre.
Both banks were lined with wooden water wheels that turned
steadily in the swift current. Instead of the blocky

Mai

ar-

come to associate with civilization on Tslamaina, they saw buildings designed with flowerlike domes

chitecture they’d

and elegant arches. Graceful winding walls connected the
main structures, and fluted slate tiles drained rainwater from
the roofs. Small observation towers bloomed amid the larger
[

86 ]

edifices.

Excepting the towers, nothing rose higher than three

floors.

Above

town the Aurang split into a series of gentle
cataracts where dim figures worked with long fish sweeps.
Terraces heavy with fruit bushes stepped toward heaven. At
the far end of the formation Etienne identified as a hanging
valley, a wide waterfall crashed into the riverbed.
Most magical of all were the sounds made by the profusion
of bells and wind chimes that inhabited every house and
shop, dangled from windows and rafters and projecting beams.
The tinkling and clanging and bonging were audible even
above the rush of the Aurang. There were bells of metal and
ceramic, of glass and clay and wood, bone bells and stone
the

chimes.

Behind Lyra Homat made
an impolite noise while Etienne elected to reserve judgment.
Alien beauty could be deceptive.
“Very aesthetic appearance,” he grudgingly admitted. But
he found it hard to resist the multicolored town after the
bland whites and yellows of Mai communities. It seemed as
if every building in Turput was painted a different color. The
town, like the air above it, was alive with rainbows.
They started down the ridge. As they neared the town
they saw one could enter from any direction without encountering an obstruction. There was a single small gate, an
afterthought of wooden logs and planks. One could walk
around it as easily as through it. It also offered them then“Isn’t it magnificent, Etienne?”

first

Tsla.

Lyra and Etienne were not familiar with Tsla characteristics and so could not tell how old he was, but both scientists
received an impression of age. In height he stood midway
between Etienne’s and Lyra’s. The resemblance between
Tsla and human, and for that matter between Tsla and Mai,

ended there.
His toga-and-cape attire could not conceal the fact that
he was covered everywhere save on the forearms and forelegs with a short, soft brown fur. The head rested on a neck
that was curved forward, giving a false impression of age.
Ears were short round stubs set atop the head. The six fingers
were shorter and stubbier than those of Mai or human while
the eyes displayed a

dewy

luster.
[

87 ]

the facial features was the quartermeter long flexible snout like that of the terran tapir. It bobbed
and dipped with an independent life of its own, no doubt
conveying subtleties of expression discernible only to another Tsla. Twin nostrils were visible through the fur at the

Most prominent of all

tip.

strained Etienne’s laboriously memorized Tsla to translate the Tsla’s greeting. “I am Sau, Keeper of the Gate of
Hospitality.” To Etienne’s relief the Tsla switched to fluent
It

“Word of thy coming has preceded thee. You are the
visitors said to come from another world.”
Lyra nodded sagely. Her affinity for languages reached
Mai.

beyond Etienne’s, and she wasn’t hesitant about trying
the local dialect. “We are they, Keeper. Your gate must be

far

of hospitality, for

it

“A conceit.” The

protects nothing but air.”
Tsla spread both hands to the air, show-

up to the elbow. “Most visitors seem to expect
a gate, so one was made. Higher towns than Turput have
need of real gates. We do not.”
The language of the Tsla was slow and languorous, a
ing bare skin

startling contrast to the fast-paced singsong

of the Mai.

Etienne found himself impatient for the Keeper to continue.
“Thee are welcome here. We hope that thy visit will honor
us.”
Polite, open, with

none of the double meanings the Mai

attached to such phrases of greeting. Despite his initial reservations Etienne found himself developing a fondness for
the Tsla. There was a graciousness about this creature no
Mai had displayed, not even the obsequious Ambassador
Ror de-Kelwhoang of Po Rabi.
“Follow me and I will take you to a place of rest. Thy
friends,” he added with a barely perceptible hint of distaste
as he indicated the porters, “are also welcome.”
“Most generous of thee,” Lyra replied properly as the
Tsla turned to lead them into the town.
Their escort kept up a fair pace, moving with deliberation
so as not to tire the visitors. Instead of lifting each foot and
then setting it ahead and down, the Tsla moved with a gait
more shuffle and slide. The cape covering the creature’s
broad back was dark brown split by a single yellow stripe
running down the middle. This simple motif was present on
[

88 ]

the toga as well. Etienne found himself unexpectedly pleased
by the sight of another intelligent creature with hair. Baldness was the norm not only among the Mai but the thranx
as well.

After they entered the town, each Tsla they encountered
marked their passage by duplicating the Keeper’s raising of
hands, as if they were caressing the air. The Mai muttered
among themselves and packed into a tight knot behind the
humans. Etienne wondered at their paranoia, which was
typically Mai. There was no suggestion of treachery here.
Clusters of Tsla children followed a polite distance behind, wiggling curious stubs of snouts as they took the scent
of the peculiar strangers. Before too long the Keeper halted
outside a long bamlike building with a gently curving roof.
It resembled a broken olla set on its side against the earth.
“This is the Trade Place,” one of the porters said. “I was
here once before, though I did not stay long.”
The Keeper beckoned them to enter. Inside it was dark
and cool. Off to the right they found a row of interconnected
chambers with skylights set into the curving ceiling. The
glass was well-fashioned, with few bubbles. It was a good
twenty degrees warmer in the room than it had been out in
the hallway.

“For thy friends,” the Keeper announced, “and for thee
as well

if

you so

desire.”

“No, thanks.” Etienne watched the Mai pile joyfully into
the big room and stand with their faces turned up to the
sunlight. They divested themselves of their burdens without
being told. “I think we’d prefer the type of room you use
yourselves.”
“As thee wish.” The Keeper took them back out into the
hall and led them farther into the building to a smaller room
full of the aroma of fresh incense.
“If this suits thee, I must leave now.”

Etienne said.
Lyra was running a hand over the near wall. “Look at

“It suits,”

this,

Etienne.

The entire inside wall is glazed, like a big pot!”

“Watertight and
cool in summer, reflects the heat of a fire in winter.” The
single skylight did not trap the heat as did those in the por-

He let his fingers touch the slick surface.

[

89 ]

room. A window at eyelevel allowed a view outside to
the paved street.
After a time a second Tsla joined them. He was taller
than the Keeper and stood a little straighter while still displaying the curved upper spine. He wore a similar toga and
cape arrangement, but this one was black with two gold
ters’

stripes dividing

am

it.

have the honor to be thy host and guide
during thy visit to Turput.” He made no secret of his own
curiosity regarding the strangers. “Anything thee wish thee
have but to ask and if it can be provided it will.”
“I

“We

Tyl.

I

can’t stay long,” Etienne replied, chosing to ignore

:

She was in xenosociological
our boat down on the Skar and we have

his wife’s radiant expression.

heaven.

“We

left

to return there soon.”

now. Tyl, we want to see everything
we can. It’s true we have little time, but I want to learn as
much as possible about thy people and their customs, their!
way of life. That is my job.”
“Worthy scholarship,” said Tyl. He had an unexpectedly
deep voice that came rolling out in breathy, rounded syllables from beneath the flexible snout. “If thy time is constrained thee must listen close as well as look. Tomorrow,
if arrangements can be made, I will take thee to the temple
of Moraung Motau.”
“Maybe we’d like to see something else first.”
“Etienne! Don’t be impolite. You’ve been too long among
the Mai. I swear, you’re starting to act like a riverfront

“Never mind

that

merchant.”

He was

too tired to bicker with her, simply turned away
and examined the wall while she continued to converse with
Tyl.
“If thee prefer,” their host said, “there is

We

a

little

time

left

could begin now.”
“Not on your thy life.” Etienne headed for a padded
bench that obviously was designed to serve as a couch or
bed or both. “I’m worn out.”
“Well I’m not,” Lyra snapped. “You may show me around
if thee wish, Tyl.”
“My greatest honor.”
Etienne thought of a suitably sarcastic rejoinder but found
to the day.

— —

[

90 ]

|

hard to find a reason for spiting the Tsla’s courtesy. He
said nothing as they departed. The sound of chimes and bells
was like a sedative and the couch-bed surprisingly comfortable. Before he knew it he was sound asleep.
Light from a candle set in a glass dish on a high shelf
awakened him. No doubt it had been lit carefully while he
it

:

slept

by some conscientious

“Wake

up,

I

servitor.

said.”

rolled over, found himself staring up at his wife’s
excited face. He rubbed tiredly at his heavy eyes. “What is

He

it?”

“Etienne, Tyl took me through half the town, by torchlight. The system of government these people have developed is unique to sentients in this technological classification!
These Tsla are a xenologicai wonder. Do you know that the
and they’re not priests, more the
spiritual administrators
actually hold half
equivalent of primitive psychoanalysts

—

—

the seats of government?”

“That’s interesting.” He began to roll over but she put a
hand out to restrain him. He looked irritatedly back over his
shoulder.
“Etienne, listen to me! This social structure is unprecedented. This is a presteam civilization, yet the people are
socially advanced enough to pay extraordinary attention to
something as sophisticated as mental health. They don’t define it quite like that, of course, but it comes out the same.
They may be the stablest primitive alien society yet encountered, and they do this without holding any unwarranted
illusions about themselves.
“No wonder the Mai fear and suspect them! The Tsla are
so much better balanced. The Tsla have come to terms with
the health of their minds earlier than most peoples do with
the condition of their bodies. Even Martinson’s work on
Alaspin is proof of it. This discovery, Etienne, it’s worth all
the trouble of making the expedition.” She stood and began
to

pace the room.

“The Tsla are
monograph here,

special, unique. There’s

more than a chip

an entire volume.”
“I’m thrilled for you.” He let out a helpless yawn. “Do
keep in mind that we have half a river left to explore.”
She started to comment, changed her mind in midthought.
there’s

[

91 ]

I

“You’re exhausted, Etienne. We’ll discuss

this in the

mom-

in§.

“You should be exhausted

too.”

know, but I can’t hold back the enthusiasm. I’m run-i
ning on adrenalin, Etienne, and I have to share this with
someone. Who else if not you?” She hesitated and added in
an odd tone of voice, “Tyl would be interested.”
“Tyl strikes me as a good listener.” Etienne pulled the
light blanket up around his neck.
“He is, and a good talker as well. From all I was able to
discern he’s regarded very well by his fellow Tsla. I watched
him perform his evening prann. Beneath all those robes and
“I

cloaks they wear, some of these people are very impressive
physical specimens, Etienne. Much more impressive than:
the Mai.”
“Makes sense. The climate up here’s less benign and
working steep terraces requires more strength than tending
to a floodplain.”
“Yes. Much more in the way of physical strength,” she

murmured.
“I’m glad you had such a profitable evening. Now if you
don’t mind, I really was enjoying my sleep.”
“Sorry. Inconsiderate of me.” She tiptoed backward from
the room. “I’ll leave you now, Etienne, and I’ll try not to
wake you when I return. I have to find Tyl.”
“Sure,” he mumbled, already half-conscious again, “go
find Tyl.”

He

much

refreshed the next morning. The sun was
shining brightly through the skylight and window and a basin
of clear cold water was waiting for him by the foot of his
bed. It was the best night’s sleep he’d had since leaving
felt

Steamer Station.
He splashed water off his face, dried himself with his shirt,
and looked around.
“Lyra?” The other couch-bed was empty. He raised his
voice a little. “Lyra!”
She entered through the arched doorway a moment later,
already fully dressed and wide awake. He frowned at
her.
“Didn’t you get any sleep?”
“Sure did. Slept like Lazarus, got up at dawn. This is such
[

92 ]

a wonderful place, Etienne I know it’s an unprofessional
thing to say, but there’s no comparing these people to the
Mai, Homat being an exception. From what Tyl tells me
there’s next to no crime among the Tsla. We can leave our
possessions anywhere in town without fear they’ll be stolen.
That’s another byproduct of their concern for mental health.
They’ve learned to cope with their baser instincts not only
better than the Mai, but better than many people I know.”
‘‘That’s quite a judgment to make on the basis of half a
night’s conversation with one native. Isn’t it an unwritten
rule that all primitive cultures have their hidden eccentricities? I’m sure the Tsla’s will appear in due course.” He
hunted for his lederhosen.
‘‘Maybe so, but I haven’t seen any evidence of it yet and
I’ve

been looking. Hurry up. Tyl’s waiting for us.”

‘‘Waiting for us?

Why?”

mute her exasperation. “To guide us to
the temple of Moraung Motau, remember?”
She didn’t

try to

“Sorry. Still full of sleep. What about something to eat?”
“That’s waiting too. I’ve already sampled the local cooking. It’s blander than the Mai’s but perfectly palatable. Don’t
worry about Homat and the others. They’ve already eaten
and they’re stretched out under their skylights, soaking up
the ultraviolet.”
The meal that

was brought

to their

room was simple but

ample. Tyl joined them, watching while they ate and sharing
their enjoyment if not their table.
Etienne muttered a terse thank you, asked, “How far is
it to this temple?”
“A day’s journey. We will spend the night near there.”
Etienne searched his memory, was unable to conjure up
the sight of any large structures at the far end of the valley
and told Tyl so.
“You did not miss seeing it, friend Etienne. I perhaps
should have said it lies a day’s ride from Turput. We will
not use our

own

feet.”

“Lowagons?” Etienne inquired, thankful for his feet.
“No. Those are tools of the Mai. We will ride lekkas.

When

thee are ready, I will take thee.”
In the stable area behind the hospitality building they
encountered, their first lekka, a furry thin-legged creature
[

93 ]

with an incongruously rotund body and a double tail that
switched nervously from side to side. Blunt furry faces turned
to glance curiously at the bearers of strange new smells.
They waited with placid expressions and chewed their cuds
as Tsla handlers attached reins to the base of high, forwardcurving ears. The forelegs were longer than the hind, an
unusual arrangement for an animal built to run. Etienne
thought of hyenas and giraffes, though the lekka was bulkier
than either.
In consequence, there was no pommel on the woven cloth
saddles. Instead, each boasted a high backrest designed to

keep the rider from sliding backward down the sloping spine.
It was heavily padded. There were no stirrups. The handlers
brought stepstools to assist in mounting.
The reins were simple and straightforward and both Redowls were mounted in minutes. Tyl turned his own steed,
spoke comfortingly.
“One thing to be careful of. The lekka stands quietly, but
they love to run. So be prepared.” A stableyard gate was
swung open ahead and he swung his lekka around.
As their guide shouted an indecipherable Tsla word,
Etienne’s mount made a sudden rush for the gap, reaching
out with those long forelegs and nearly throwing its rider
feet over head despite the saddle’s solid backbrace. As it
was he almost kicked himself in the mouth. Lyra’s deep,
vibrant laugh didn’t make him feel any better. He threw her
a murderous look which she ignored as she smoothly followed Tyl out the gate.
Etienne brought up the rear, furious at his own clumsiness
and determined to master his animal. Before too long his
hips adjusted to the odd reaching gallop and he was speeding
up the wide dirt road as comfortably as Lyra.

The track ran parallel to the river. The Aurang here was
some six kilometers wide, a mighty torrent but only a trickle
compared to the Skar. At the far end of the hanging valley
the river fell to earth in a broad waterfall, sparkling and most
impressive. It was a good hundred meters high and reminded

him of the great

on the tropical thranx
worlds that they some day hoped to visit.
He nudged his mount nearer Lyra and Tyl, called across
waterfalls trideed

to their guide.
[

94 ]

“It is called the Visautik,”

Tyl informed him.

“We

will

reach it by midday.”
Etienne was studying the sheer wall that seemed to mark
the end of the valley. “Then what?”
“There is a trail not visible from here, a trading road that
climbs a rockfall on this side of the Visautik. It rises to the
next valley. Many legats beyond lies the temple of Moraung
Motau. And the Cuparaggai.”
“What’s that?” Lyra asked, simultaneously noting that
the Tsla used the same unit to measure distance as did the
Mai.
There was no way of telling if their guide smiled, since
his mouth was hidden by the weaving proboscis, but Tyl
nonetheless managed to convey a feeling of anticipation as
well as delighted amusement as he said, “Thee will see.”

[

95 ]

1

I VIII
They heard

the Cuparaggai long before they

before they heard

saw

it,

and

announced itself as a buzzing
a vibration in the bones. Its roar drowned out
the rush of Visautik Falls before they crested the canyon
felt it

it.

It

in the ears,

wall.

The temple valley was not as large as the one in which
Turput lay, and it appeared narrower and smaller still because of the height of the walls that enclosed it. Jewellike
fields filled the valley, nourished by the Aurang’s flow. At
the far end of the valley lay the still unseen source of steady
thunder, marked only by sunlit mist.
They paused atop the ridge and had an interesting lunch
that consisted of some kind of local rolled meat and thick,
sweet breadsticks. Then they remounted and rode on. Several hours later Tyl paused and extracted a handful of
small
round cottony pads.

Lyra examined the pair he handed

to her.

“What are these

for?”

Tyl pointed to the small shapes atop his head, then pushed
one of the pads inside.
[

96 ]

“Oh!” Lyra hadn’t noticed that they now had to shout in
order to be heard over the nearing roar, but she was made
aware of it as soon as she inserted the pads and silence
returned.

Despite these precautions they were quite unprepared for
the sight that greeted them when they turned a sharp bend
in the canyon.
Several kilometers ahead, sheer rock walls met to form
a vertical defile no more than four kilometers wide. For the
first time since they’d left the Skar, Etienne forgot his irritation with Lyra. He was enveloped by wonder.
“How high?” she shouted at him, leaning close so that he
could hear her through his earplugs. He’d already taken a
sighting with the instrumentation on his wrist.
‘Twenty-five hundred meters!” Only the fact that the spray
did not rise half as high as the falls themselves enabled them
to see the cliff where the Aurang River flowed over the edge
of the Guntali Plateau. It was a frightening, magnificent drop
and the result was a cascade of unmatched proportions, fittingly located on a world of geological superlatives.
It seemed impossible that the stone at the base of that
torrent could withstand the impact of so much water falling
from such a height without turning to powder. Just as it
seemed impossible for the ancient multistorey edifice that
clung to the cliff face just to the right of the waterfall to
remain in place without having been shaken to pieces
hundreds of years ago.
Tyl pointed. “Moraung Motau.”
“How old?” Lyra shouted as they raced toward it.
“A thousand years, two thousand, who can say?” Tyl
spurred his lekka on.
Hundreds of windows threw back the sun from the rambling, rock-climbing structure, which appeared more than
large enough to shelter the whole population of Turput. Huge
bas-reliefs covered the facade with writhing figures and decorative motifs. Only the fact that the building had been hewn
from the raw stone of the cliff face enabled it to withstand
the steady vibration produced

by the immense

waterfall

nearby.
Several thousand years, Tyl had said, and Etienne had
[

97 ]

no reason to doubt the Tsla’s veracity. He had shown himself
to be truthful in everything else.
As they drew near he saw that the thick green lines that
covered the lower part of the cliff on both sides of the Cuparaggai were not sculpted and painted decorations but enormous vines, unlike anything they had observed growing on
Tslamaina before. Tsla toiled among them, tending to roots
and leaves. They wore longer capes of some shiny material
which kept them from being soaked by the omnipresent spray.
Tyl reined in his lekka and the two humans slowed accordingly.

we

going any farther?” Lyra asked, shouting to
make herself heard over the Cuparaggai’s thunder. “Aren’t
we going inside the temple?”
Tyl gestured negatively and looked apologetic. “I am sorry,
but it is not permitted. Thee are not initiates. Nor could thee
stand it for very long. The monks who live and work at
Moraung Motau are attuned to the old books and ancient
ways. They are also quite deaf. It has always been so.”
He led them through the gate of a nearby farm. Etienne
could not tell if the stop had been prearranged, but the farmer
and his two mates were as cordial and relaxed as if they’d
“Aren’t

known

their guests for years.

There they stayed and spent the remainder of the day
talking, or rather, everyone listened politely and attempted
to answer Lyra’s unending questions. She inquired about

monkish
what the
the poor farmer and his

division of labor in the valley, family structure,
ritual, about trading procedure and education and

Tsla expected of an afterlife until
mates were exhausted. Eventually Tyl intervened.
“Much of what thee request of this family they can not
provide for reasons of ignorance, inhibition, custom, or uncertainty. Nor can I. There is one who might sate thy endless
curiosity.”

“Then

who

want to meet.”
“Mii-an is Chief Consoler and First Scholar of Turput.
His time he gives of but sparingly, for he is old and tired.
But I believe he will consent to share himself with thee.”
“That would be wonderful.” Lyra put a hand on her husband’s arm. “Wouldn’t that be wonderful, Etienne?”
“Wonderful. You won’t mind if I don’t tag along?”
that’s

I

[

98 ]

She looked shocked. “Etienne, this is a special opportunity. How can you? ...” She caught herself, coughed.
“You’d rather look at the rocks, wouldn’t you?”
“That’s right. I’d rather look at the rocks. You go ahead
and sit at the feet of this Consoler.” He glanced past her, to
Tyl. “Provided it’s no imposition.”
“Friend Etienne, the sharing of knowledge is never an
imposition, just like the sharing of self. It gives pleasure.”
On their way back down to Turput, Etienne let his lekka
fall behind Tyl’s so that he could talk to his wife without
shouting.

“Lyra, don’t you think you’re starting to view these people with something less than scientific detachment? Of all
people, you ought to know better than to idealize a primitive
race, no matter how superficially attractive their philosophy
may seem.”
“It’s not superficial. You put too high a premium on technology, Etienne. There are other definitions of advancement,
other kinds of higher knowledge.”
He found himself growing angry. “Come on now, Lyra.
The Tsla are nice enough, and they seem content within
themselves, but that’s hardly reason enough to go overboard
about them. I never thought I’d see you romanticizing a
bunch of elephant-nosed aborigines.”
“I would not use the word ‘aborigine’ to describe them,”
she replied coldly. “They have advanced far beyond that
stage. As for ‘romanticizing’ them, I don’t consider you
qualified to use the word.”
Her whole attitude struck him as so absurd that the putdown missed its intended effect. “This is supposed to be a
scientific expedition,” he told her, “and we’ve been more
than a little occupied with business. I’m sorry if I haven’t
found much time for romance, but I’m not used to strumming
guitars beneath four moons, let alone one. Besides which
it’s a two-way street. A little encouragement on a second
party’s part might be in order.”
She bridled at that. “I’ve given you ample opportunity.”
“You don’t say? How exactly do you define ample opportunity, and how does that have anything to do with encouragement? They’re two different things, you know.”
“If you don’t know,” she snapped, “I certainly can’t tell
[

99]

you.” She spurred her lekka forward until she was cantering
alongside their guide.
Etienne watched as the pair of them began an animated
discussion of some obscure aspect of Tsla behavior. Infatgood scientist like Lyra, infatuated
uated, he told himself.
with a bunch of furry primitives. It was hard to believe.
Well, she’d get over it soon enough. Everything about
Tsla culture was new to her, each bit of information a surprise and contrast to what they’d learned about the Mai. As
soon as she worked it out of her system they’d head back
down into the Barshajagad and life would return to normal.
Let her rhapsodize about her work. He had plenty of his
own to do for a change. If she tried to draw him into her
discussions all he had to do was start talking enthusiastically
about the amount of pyroxine in the local metamorphics and
she’d leave him alone quickly enough.
True to his word as always, Tyl succeeded in obtaining
permission for Lyra to have an audience with the Chief Consoler. From then on Etienne saw very little of his wife save
at mealtimes. He lost himself in his own field studies, making
as complete a record of the canyon of the Aurang and its
formations as possible, estimating the age of various strata
and returning several times to marvel at the power and majesty of Cuparaggai Falls.
It was only several weeks later, during one of their increasingly infrequent meetings in their room, that he remarked again on the amount of time she was spending among
their hosts, and it was not something she said that prompted
his comments: it was her appearance.
“Where did you get that outfit?” He stared at her and
tried to withhold his laughter.
Lyra executed a slow pirouette for him. The brilliantly
striped free-flowing gown and cape swirled loosely around

A

her.

“Tyl gave it to me. Mii-an ordered it. It seems that he
thinks very highly of me. We’ve been exchanging information, you see. He teaches me, I teach him. Mii-an lives for
the sharing of knowledge.”
“Glad the two of you are getting along so well. But really,
Lyra native dress?”
“What’s wrong with it? It keeps off the wind, it’s as warm

—

[

100]

during the night as my long sleeves and cooler during the
day. Eminently practical. They had to modify the shoulder
area for me. We don’t have that curvature of the upper spine,
and my arms are longer, but it’s such a tentlike garment little
work was necessary. Mii-an insisted.”
“Nice of the old boy. What enlightening discoveries have

you made?”
“Everything I’ve learned to date only confirms what I
originally suspected. The Tsla are the most sociologically

advanced race of their class yet discovered. They have no
standing army, no police force, and all citizens bear arms
on the rare occasions when it’s necessary.”

“No crime

a society this primitive?”
“There you go with your preconceived notions of what’s
primitive, Etienne. There’s some crime, naturally. It’s handled by the Consolers and Advisors. They treat the culprit
like a patient, not a criminal. Cure and not punishment.
According to the First Scholar there is perfection in everyone.”
at all, in

“You

included, naturally.”
“Me included.” The sarcasm went right past her. “You
included. The Mai and the Na included.” Then she said
something which made him sit up and take notice. “Etienne,
I believe the Tsla may be mildly telepathic.”

“Now

would be a discovery worth shouting about.
There are no known telepathic races, only mutant individuals. What makes you think so?”
“Their remarkable perceptivity. They seem to have an
instinctive grasp of what I’m going to say before I say it.”
His initial excitement faded. “What makes you think it’s
that

anything more than that?”
She suddenly looked uncomfortable. “For one thing, Tyl
has commented on more than one occasion that he doesn’t
believe you and I are getting along too well.”
The sharp laugh that filled the room was wholly spontaneous.
“And you’re basing your assumption on evidence like
that? You don’t have to be a telepathic native to see that
you and I aren’t exactly acting like the ideal couple. I’m sure
you’ve shared that knowledge with this Mii-an also and he
passed it on to Tyl.”
[

101 ]

“You just don’t want to consider the possibility, do you?”
“Possibility? Show me some real evidence for telepathic
consider the possibility. I’m starting to worry
about you, Lyra.”
“Save yourself the trouble.” She turned to leave. “I should
have known better than to confide in you.”
“Lyra. .” She hesitated. “Lyra, we’ve only been here a
few weeks. The Tsla aren’t natural wonders any more than
they’re living examples of Rousseau’s natural man. They’re
simply a nicer group of folks than the Mai. For all we know
they may make mass sacrifices every six months.”
“I don’t understand your hostility. Why this sudden antipathy toward the Tsla? They’ve been perfect hosts.”
“There’s no antipathy and what I’m saying has nothing
to do wiih the Tsla. All I’m saying is that no conscientious
researcher should jump to conclusions, much less make value
judgments about an entire race on the basis of a few weeks
spent among one group of villagers.”
“I can agree with that, Etienne.
lot more study is needed
to confirm my findings. There are several volumes to be
composed. I haven’t even had time to examine how the
Tsla’s position as middlemen between the Mai and the Na
has affected their outlook on life and their social developability

and

I’ll

.

A

ment.”
“I’m sure someone will resolve all the loose xenological
ends neatly some day.” She said nothing and a sudden thought
changed his tone. “Lyra, are you trying to tell me something?”

“Yes. I’m not ready to go Upriver again yet, Etienne. My
work here is barely under way.”
“When will you be ready to go Upriver again, my love?”
“Maybe in a couple of months. Certainly no sooner.”
“That takes us into local winter. That wouldn’t cause us
any problems here, but up near the arctic circle the Skar
may freeze solid. The hydrofoil’s not equipped for ice skimming, Lyra. We can’t wait two months.”
She turned again, a swirl of brightly striped cottonlike
folds. “I’m sorry, Etienne, but I can’t abandon my work
here. As you so aptly pointed out, I don’t have sufficient
evidence to support my numerous conclusions.”
“Where are you going?”
[

102 ]

“Evening meditation. I’ve been invited to watch and to
participate if I desire. I’d ask you along but you wouldn’t
find a bunch of aborigines sitting around attempting to get
in touch with their inner selves very interesting, would you?”
she was gone. He stared after her for a long minute.
“Well, damn!” He would have kicked his bed if it hadn’t
been constructed of solid rock. He settled instead for slamming one fist into an open palm until the latter was sore.
Of one thing he was certain. No matter how vital Lyra
considered her work here, they had to return to the Skar.
That was the agreement. Similar agreements had kept their
marriage together for twenty years and he was damned if he
was going to alter that relationship because of a sudden
infatuation on her part for a race of pseudolamaistic anteaters
with soulful eyes.
She didn’t come to the room that night. It wasn’t the first
time she’d stayed away all night, but it was the first time
he’d lain awake long enough to notice it. It was very early
the next morning when he strode purposefully down the hall

And

toward the porters’ quarters.
Like his companions, Homat lay asleep beneath a half
dozen heavy woven blankets. Etienne estimated the room
temperature at seventy degrees. He nudged the Mai hard.
“What is it, de-Etienne?” Homat inquired as he tried to
clear his vision.

“Get up. Get everyone up. We’re leaving.”
“Leaving, de-Etienne? I thought
you did not say, and

—

very early.”
“There’s been a sudden change of plans. You’ll find out
that we humans have a tendency to do things on the spur of
it is

the

moment.”

—

understand that, de-Etienne, but
“I’ll be in the courtyard if you need me. Tell them to
hurry it up.” He left a very puzzled Mai behind him.
Evidently meditation was over, or else someone had roused
his wife from her contemplation. She stormed out into the
open courtyard, ignoring the strained singing of several
lizardlike puouts on the main gate. Etienne didn’t look up
from his work. He was checking the supplies several somber
Tsla were providing.
“I

[

103 ]

“Etienne, this is childish. You know how I hate it when
you turn childish.”
“Yes, I know, and you hate ultimatums even worse.”
“That’s because ultimatums are the worst manifestation
of childishness. I thought everything had been settled last
night.”

“Settled to your satisfaction. Not to mine. I’m leaving.”
He tugged brutally on a backpack’s straps.
She sighed deeply. “I told you that my work here is just
getting under way, that I’m only beginning to make some
real progress in understanding this culture, these people.”

“Fine. I understand that.” He moved to check another
pack. Homat and the rest of the porters began filing sleepily
out of the hospitality building, shivering in the early morning
cold. Few Tsla were about this early and the sun was just
peeking over the eastern wall of the canyon.
“You stay here, Lyra. You don’t have to come down with
me. If all goes as intended I’ll be back in six months to pick
you up. Stay and meditate like mad.”
“You can’t go north alone,” she argued. “Two is the absolute minimum authorized for an expedition like this.”
“Then from this point on the expedition advances without
authorization, I guess. Homat’s learned enough to assist me.

Haven’t you, Homat?”
The Mai guide’s gaze shifted warily from one tall alien to
the other and he found reason to work on the pack farthest
away from them both.
Etienne started toward another bundle and Lyra rushed
to confront him, blocking his path. “Stop it, Etienne. Stop
it right now. I’m not in the mood for a fight.”
“Why not?” he asked sarcastically. “Did I upset your
morning devotions? And as long as we’re on the subject of
childish acts,

how would you

define

someone who

forgets

and goes native despite twenty
years of arduous fieldwork that consistently proves such

eight years of higher education

counterproductive to good research?”
“I’ve explained before that the Tsla are a unique race
deserving of special study. Sometimes to obtain the best
results it’s necessary to bend the rules.”
“Not as far as I’m concerned it isn’t.” He waved expansively at the surrounding buildings. “But you go ahead. Stay
activities are

[

104 ]

j

and have yourself a deliriously good time. Bury yourself in
native customs and habits. Inhale primitive wisdom, join the
local religion, become a Tsla nun if they have such instiI don’t care. I never put restraints on you, Lyra,
tutions
despite all your talk of ultimatums.
“As for me, I intend to locate the source of the river Skar
and study its history and geology from there to the morass
of the Skatandah. Halfway along that journey of discovery
up.”
I will make it a point to stop back here and pick you

—

“Etienne.”

“What?” He stepped around her and bent to the pack with
a

will.

“Etienne, you know I can’t let you go without me.”
“Why not? What about your carefully timed research pro-

gram?”
“We’re a team, Etienne. We complement each other. Neither of us does our best work solitaire.”
“We’ll just have to adapt somehow, won’t we?”
“No,” said a new voice. Etienne frowned, looked toward
the hallway. He and Lyra had been arguing in Tsla, using
the local language out of habit.

The Chief Consoler and First Scholar of Turput stood in
the portal. It was the first time Etienne had seen him and
the Tsla’s advanced age manifested itself in the streaks of
silver that dominated his face, the wrinkled flesh of exposed
forearms. Tyl stood at his right shoulder to lend support
should it be needed. Mii-an leaned on a twisted cane.
“I was told of the disturbance,” he said in a surprisingly

strong voice.
“No disturbance,” Etienne muttered, inspecting the packs.
“Just a friendly domestic conversation, that’s all.”
“We do not mean to intrude,” Tyl said. “It would give

unhappiness if I thought that we
“Oh for heaven’s sake.” Etienne turned sharply to confront the newcomers. “Must you people always be so damned

me much

politeT'

“We’re sorry,” said Mii-an. “It is our nature.”
Etienne threw up his hands.
“Such a disturbance cannot be allowed,” Mii-an said.
“What do you mean it can’t be allowed?” Etienne asked
him.
[ 105 ]

”

“Discord among guests is not to be tolerated.”
“Really? And what do you propose as a solution?”
Mii-an shambled across the paving to stand close to Lyra.
He took her left hand in some strange alien grip Etienne
hadn’t observed in use before.
“Thee must go with thy mate. If thy duality is to be the
price of thy studies, I cannot allow thee to continue. When
all is resolved, return to study with us another time.”
“But it was already settled,” she protested. “I was to
remain here and continue my research, learn your ways

and

—

raised a six-fingered hand. “We will
miss thee, for thou has a thirst for learning that all but matches
our own. If thee could bring thy mate’s work here all would

The Chief Consoler

be simplified, but mountains are

difficult to

move.

It is

more

accompany him. Besides, thee may still
continue thy studies, for some of thy work can go with thee,
a boon for which we would be most thankful.”
sensible for thee to

“I don’t understand, Mii-an.” Etienne listened without
looking. Apparently the First Scholar was taking his side

and he was embarrassed by

“Beyond the lands

his early display of anger.

from Turput are many
that are unknown to thy Mai companions.” He gestured to
his right. “If thee will permit it, Tyl and four bearers will

accompany

that lie Upriver

He

has traveled extensively, knows many
Upriver dialects and peoples. When you pass beyond his
realm of knowledge, he will be there to see and to study for
all Turput. And when not guiding thee he can continue to
instruct you in our ways.”
“You said you’d do that yourself.”
“The instructor is not important. All that matters is the
knowledge.”
“It’s not that simple.” She glanced at Etienne, who carefully avoided her stare. “Looks like you win after all. I can
argue with you but not with Tsla logic. That is, if you have
no objection to Tyl joining us.”
“I’ve no objection, but it’s not entirely up to us.” He rose
from the pack he’d been inspecting so intently. “Homat?”
“You already have a guide, de-Etienne,” he replied slowly.
“We do, and a fine one, but what the old Tsla says makes
thee.

[

106 ]

j

|

good sense. Haven’t you said that the
is new to you?”

Homat was

“Yes, yes.”

still

river

beyond this point

reluctant to surrender any of

his hard- won authority. “I see that

you are right, de-Etienne.
A Tsla who knows the way would be welcome.” He tugged
at the hood of his coat. “Anything would be welcomed that
takes us quickly out of this cold country.”
Etienne grinned. “I apologize. I guess I did kind of drag
all of you out of a warm bed on your equivalent of an icy
morning.” He turned to the First Scholar. “We accept your
kind offer. Tyl’s been nothing but helpful since we got here

see no reason not to share his company. How do you
feel about this, Tyl? You haven’t said anything.”
“It is Mii-an’s place to say, but I look forward to it. I will
gain much knowledge. It is a unique opportunity for me.”
“It’s settled then, I expect.” Lyra started for the hallway.
“I’ll go get ready. See what I mean about Tsla judgment,
Etienne? They have enough sense to see that we’re a team

and

I

j

even when

He

left

we

the

don’t.”

Mai

make

and hurried to
She was resigned to leaving, which was

to

final preparations

catch up with her.
very different from being agreed.
“I’m sorry I had to force the issue like this, Lyra, but I
was at my wits’ end. I couldn’t think of anything else.”
“I accept that.” She slowed and some of the hardness
drained from her expression. “Maybe you’re right, Etienne.

Maybe

I’ve gotten a

little

too close to

my work

here.

The

good working team is its ability to compromise.
I’m compromising. Just remember, you owe me one.”
“I promise, Lyra. On the way back you can spend as
much time as you want. But we must make it to the turnsoul of a

around point, the source of the Skar, before winter sets in
up north. We’ve no idea what to expect, since the southern
winters are moderated by the Groalamasan.”
“So you keep telling me.”
“What about this Tyl?” he asked, changing the subject.
“You’ve been working with these people. He’s a scholar.
Do you think he’s up to a difficult, dangerous journey? Physically, I mean. Mentally I know that he’s ready.”
“Don’t worry about his stamina, Etienne. The Tsla are
as adaptable as we are, not at all like the Mai. He’ll be able
[

107 ]

to handle the heat

down

in the Barshajagad. We’ll

space for him inside. There’s plenty of room.

make

He and

his

companions will manage.”
“Companions?”

“You didn’t hear the

words?” Etienne
shook his head. “Mii-an doesn’t want to send Tyl by himself.
He wants to send him with four porters, to replace the Mai
who will leave as soon as we reach the river.”
“We don’t need porters on the river.”
First Scholar’s last

“Mii-an has told me several times these past days that
there will come a point where we’ll have to leave the river,
leave our boat.”
“We can’t leave the boat. You know that.”
“I know it, yes, but Mii-an insists that without porters
we’ll have to turn back at a place somewhere a couple of
thousand legats Upriver.”
“It’s true.” They turned around, saw Homat standing behind them. “I listen and hear many things, de-Etienne. The!
Tsla speak of this after you have come inside.” He eyedi
Lyra with great interest. “Why do they say such things?”
“Mii-an talks about a spot far Upriver where the Skar
undergoes ... he called it a dramatic change of personality.
It’s like the Tsla to ascribe such traits to inanimate objects,
and he was very clear in his description of this place. It’s
called the Topapasirut.”
Homat’s extreme reaction was unexpected. His eyes went
very wide as he executed a half dozen powerful signs designed to ward off dangerous spirits.
“It means,” Lyra told her husband, “Cleansing Place of
all the Waters.”
“That doesn’t sound very threatening.”
“I agree, but Mii-an insists we can’t pass beyond it with
the boat. Hence his insistence that we accept porters.”
“Another waterfall? Satellite topographies don’t show any
large waterfalls in the northern region of the Barshajagad,
though admittedly pictures are less than perfect.”
“No, not a waterfall. Something else.”
“Five Tsla, Homat?”
“I dislike the presence of so many strangers on board the
spirit boat, de-Etienne, but it seems we must tolerate all to
gain the knowledge of one.”
j

[

108 ]

Etienne Redowl considered, said finally, “Tell the one
called Mii-an we accept his generous offer, but that all the
porters are to be under your command.” The Mai seemed
to grow several centimeters.
“They won’t stand for that,” Lyra argued.
“Won’t they? Surely your high and mighty Tsla can take

orders from a mere Mai. Don’t

tell

me

they’ll

argue about

it.”

an important scholar.”
“I said that the four porters would act at Homat’s direction, not Tyl. You’ll just have to explain to Mii-an that Homat’s been with us a long time, that he’s familiar with our boat
and its workings, and that he’s our right arm. Or left, whichever they accord more weight to.”
“Neither. They’re physically as well as mentally ambi“Tyl

is

dextrous.”

going to be crowded
on the boat. As for letting them inside the cabin with us, I
understand the need but are you sure we can trust them?”
“I trust Tyl completely, Etienne. And the porters will look
on their work as the Buddhaistic equivalent of making a
pilgrimage for merit. So they’ll work their hardest to make
sure the expedition’s a success.”
“Tell them to hurry themselves along then, Homat. We
have a long way to go.”
“To the river, de-Etienne, and to real weather! I will hurry

“We need a chain of command.

them with delightment!”

[

109]

It’s

Compared to the long climb up from the shore of the Skar,
the descent was as pleasurable as an afternoon stroll through
the gardens of New Riviera. In addition, the loads had been
distributed among twice as many porters, the Tsla shouldering their new burdens alongside but separate from their
Mai counterparts.

The Tsla joked amiably among themselves, their evident
good spirits proof enough of Lyra’s claim that all were willing volunteers. Whenever Tyl moved among them they deferred to him as they would a superior, but without any of
the bowing and scraping common among the Mai. The porters recognized and honored him as their mental and spiritual
superior.

He,

in turn, did not

use his position to lord

it

over

his fellows.

There was something of a subtle hierarchy among the
porters, however, as if each one knew his place without
having to be reminded of it. At the bottom of the pecking
order was one exceptionally large, powerful, and mentally
slow individual named Yulour. He hardly spoke at all and
was often the butt of gentle, nonmalicious humor on the part
[

110 ]

of his companions, to which he invariably responded with a
smile. It took a while for Yulour’ s slowness to manifest itself
beyond a doubt, at which point Etienne slipped back from
the head of the party to take Tyl aside.
“Yulour?” Etienne wished he could see if Tyl was smiling,
but that weaving flexible snout concealed the lower half of
his expression. “He was orphaned in the mountains, his
parents slain by some carnivore he could not well describe
to us. Perhaps the terror of that moment stopped his mind
from growing.” Tyl made a gesture Etienne did not recognize.

raised a part of Mii-an’s extended family, but it
did not help him here .” Tyl tapped the side of his head. “For
back
all that he is a goodly soul, with a kind heart, and his
merit from this
is strong if his mind weak. He will gain much

“He was

journey, perhaps even enough to admit him to the afterlife.
“It’s not my specialty, more my wife’s province, but I
didn’t know that the Tsla believed in an afterlife.”
“Not all of us do. I do not know if Yulour does, so I try
to believe for him. He appears content with his lot, unfair
as life has been to him. There are many I know who envy
him his unshakable contentment. On this journey of discovsave for thee and thy
ery he is my greatest responsibility
mate, of course.” There was no guile in those warm brown

—

eyes.
“If he were to

wander away from us he would never

find

back. Indeed, though he has lived there all his life,
he could not find his way back to Turput from this spot. He
would not have enough sense to follow the road.” Tyl waited
and when no more questions were forthcoming, fell back
his

way

among

his fellows.

Everything Lyra claimed for the Tsla was borne out by
each new experience. They were a kind, likable people. So
why did he persist in trying to find a reason for disliking

them?
the answer to that one. Lyra was not fond of
the Tsla. She was absolutely infatuated with them. But was
internal
that the root of his problem? He pressed on with his

He knew

argument. No,

it

There was one Tsla
her spare time with, one she

was something

else.

one she spent all
looked up to and turned to with every new question: Tyl.
in particular,

[Ill]

Now

there

was a

bizarre thought, he told himself.

No

question about it, Tyl was an impressive specimen of mammalian life. It wasn’t the first time Lyra had grown personally
fond of some object of study.
Patrick O’Morion’s space. I’m jealous of an alien aborigine, he told himself. The shock of realization so numbed him
he nearly wandered off the road toward a hundred-meter
drop. Lyra noticed the dazed look in his eyes.
“Etienne? Are you okay?”
“Sure. Yeah, I’m okay.” He blinked, extended his stride
until he once more assumed the lead. Lyra stared at his back,
shook her head in puzzlement and hurried to catch up with
him.
The Tsla brought up the rear. Tyl stood next to Yulour,
dwarfed by the porter’s bulk. “Yulour?”

!

“Yes, Learned One?”

“What is the sign made by crossing the Oo and the Strike?”
The porter’s brow did not furrow. There was no point in
straining his capacity over the mildly complex concept.
“I do not know. Learned One.”
“That’s all right, Yulour. It’s not important. Tell me, what
do you think of our new friends?”
Yulour looked over the heads of his companions, at the
two humans. “They are very nice. Learned One, though they
have so little fur. And when they talk among themselves it
is strange talk, neither like ours nor the Mai’s. But they are
nice.”

“Yes, they are. Thank thee for thy opinion, Yulour.” The
porter made a movement with his trunk. ,
Tyl rejoined the objects of his interest. “Your curiosity
induced me to chat with Yulour, Etienne. I put to him a
question simple enough for a cub to answer, and he could
not. It was beyond his simple powers of reason. Yet it struck
me that he may be happier than we. While he is free of
intelligence, he is also free of the pains and travails higher
thought brings. Ignorance, frustration, envy: he is subject
to none of these.”
“You make him out to be a perfect saint.”
“Sometimes I wonder. He is so content, and still there
are times I do not understand him.”
“We have a saying among our people, Tyl.” Etienne strug[

112 ]

I

gled to translate it into Tsla. “Better a lucky idiot than an
unlucky genius.”
“Ah, this strange concept of ‘luck’ again. Lyra mentioned
have no such concept. You must explain it to
it to me.
me further.” Etienne made an attempt to do so as they plod-

We

ded steadily downhill toward the ever widening streak of

Days

was

the Skar.
passed and the heat intensified, rising past ninety

silver that

did so the Tsla began shedding their clothing,
capes and togas vanishing into packs, not to be used again
until the climate of the far north was encountered.
It was the first time Etienne had seen a Tsla without the
familiar cape-and-toga attire. They appeared quite comfortable without it, as if clothing was employed for protection
against the elements and possibly to signify social standing,
degrees.

As

it

but not because of some primitive nudity taboo.
Not that they were naked in the human sense, since soft
brown fur covered everything except forearms and forelegs.
The only surprise was the unexpected presence of a tail, a
short stub five to six centimeters in length. It made them
look animalistic, though several intelligent races retained
tails. The AAnn, for example, considered the retention of a
as a sign of intelligence, not vice versa.
In other respects the Tsla were very human, if one discounted the six-fingered hands, six-fingered toes, and myrmecophagous face. There was one other aspect of their

tail

anatomy that interested him. He fully intended to question
Lyra about it as soon as he could be sure she wouldn’t
misinterpret his curiosity. Undoubtedly she would have found
amusing.
By the time the temperature touched one hundred degrees
for the
the Mai were shedding their cold-climate attire, able
stifling heat and hufirst time in weeks to luxuriate in the
his uncertainty

^

They reached the bank of the Skar and turned toward Aib.
the
Etienne was looking forward to a cool shower on board
they’d hand
hydrofoil. As soon as they ’d cleaned themselves up
local
over the second half of the agreed-upon payment to the
Oyt and make preparations for resuming their journey Upriver
That evening they were confronted by the leader of their
[ 113 ]

!i

Mai porters. So rapidly did he talk that even Lyra had trouble
following his words. It was left for Homat to interpret.
“It has something to do with the season of sowing,” he
explained. “They are all late to help and are anxious to be
on their way. There is also talk of local taxes. They come
not from Aib

but from the outlying farming district.”
Lyra nodded knowingly. “I understand. They want to skip
with their payment before the local authorities can demand
a cut. Perfectly Mai.”
The porters organized a hasty ceremony of departure,
took their payment, and left in a rush. Only slightly discomfited by the heat, the Tsla assumed the second half of the,
divided burdens. Larger and stronger than the Mai, they had
no difficulty with the full loads.
Two days later they were nearing the outskirts of Aib
when Etienne’s eyebrows drew together. “That’s funny.”
“What is funny, Etienne?” Tyl asked uncertainly.
Etienne ignored the question. Impolite, but he was concerned with something besides alien concepts of courtesy.
“I don’t see the boat, Lyra.”
She strained her eyes. “Neither do I. Your eyesight’s
better than mine, Etienne, but you’re right. I don’t see it.
Surely that’s the dock where we left it moored?”
“Has to be,” he muttered. “See, there’s the basaltic outcrop the local ruler used for a dais.”
“Something is wrong?” Tyl asked. “I feared as much.
These Mai,” he said evenly, not caring whether Homat overheard him or not, “will steal anything left unguarded for half
an anat and consider it moral.”
“We made an arrangement,” Etienne explained even as
his pace quickened, “with the head of this town to watch
our boat for us. We paid him half the set fee prior to our
departure.”
Forbearing to say, “I told you so,” Homat instead chose
to put the best possible light on the situation. “Perhaps the
people of Aib are not responsible for the disappearance of
the spirit boat.”

“You

itself

rationalize hopefully,

Homat. What do you

really

think?”

The Mai’s gaze

shifted rapidly
[

114 ]

from one alien to the other.

was a look Etienne had become

It

familiar with

tened to reassure their guide.
“You have nothing to fear from us, Homat.

and he has-

We are your

friends.”

“You

recall,

how

de-Etienne,

I

warned you against

this

possibility?”

“All too clearly.” They were almost running now. The
dock was an empty gesture protruding into the river.
“I cannot see, de-Etienne, how the spirit boat could have
vanished without the Aibites knowing. If they did not take
it themselves, they surely did little to prevent its being taken.
I

thought you said that

it

could not be stolen, that

it

would

protect itself.”
“That’s what we thought,” Etienne replied grimly. “It
looks like we were wrong.” He looked toward the town.
“Let’s pay our good friend Gwattwe a visit, shall we?”
The modest residence of the Oyt of Aib was guarded by
a brace of well-armed but obviously nervous warriors. The

Oyt, one of them explained, was not at home.
“Then you’ve no objection to our entering to lay tribute
at his table?”

“I

was

Lyra

replied.

told to admit

no

visitors.”

The

soldier looked very

unhappy.
Tyl spoke. “This refusal gains your master no grace, to
flagrantly flout the laws of hospitality concerning weary travelers.”

“In addition to which if you don’t let us inside, we’ll call
on our otherworldly spirits to blow the place down.” This
was more bluff than promise, since an asynapt wouldn’t do
more than scorch the stone wall before them, but the guard
didn’t

know

that.

The guard looked askance
hip, having already assumed

at the pistol riding Etienne’s
it

was some

sort of

weapon.

He had no

desire to personally discover its capabilities. “I
will find out what best be done.” He turned and vanished
into the domicile, reappearing after a lapse of a few minutes.
curious, hesitant crowd had emerged from other nearby
structures. They milled about well clear of the travelers,
staring at the pair of aliens and the five Tsla.

A

are to be admitted,” the guard informed them, “but
you leave your spirit callers outside.”

“You
only

if

[

115 ]

;

“Our

spirits

come with

us,” Lyra informed

him

in no-

nonsense tones.
The guard sighed. “I was asked only to request it. Enter.”
The stone and wood edifice was something more than a
house and a good deal less than a palace, but was no doubt
the best a small town like Aib could afford. Although the
matter of their boat’s whereabouts occupied most of his
thoughts, Etienne still managed to note the mixture of envy
and distaste with which the local Mai viewed the Tsla.
As Etienne had expected, Gwattwe had been there all
along. Etienne thought he looked unwell, as if all the traditional bravado had been knocked out of him. Strange. If
he intended to bargain for the missing hydrofoil he was beginning badly.

“Where

is it?”

he snapped

Oyt, in no

at the

mood

for

protocol.

do not have to guess to what you
tiredly. “Your spirit boat is not here.”
“I

“You

stole it,” Etienne growled.

payment as

refer,” said the

“We

trusted you,

Oyt

we

which you betrayed.
You promised that our property would come to no harm.”
“I lied,” said Gwattwe.

left

security for that. trust

Venerable mastery of diplomacy, Etienne mused sardonically. But this wasn’t what he’d anticipated when they’d
entered the town. Something was wrong here.
“Where have you hidden it?”
“We do not have your spirit boat.” Gwattwe executed a
most profound gesture of regret and helplessness. Tyl was
watching him carefully.
“I believed you when you offered us assurances. Why
should I believe you when you offer disclaimers?”
“It matters not whether you believe me. We do not have
your boat. We did not steal it. Oh, we tried to.” His expression turned sour. “Most assuredly we tried. Your spirits slew
my advisor and several of his students, one at a time.” He
paused, but if he was expecting some word of contrition
from Etienne he was going to have a long wait. He continued.
“We tried everything that we could think of, but we never
had a glimpse of the spirits that watched over your vessel,
nor of how they slew.” He rose from his couch and balding
houris rolled clear of his feet.
[

116 ]

j

*

“Then where’s our boat?”

me

have to tell you that it was stolen.”
“But not by you?”
“Not by us. Why do you think it pains me?” Clearly
Gwattwe of Aib was distressed only because another had
succeeded where he had failed.
“It pains

“When

to

my

best advisors in matters spirit-wise I
finally resolved to contact the renowned Davahassi, who is
head advisor to Langai of Hochac.”
Tyl leaned close to Etienne and spoke in Mai. “Hochac
is a very bad place. It lies a few legats north of the place
where the Aurang flows into the Skar. We rarely trade with
them, for the people there are mean of spirit and sometimes
prefer to kill for what they want rather than pay for it as
many Mai are wont to do.”
Etienne saw Homat stiffen, but the guide held his tongue.
I lost

He would have
spect in his

to convince Tyl to

comments concerning

was around.
“It was hoped

more circumMai whenever Homat

be a

the

little

that Davahassi might solve the secret of

your spirit boat as he has traveled widely and gained much
knowledge. He came down by boat with Langai himself and
a large escort of advisors. I was suspicious then but didn’t

know what

else to do.

“They studied your

spirit

boat for

many days and

buried

three advisors of their own in the river before Davahassi hit
upon his plan. The secret, he announced, was to leave the
spirits that protected your vessel in place and not to intrude
on their privacy, for clearly the craft was their home and
they defended it as such from any intruder. But that did not
mean that the home itself could not be moved, provided the
spirits

within were

left

undisturbed.

“Therefore at his instructions Langai had a great wooden
cage constructed. Many spells were then placed upon the
spirit boat as the cage was placed around it and bound in
place. It was then dragged from its home, the water, and
placed on a platform whence it was transported to the center
of Aib. It sat right there while we all celebrated.” He pointed
toward the town square outside the official residence.
“During the celebration our spirits were high. All would
share in the profit from this action. We relaxed with our
[

117 ]

Davahassi, may his entrails entice parasites,
drugged our fine wine. When we awoke the next day it was
found that Langai and his advisors had slipped the spirit boat
back into the river. The wooden platform on which it had
been placed apparently made a most delighted raft that they
used to carry their booty homeward, like carrion eaters.
“We pursued, but too late, and Langai had stationed soldiers in the hills between here and Hochac. Certainly we
could not have approached by water in time to intercept
them.” He concluded his tale of woe and lost opportunity
with the Mai equivalent of a disgruntled shrug.
“You see, we did not steal your boat, but it was not for
want of trying.”
“How noble of you to say so.”
“A wooden cage,” Lyra murmured. “Wood’s a rotten
conductor. Once out of the water they’d be safe enough so
long as they didn’t make contact with the hull.”
“‘Left the spirits in peace,’” Etienne repeated. “That explains what happened. Nothing’s wrong with the ship’s defensive systems. They just avoided provoking them. I never
thought the locals would have enough sense to move the
whole boat without trying to get aboard and at the controls
or contents.” He turned back to Gwattwe.
“We’d like your help in recovering our property. You can
compensate for your own attempted thievery and earn your
fee by providing us with a troop of soldiers to help us assault

good

‘friends.’

Hochac.”

“Would

were feasible,” Gwattwe murfor the chance at revenge alone, but

that such a thing

mured. “I would do

it

not Aib, hairy one. It is not much larger but it is
far stronger. It would take many more soldiers than Aib
could provide to overcome it, for Hochac is a walled town
and heavily defended. Otherwise it could not withstand the
attentions of its neighbors, whom it makes a practice of
bullying and defrauding. The Hochacites are known for their
love of battle. We of Aib are a peaceful folk.”
“Sticky fingers and now sticky feet.”
hand came down
gently on his shoulder.
“Perhaps,” Tyl whispered to him in Tsla so that Gwattwe
could not understand, “it might be better for us just to go.
The Hochacites may be expecting a big attack. If we ap-

Hochac

is

A

[

118 ]

proach with patience and caution, we may surprise them.
But do not inform this one of our intentions. Like all his
kind, he may yet find profit in selling such information to
those who have already stolen from him. Feuds are like chaff
to the Mai, and as permanent as their promises.”
Etienne turned back to the waiting Oyt. “As we apparently have lost our craft and cannot recover it, we must
return Downriver to the Groalamasan and our base in order
to obtain another. You owe us for what we already have
paid you.”
“I do not deny that. Business is business,” Gwattwe readily

admitted.

“We

accept recompense in the form of a couple of
riverworthy sailing craft so that we may safely return Downwill

river.”

Gwattwe looked relieved, if not downright pleased. “That
is fair,” he said quickly. “The craft you wish will be provided.
And may you have a safe journey Downriver.”
Safe it would be, Etienne mused, but they had no intention
of heading south.

Having no reason to ply the Skar, the Tsla were not very
good sailors. But Homat felt right at home. With his help,
both small boats managed to make their way slowly Upriver.
They anchored well out in the river away from the walled
harbor of Hochac. Occasional fishing boats drifted past and
their crews hailed the newcomers. Etienne and Lyra stayed
out of sight belowdecks while Homat fielded the passing
inquiries.

The

sight of the Tsla raised curious stares, but

many of

the drifting fisherfolk were from farther Upriver.
Their questions were not threatening. Only a few of the
curious called Hochac home port. To them the sight of Tsla
on the river was unusual, but hardly cause for alarm.
Langai of Hochac and his advisor Davahassi might know
that the alien owners of the stolen spirit boat had gone to
visit with the Tsla, but that wasn’t reason enough to connect
the off-worlders to these furry fishermen. As far as Langai

and the rest of Hochac knew, Etienne and Lyra Redowl were
far away.
So no soldiers rowed out to inspect the fishermen and the.
two boats were able to move safely inshore on the heels of
[

119 ]

As soon

it was dark, Etienne and Lyra crept
out on the upper deck and produced daynight scopes from

nightfall.

as

their kits.

“Must be used to attacks.” Etienne squinted through his
monocular. “The stockade’s made of wood instead of stone,
but its good and high. Too high to scale easily. You can see
places where the individual logs have been scarred by fire.
The top is flat and lined with broken glass. Cute.”
“What sign of thy spirit boat?” Tyl asked softly.
“I can’t see a thing besides the stockade, but there’s a
helluva lot of light from the center of town.” He touched a
switch on the side of the scope and the tiny long-range microphone amplified sound along with the light. Homat jumped
at the unexpected rush of noise while the Tsla drew back
and made signs. Lyra reassured them.
As soon as Homat had overcome his initial suspicion of
the scope, Etienne asked him, “What do you make of this?”
The Mai moved hesitantly nearer the source of the sounds.
“Drums, pipes, flutes, high chanting: they sound as if they
are celebrating.” His face lit with recognition of a particular
chant. “That is what it is. A gathering to celebrate their great
triumph over the Aibites and their successful theft. I did not
recognize it at first. Many of the words here are different
from in Po Rabi.”
“Then we have a chance to surprise them while they’re
partying.”
“I don’t think so, de-Etienne. They will have the spirit
boat carefully watched, lest some of their own fellows try

to steal

it

and

steal the spirit

Downriver. Anyone clever enough to
boat would not be so stupid as to trust his

sell it

own

people.”
Etienne touched the asynaptic pistol riding his hip. “Then
we’ll just have to walk in and make a polite request for the
return of our property.” He glanced at his wife but this time
Lyra had nothing to say about the prospect of wreaking
havoc on the natives.
Another source did, however. “The taking of lives would

be most regrettable.” Tyl wore his most soulful expression.
“I’m sorry too, Tyl, but we have to get our boat back and
I’m in no mood to be nice about it. Not only would its loss
mean the end of our expedition, but there are devices on
[

120]

|

board that could be a real danger to the Mai themselves if
they ever managed to figure them out.” He wiped sweat from
his forehead. The temperature was still over a hundred and
ten and the humidity hovered around ninety percent.
“There’s another factor to consider. Lyra and I could
probably obtain transportation back down to the Skatandah

I

we

couldn’t take months of this heat.”
“I do not dispute the need to recover thy property, Etienne.
only abhor the necessity of taking lives through violence.”
“We’ll do as little shooting as possible.”

Delta, but

“A very exuberant celebration.” Homat was
intently to the amplified

still

listening

sounds coming from beyond the

stockade as the two boats slipped into the harbor. “Siask!”
he suddenly snapped, dropping to the gunwale. Etienne and
Lyra immediately flattened themselves below the seats.
“What is it? What’s the matter?”

“A

patrol, I think.

What do we do now?”

may be

permitted?”
Etienne glanced down toward Tyl.
“If I

“You have something

mind?”
“You and thy Lyra must remain concealed, for on sight
of thee the alarm will surely be raised, but thy friend Homat
will only be questioned, especially if we show ourselves. It
is unusual, as you know, for we of the Tsla to come down
to the river. These warriors should be intrigued by our presence but not alarmed, for it is well known that we love peace
and harm no one.”
“Good idea, Tyl. You put them off their guard long enough
for Lyra and me to get close enough to bring them down.”
Tyl’s proboscis twitched with amusement. “That would
be too risky, would it not?” He gestured toward his com-

in

“We

undertake the necessary action.”
“Wait a minute.” Lyra looked confused. “What about
what you just said, Tyl, about loving peace and not harming

panions.

will

anyone?”
Etienne shushed her. “Don’t confuse our guests. Let’s
see what these pacifists can do when they want to, shall we?
Think of it as an interesting footnote to your research.”
She gave him an angry stare, but said nothing. They hid
themselves beneath a section of sail as the Tsla rowed the
[

121 ]

»

boats into shore. He had a sudden crazy urge to pinch her
but managed to suppress it.
At first the patrol ordered both boats to stand off, but oni
sight of the Tsla they allowed them to dock. Etienne listened
hard. At any moment he expected the sail to be thrown aside!
and to find himself eye to eye with a long spear.
Then there was the sound of muffled struggling and he
and Lyra emerged from their temporary cocoon with pistols
at the ready. They might as well have relaxed beneath the
j

I

j

cloth.

Tyl and the porters had no trouble with the patrol. Yulour
in particular distinguished himself, exercising his great
strength with a caution that was frightening to see. Etienne
made a mental note to leave the teasing to Yulour’ s com-ti

ij

i

ij

panions.

The

had been neatly silenced. Etienne was
full of newfound respect for their philosopher-guide as he
helped him and the other Tsla slip the guards into the river,
entire patrol

but he couldn’t help but wonder at this facile contravention
of established Tsla tenets. Time enough later for social analysis, he told himself curtly. First order of business was to
get their boat back, not discuss Tsla motivation.
Having gone ahead to scout out the approach, Homat
now beckoned them forward. Soon they were standing next
to the impressive palisade of logs that girdled the town. There
were plenty of slots cut in the wood through which archers
could aim and fire on attackers. The openings near the harbor
showed only the backsides of buildings, but as they made
their way around the stockade, gaps appeared which permitted a view deeper into the community.
Eventually they located a small pedestrian gate. It was

unguarded and swung wide at Homat’s touch and they stepped
inside, concealing themselves behind a square storage building.

From
was

the slurred shouts they could now hear clearly, it
evident that plenty of drinking and drug-taking was going

on.

As they moved toward

the center of the town they had
a glimpse of unsteady revelers falling down in unexpected
places, and nearly tripped over several who had celebrated

themselves into unconsciousness.
Ahead lay the town square, a place of ceremony and
[

122 ]

j

j

j

money-making among the Mai. Smack in the center of the
paved square, surrounded by celebratory bonfires, was the
Redowls’ hydrofoil. The fires were maintained at a reasonable distance from the boat, not out of any fear of harming
it but to ensure the safety of the wooden cage in which it
rested. The chanting was loud now and terribly off-key.
Etienne looked to his wife, saw with disgust but not surprise
that she was furiously whispering a description of the celebration into her note-taker. That was his Lyra: if the locals
ended up boiling her in fish fat she’d spend her last moments

j

|

jotting

down

the recipe for posterity.

“What now, Learned One?” Apparently Tyl had

ex-

hausted his limited store of strategic knowledge. Etienne felt
a perverse satisfaction over the Tsla’s use of the honorific.
“How can we free thy boat. Learned One?” asked one of
the porters. “It seems secured most strongly.”
“Doesn’t matter,” Etienne told him. “All we have to do
Sis get within shouting distance. We’re close enough now,
but I’m worried that all this loud chanting might drown us

|

jii

out.”
“/ understand,” said Homat confidently. “You plan to call
upon the spirits that watch over your boat.”
Tyl eyed him distastefully. The Tsla were not heir to the

plethora of superstitions that infected Mai culture.
“How will thee regain control of thy craft, Etienne? And
more important, perhaps, how are we to transport it from
the center of this unfriendly village to the water’s edge?”
“You’ll see,” Etienne told him. “Homat’s not far from
the truth.” Their Mai guide chose not to look down his nose
at the skeptical Tsla, probably because in
he was bound to come off second best.

i

|

any such exchange

Etienne idly noted the architecture as they worked their
way closer to the central square. No grand stone towers
here. This wasn’t Po Rabi. Most of the buildings were of
wood, thatch, mud, and adobe, though several did soar to
the impressive height of three stories. He did not admire
them, however. Hochac’s prosperity was tainted and it throve
by taking from its neighbors. Perhaps tonight they could
redress a few of those wrongs, make the inhabitants reconsider their methods. He hoped he’d be given that opportunity. Lyra would disapprove of his attitude, he knew, but
[

123 ]

now he

much

He watched

her coolly making notes and couldn’t help but admire her. If they died here
tonight, no one could say they’d neglected their research
right

didn’t

care.

up to the final moment.
They were halfway to the central square when they stumbled into a pair of sober locals. They looked very young and
Etienne regretted having to pull his pistol. He was too slow
and could have saved his regrets. Once again Tyl and his
companions did their work with quiet efficiency. There were
no screams and no deaths, though a single brief warning
shout was lost in the shouting and chanting.
They were surprised when the arrow thudded into Swd’s
side. The short thick fur absorbed some of the arrow’s force,
but not enough to keep the porter from staggering up against
right

He struggled with the shaft as they sought cover beneath

Tyl.

the overhang of a large house.
The archer stood on the porch of a building across the
street. He was waving his bow toward the square now, jumping

up and down and screaming high and steady. To Etienne’s

Homat stepped

out into clear sight to return the
local’s steady stream of expletives. While personally gratifying, this was a lousy tactical move. The celebrants in the
square heard the row, turned to see the odd assortment of
intruders, and had enough presence of mind left to scatter
and sound the warning throughout the village.
few located their own weapons and began to advance.
Bows and arrows and spears might be primitive, but as the
unfortunate Swd could attest, they were often as effective
as any modem weapon. The differences between asynapt
and arrow were neatness and convenience, not lethality. Add
to that the fact that in seconds they were likely to be heavily
chagrin,

A

outnumbered and there was
at’s

little

humor to be found in Hom-

foolhardy posturing.

Wishing he was closer, Etienne cupped hands to mouth
and yelled at the top of his lungs, “Execute Command RedTen!” Then he lowered the muzzle of his asynapt and fired
at the feet of the nearest onrushing Hochacite. The Mai let
out a yelp and fell on his face, paralyzed from the knees
down.
That halted the charge for a few seconds, long enough for
an answering rumble to rise from the central square. The
[

124 ]

rest of the attacking villagers turned

shoulders.
Lit from beneath

and stared over

their

by the dancing bonfires, the hydrofoil

made a most impressive

rose four meters into the
air on activated repellers, lifting the wooden cage with it. It
executed a slow pirouette until it was facing the direction
from which the command had been given, locked in on
Etienne’s eyes, and started to move toward them. As it did
so the downward facing air jets on which it hovered blasted
flaming fagots of wood in all directions, scattering fire and
natives alike. The movement caused the wooden cage to
begin to break up, showering logs and planks down on the
scurrying Mai.
sight as

it

tx]
Those Hochacites who were sober started screaming about
spirits and devils as they flung their weapons aside and bolted
for the nearest cover. Homat retreated to rejoin his companions, his eyes wide and locked on the hovering bulk of
the spirit boat as it drifted toward them.
Lyra had to give him a shove to start him back toward
the stockade gate. “Back to the harbor, everybody, before
they get over the shock!”

Moving

as fast as possible without conveying the impression of a hasty retreat, the intruders fled with studied dignity.
and then a face would peek out at them as they passed
along the street, but a burst from an asynaptic pistol would

Now

cause doors and windows to slam shut quickly.
They reached the narrow gate and filed quickly through
it. Unable to quite clear the crest of the palisade, the hydrofoil made a satisfyingly loud smashing and crackling as
it splintered several of the massive logs.
Etienne and the Tsla remained behind to guard the landward end of a pier while Lyra directed the boat over the
water before retracting her husband’s order. The hydrofoil
[

126 ]

settled gently into the Skar.

Bending low to avoid an intact

wooden

cage, she stepped aboard.
From his position facing the town wall, Etienne was gratified to hear the start-up growl of the engine as power was
few armed Mai had pushed
transferred from repellers to jet.
through the gap in the stockade, but hadn’t gained the courage to charge. As soon as word came that the boat was acting
like a boat once more, some of the initial terror of its unboatlike behavior would fade and the Hochacites would try
to recover it. Etienne had no intention of giving them that
kind of time. “Now, Tyl! Get your people on board before
the Mai have time to regroup!” Even as Etienne backpedaled
to cover the Tsla’s retreat, the bolder villagers slowly adsection of

A

vanced.

Lyra made a quick head count and spun the wheel as she
nudged the accelerator. The hydrofoil varoomt d out into the
safety of the Skar, but not as fast as Etienne wanted. The
unwieldy remnants of the cage prevented the boat from rising

up on

its

hydrofoils. Distant shouts

sounded from Hochac’s

harbor; pursuit was being organized.
Among the ship’s tools was a heat stitch that could cut
and weld. It made short work of the leather thongs that bound
the sections of the wooden cage together. As Etienne sliced
the thongs the Tsla heaved the heavy timbers over the side,
and a few arrows thunke d against the rear of the boat. Finally, with a loud splash the undersection of the cage gave
way and drifted astern. The pursuing Mai were still within
insult range but by now even Homat was too tired to respond.
Etienne stumbled to the intercom. “We’re clear, Lyra.

Raise her up.”

The rumble of the

electric jet

became a whine as the boat

rose above the surface on its twin foils and rocketed Upriver
at a leisurely sixty kph, leaving the Tsla whispering their
wonderment to one another and the frustrated Hochacites
far behind.
“Wonderful, delicious,” Tyl muttered as he peeked hesitantly over the side. “The boat flies over the water. You

me how

works.”
Etienne stiffened, relaxed almost as quickly. Tyl’s words
had sparked bad memories of Irquit and the ease with which
she’d mastered the hydrofoil’s security system. But there

must explain to

it

[

127 ]

was no deception

in this philosopher-teacher.

Etienne

felt

guilty at his instinctive suspicion.

You’re entitled to learn about what
you’ve just rescued. I’ll try and explain the principles to you
and you must tell me more about what we’re likely to en-

“Be happy

to, Tyl.

counter Upriver, especially this Topapasirut that has you so
concerned.”
“I will gladly do so, Etienne. But as for the Topapasirut
there is little to say. It must be seen to be understood.”
“Still certain

we

can’t surmount it?”

think so, yes, but after seeing what you have
achieved tonight I am less certain than I was before.”
“I

still

Etienne mused. Further discussion would have to wait until morning. He longed desperately for the softness of his air-conditioned bunk. Lyra
could drive for another half hour. Then they’d be far enough
Upriver from any lingering pursuit to put the boat on

That

is

faintly encouraging,

autopilot.

they were on their way again, though he felt no
pride in the thoroughly unprofessional but necessary diversion for which the inhabitants of Hochac were responsible.
With any luck that would be the first and last interruption
of its kind.
As for allowing the Tsla into the cabin, that was a necessity. They would be much more comfortable inside, where
the temperature approximated that of their home. There was
no fear in him. For one thing he was too tired. For another,
he’d slept peacefully among the Tsla for weeks. They’d earned
his trust. Besides, he and Lyra could always lock themselves
in their cabin, and no curious Tsla could disengage a locked

At

last

autopilot.

The morning dawned

and stinking humid but
Etienne sat comfortably alongside Lyra in the little dining
nook. Tyl squatted on the floor nearby. The porters ate
farther astern, in the storage area that had been turned into
their living quarters. They could have joined the humans but
chose not to. Etienne asked why, confident it would have
some bearing on his question.
“They’re ashamed,” Tyl explained.
bright, hot,

[

128 ]

“Ah.” Lyra looked satisfied. Apparently she’d been thinking along similar lines. “Because they had to fight?”

“Oh no.” Tyl

nibbled at his bowl, his stubby six-fingered
hands probing for solid morsels. The Redowls had already
overcome their distaste at seeing a Tsla rummage for food
with its long snout. “They are ashamed because they were
not permitted to fulfill their intentions.”
“But they did,” Etienne argued. “We’re safe and we recovered our boat.”
“Yes, but no thanks to us.”
“You dispatched that patrol at the harbor.”
“It was our intention to assist thee during the entire process, Etienne. Yet we could only stand helplessly by and
watch while this wondrous craft,” and he tapped the metal
floor, “did more to save itself than did we.”
“But you couldn’t have done more than you did,” Lyra
told him. “We barely had enough time to activate the voice
pickup.”
“That is not the point. We know we could not have carried
this boat to the river on our shoulders, but we did not have
the chance to try. Therefore merit was lost because we did
not have the opportunity to vanquish our enemy.”
Lyra looked uncomfortable. “It’s my understanding that
your society is a pacifistic one.”
“Of course, that is true.”
“Then how can you talk of gaining merit by fighting?”
“Like a storm or rockfall, a declared enemy is an agent
of nature. As an enemy it removes itself from the considerations of civilization.”
Etienne was enjoying his wife’s discomfiture enormously.
“But your enemy is only acting in what he considers a civ-

manner.”
“He must be judged by civilized standards.”
“You mean, by Tsla standards.”
“Naturally. You do not think that we would adopt the
standards of the Mai?” He sounded politely outraged. “A
truly civilized people instinctively know what constitutes
ilized

civilized behavior.”

“Sounds like expediency to me.”
“Not at all. Our moral standards are not nearly so
ble.”
[

129]

flexi-

remorse when you kill an enemy?”
“Naturally. An enemy is one who has freely abjured his
soul. How else could we feel but sorry for him?”
“That wouldn’t, however, have prevented you from killing every Mai in Hochac who opposed you?”
“No, it would not. By opposing us in the recovery of your
property they would have demonstrated disregard for civilized behavior, thus removing themselves from consideration by those who adhere to such behavior. I see no

“Then you

feel

contradiction in this.”
“No contradiction at all.” He glanced at his wife. Lyra’s
note-taker was running and she didn’t look up at Tyl. “Just
wanted the point clarified.”
“I thought,” Lyra said quietly, “that the Tsla considered
it sinful to kill.”

“To kill any civilized person, yes, a terrible sin. But there
is no moral restraint against defending oneself from the hostility of an uncivilized person any more than it is sinful to
a roof to keep out the rain.”
“All perfectly clear,” Etienne agreed. He was content. It
was clear that his initial worries about the safety of the Tsla
were unfounded. For all their vaunted pacifism they were
quite capable of taking care of themselves should the need
arise. Killing a civilized person is a sin. Anyone who assaults
raise

me

Very neat.
Neat enough to quash Lyra’s romanticized notions of Tsla
society. Her beloved mystics were no more or less bloodthirsty than any other primitive folk. Well, that wasn’t quite
fair. But it was evident they could slaughter with a clear
conscience so long as their victims fell below civilized standards. When you set those standards yourself it gave you
is

uncivilized.

considerable flexibility in establishing a defense.
Lyra continued to press Tyl for information, hoping to
bolster her fading thesis of Tsla nobility. Etienne left to check
the autopilot and then to see what the other Tsla and Homat

were up

to.

He

also

wanted to

the porters that, in his
eyes at least, they’d acquired a great deal of merit for what
they’d done in Hochac.

They were more than

tell

three thousand kilometers north
northwest of Steamer Station and the distant Skatandah Delta.
Cloud cover was increasing daily though it brought little
[

130]

from the heat and humidity. The Barshajagad was beginning to narrow sharply, towering walls shortening the
daylight on the river. Both sides of the canyon could be seen
relief

now though

the edge of the Guntali Plateau was still faint
with distance. But for the first time it felt like they were
sailing

up a canyon.

Ahead lay another major tributary of the Skar, the river
Gaja. Beyond this confluence, according to Tyl, the Barshajagad’s walls drew toward one another with breathtaking
suddenness, closing in to seal off the place where river devils
were bom, the Topapasirut. Beyond the Topapasirut lay
lands unknown even to the wise men of Turput.
One thing Etienne no longer had to concern himself about
was Lyra’s tendency to adopt Tsla habits. After Tyl’s breakfast explanation of adaptable battlefield philosophy he never
again saw her in Tsla cape and toga.
They reached the place where the Gaja flowed thick and
muddy into the clear Skar. The Tsla records were accurate.
It was immensely wide and tinged a pale rust in color. The
Gaja was another Amazon, just another tributary. He felt
no amazement. Tslamaina had already exhausted his store
of geological superlatives.
Beyond the Gaja the Skar narrowed rapidly. As it did so
the current intensified. Submerged mountains and hills began
to produce some white water, the first they’d encountered
in their long journey Upriver. The cloud cover was thick
overhead and Etienne saw why that section of the river had
not been accurately mapped by the single orbiting satellite.
Seven thousand meters overhead, the edge of the Guntali
glistened with ice and snow. The rim was now a mere two
hundred and fifty kilometers distant to east or west, descending toward the bottom of the canyon in a series of steps
and escarpments. Through the telescope Etienne examined
one sheer wail some four thousand meters high.

One day they were

cruising slowly so that Etienne could

check the standard subsurface water samples. Lyra sat at
the controls while Etienne was working in the lab astern.
Several Tsla were watching the logging procedure with interest while Homat lay half asleep on his mat on the rear
deck. Suddenly the boat tipped wildly, almost knocking
[

131 ]

Etienne from his
of the hull.

feet.

Something had bumped the

right side

“What

the hell was that?” Etienne yelled forward.
“I don’t know. Something hit us from below.”
“What’s with the scanner?”
“Nothing. It didn’t come from Upriver.”
He did some fast thinking. Whatever had nudged them
un-gently hadn’t shown up on the scanner. Therefore it hadn’t
slipped down toward them. Therefore it must have come up

behind them.
Therefore it sure as

hell

wasn’t a rock.

Homat was

shouting hysterically from astern and Etienne
and the Tsla piled out through the rear door into the hot,
damp air. Even as he emerged Etienne caught himself wishing for his pistol.

Not that it would have done him any good. He was

staring

a slowly rising cliff black as polished obsidian. Within the
cliff was a cavern, filled with acres of dripping blueblack
streamers like baleen, only thicker and more widely spaced.
“Lacoti!” Homat was blubbering in fear. Etienne immediately understood how they’d missed the creature on the
scanner, since it was programed only to acknowledge submerged objects which might be dangerous to the boat. The
device would blithely ignore anything organic flattened out
along the river bottom. The current provided food for the
Lacoti, which doubtless rested contentedly in the mud of
the Skar, mouth agape to receive whatever nourishment the
river chose to provide.
Unless something disturbed it, of course.
If the Lacoti had eyes, they were hidden somewhere back
of that vast cavernous maw. It was moving toward them, a
fact that he perceived right away. He shouted toward the
intercom, unafraid but having no wish for a closer view of
Lacoti gut. It might be a slow swimmer but it might also be
capable of a last second burst of speed. “Lyra, there’s something back here that’s about half the size of a starship. Move
us out of here.”
“What do you think I’m trying to do? I can see it on the
rear screen!” Her voice was frantic. “We’ve got a short or
something. I can’t get any speed up.”
“Oh hell,” he muttered. “Tyl?”
at

[

132]

expression. “We are not river
can
dwellers and have no experience of such creatures.
pray.”
Etienne let out a curse and dove into the cabin. Behind
him the towering gullet was drawing slowly nearer. Part of
the problem stemmed from the fact that it was sucking in
water at an enormous rate, creating a suction the hydrofoil
was hard put to counter. If they didn’t lift up on foils and
make some speed they were going to go down the Lacoti’s
throat like a cork in a sewer. He had no idea what had
prodded it out of its bottom lair. Maybe the hydrofoil’s engine produced a discomfiting vibration. No time now for

The Tsla wore a

fatalistic

We

study.

He reached the cockpit and shoved Lyra aside. She didn’t
protest.

“Emergency override?”
already!”
He fumbled at the instrumentation. The stem screens were
dark now and he could hear the echo of water rushing down
“I tried

it

a monstrous throat.

whine of the jet filled the air. Lyra was
thrown against a wall and the backrest of the pilot’s seat
pressed hard into Etienne’s back. For an instant Etienne was
sure he could see a thick black lip overhead as the boat slid
down that endless throat. Then they were out in the light
again and the stem screen showed the immense mouth receding behind them. It closed and the Lacoti sank like an
island. A quick check of the scanner showed it was not
pursuing, just as it revealed rocky outcrops, mudpoles, and
vegetation growing atop the massive back. The thought that
something the size of the Lacoti required camouflage was
sobering. The sooner they reached shallower water the better

The

familiar high

he’d like

it.

He rechecked the readouts before allowing himself a long,
relieved sigh. “Go check our passengers.”
“Don’t give me orders,” she snapped as she pushed back
her hair and adjusted one fallen halter strap. “I know what
to do. I’m just not as mechanically inclined as you, that’s
all.”

He
a fine

spoke very carefully, conscious that she was treading
line between anger and hysteria. “When you tried the
[

133 ]

accelerator you forgot to disengage the secondary lock on
the autopilot. That’s why the emergency override didn’t work
either.”

“I

know

that,” she

murmured. She was mad at herself,
saw that thing in the screen and I got

he saw, not at him. “I
scared. I guess ... I panicked a little.”
“It could have happened to anyone,” he said softly. He
didn’t want to say that. What he wanted to do was let off
tension by calling her a stupid, senseless little fool. But he
didn’t.

most

He was gentle and understanding.

intelligent thing

It

was possibly the

he’d done since they’d stepped off the

Steamer Station many months ago.
What really confused him was that he didn’t know

shuttle at

why

he did it.
“I’m going to run a complete checkout,” he told her. “That
thing coming up underneath our keel gave us a pretty good
jolt. I want to make sure it didn’t bust something loose.”
She nodded. “I’ll have a look in the hold.”
She was gone for several minutes, returned sooner than
expected. Her expression was grim.
“Etienne, we’ve suffered a fatality.”
“What?” He spun the seat around and stared at her in
disbelief. “How? We made it clear in time.”
“One of the porters. Her name was Uon. When you hit
the accelerator I was thrown against the wall. Everyone out
back was knocked to the deck. But Uon was standing up
top, near the mast. When we shot forward she lost her footing
and fell. Cracked her skull, looks like. She’s dead.”
Fingers tightened on the back of the seat. “I didn’t have
any choice,” he growled. “Another second’s delay and we’d
have become a meal.”
“I already explained that to Tyl and the others. They
understand completely. They’ve
made a request.”
He didn’t look up. “What do they want?”
“They’d appreciate it if we could stop hereabouts for the
night so they can give Uon a proper sendoff. I didn’t get the
details but apparently there’s a lot of ritual involved. They
want to anchor somewhere inshore.”
“I suppose we can find a quiet place. Least we can do.
I’m really sorry, Lyra.”
“It was my fault as much as anyone’s.” She smiled slightly.
.

[

134 ]

.

.

“They’ve accepted it with somber grace. They adjust to death
very well.”
Now he looked up. “Maybe better than we? If that’s a
sign of social maturity I’m willing to concede the point.”
But his concession didn’t make her feel any better.
They found a small cove, no more than an oversized pothole that the Skar’s swirls and eddies had etched into the
riverbank. The night sky was a dull starless gray thanks to
the solid cover of clouds that stretched like a fluffy awning
from one rim of the Guntali to the other.
Lyra overcame her sorrow by burying herself in her studies, trying to record every slightest nuance of the Tsla funeral
ceremony which was performed on the open rear deck of
the hydrofoil. This involved the use of torches, some special
powder carried by Tyl, and much chanting and singing. Having no desire to participate or watch, Homat had relinquished
his bedmat for the privacy of the bow. He lay there murmuring spirit rhymes as he leaned over the side to watch the
phosphorescent motocrullers, tiny, superfast clamlike bivalves that made whirlpools of light beneath the shade afforded by the ship.
Having considerably less interest in native rituals than his
wife, Etienne had retired to the comfort of their cabin. The
expression on her face when she burst in on him startled
him out of his reading. She stumbled against him and he put
both hands on her shoulders to steady her. She looked ill.
“What’s wrong, Lyra, what’s the matter?” She’d left the
door open behind her and the steady chant of the Tsla filtered
in to the bedchamber.
“Sendoff ritual,” she whispered, choking on the words.
She pushed past him, toward the head. The recorder dangling
from her neck bounced against her chest.
Curiosity overcame his apprehension as he left the cabin
and headed astern The rear deck was lit by the flicker of torchlight, illuminating the source of Lyra’s distress. His reaction
was less violent than hers. Not that he was delighted by the
sight, but since he held no high hopes for the Tsla he was far
less disgusted and disappointed than his wife.
The Tsla were deeply engaged in the funeral ritual and
only Tyl broke away long enough to greet him. He looked
.

[

135 ]

concerned. This was mitigated somewhat by the blood dripping from his mouth and snout.
“Lyra left us in a hurry. I hope we did not offend her.”
Etienne summoned unsuspected reserves of diplomacy.
“My wife sees you and your people as being nobler than
any of us have a right to be. It’s a failing many humans are
heir to.”

Tyl’s nose twitched and those big soulful eyes turned
toward the doorway. “I see. But you feel differently?”
“After a fashion. I don’t approve, but neither do I con-

demn. Neither would Lyra,

if

she hadn’t lost sight of her

scientific training.”

am

sorrowed,” Tyl continued. “It is part of the ritual.
It must be done the same day, as soon after death as possible,
because otherwise ...”
Etienne cut him off. “The reasons are self-explanatory,
Tyl.” He was unable to keep his eyes from the scene on the
deck. “It’s only that the customs are very different among
“I

my own

folk.”

can sympathize.” He gestured backward with a hand.
“Uon was much loved by her friends. We could not think
of sending her soul on to eternity without properly displaying
“I

that affection.”

“We

among our kind we choose to
express such love for the departed in more metaphysical and
less

feel likewise, only

immediate terms.”

“Customs are different among all peoples. Now if you will
excuse me, I must participate or Uon’ s soul will not count

me among

its

friends.”

Etienne pointed. “You have blood on your face.”
Tyl wiped at it. “The result of ritual contact. She struck
the deck very hard.”
Etienne left the ceremony to return to the cabin, closing
the door behind him. Lyra sat on the bed, staring blankly at
a xenological chip unscrolling on the viewer. He doubted
she saw the words. He sat down behind her and put both
hands on her shoulders.
“I

know how you

feel,”

he said helplessly.

“It’s

never

pleasant to have one’s illusions shattered.”

“Such hopes,” she muttered disconsolately.
[

136]

“I

had such

hopes for them. They seemed to have progressed so far
without the corresponding technological traumas.
“They have progressed far,” he found himself saying, to
his own considerable surprise. “But it’s still an alien culture,
Lyra. You can’t let yourself lose sight of that, let your scientific observations be compromised by your feelings for
them personally. You can’t anthropomorphize their culture
any more than you can their physiognomy.”
“If I did that,” she replied, “it was out of hope.”
“I realize that, which is why you’re going to make your
report on Tsla funeral custom as detailed and informative as
any other part of your records. The balance it will provide
Otherwise
is important. It will help confirm your objectivity.
will be disreall the rest of your work among these people
garded.”

of course.” She put the chip reader aside,
fiddled with her recorder as she leaned back against him. “I
don’t have any choice, do I?”
“As Lyra Redowl you do. As visiting xenologist representing the interests of every xenologist who couldn’t make

“You’re

this trip,

right,

you do not.”

was unprofessional of me to
know better. Among the new one must

She nodded, then stood.

“It

run away like that. I
always expect a shock or two.”

forme. Rocks are rarely shocking.”
She smiled, not because his sally was funny but because
he bothered to try and make it so.
“We’re only human, Lyra.”
“Yes, and the Tsla are not. For a moment I’d forgotten
“It’s easier

won’t forget again.”
“Don’t let this push you too far in the other direction.
Whatever you think personally about their customs, they’re
is what he’s always
still good people, and our friends. Tyl
been: a learned and compassionate friend.”
“Among his own kind, yes. Etienne, you’ve been right

that. I

and I’ve been wrong.”
He turned away, embarrassed by her admission as he
often was when he won some small portion of their private
war. There was a contradiction there he didn’t understand.
She started toward the hall and the stem deck, muttering
that
as she went. “After all, one can make the argument
[

137 ]

ceremonial necrophilia is no more barbaric than any of a half
dozen other funeral rituals observed among pristine primitive
cultures. Among the Canuli, for example ...” Her voice faded
as she slipped further into scholarly preoccupation.
He felt sorry for her at the same time that he was glad
he hadn’t chosen to share her discipline. He made a mental
note to inform Tyl sometime soon that in the event he and
Lyra should meet with a fatal accident, they were to be
buried in accordance with human custom only.
Still, several days passed before Lyra could bring herself
to talk with Tyl or any of the surviving porters. They sensed
her distress and kept their distance, no easy thing to accomplish within the confines of the hydrofoil. They busied themselves with learning the art of trolling, something they could
not do on the unnavigable waters of the upper Aurang.
They were now five thousand kilometers north of Steamer
Station, with an unknown distance yet to cover. Unknown
because the satellite responsible for the photogrammetric
mapping of Tslamaina had rather neglected this portion of
the northern hemisphere in favor of detailing the much more
heavily populated areas around the equator and the Groal-

amasan Sea.
The temperature had fallen to the point where Homat was
obliged to don long clothing in order to be comfortable in
the ninety degree heat of midday. Of greater concern was
the sharp narrowing of the Barshajagad. Towering walls had
closed in on the river, compressing its volume into a much
smaller channel, and the increasingly swift current was becoming powerful enough to slow their progress even though
the water could gain a grip only on the two submerged hydrofoils. They encountered no white water, however, and
the scanner indicated the river bottom still lay far below
their keel.

But Etienne found it difficult to concentrate on such things;
he was hypnotized by the canyon walls, seven thousand
meters that dropped in places sheer to the river, a gorge
unmatched even on gas giants with surfaces solid enough to
withstand continual erosion by high winds. All that remained
of the sky was a narrow strip directly overhead, masked by
perpetual cloud cover, a faint gray band delineating the limits
of the real world.
[

138 ]

Each time the river bent, the rock cliffs seemed to swallow
any hope of retreat. The hydrofoil seemed very small indeed
as it fought that steadily intensifying current. The Redowls
worked in relays now, unable to trust navigation to the auspeed while they both slept and the river
caught hold of them, it would crush the duralloy hull against
one of the granite walls as easily as eggshell.
topilot. If they lost

[

139 ]

fX'l
Two

days of

this

saw

speed dangerously reduced.
Lyra entered the cockpit rubbing her eyes, took one clear
look at her husband’s and said, “Etienne, we can’t keep this
up. We re both exhausted and we’ve no way of knowing
their

how much longer this stretch is.”
He coughed into his fist. “I thought the damn track would
widening out again by now. It doesn’t make sense. This
much water moving downstream at this speed ought to have
worn a broader canyon. But it hasn’t.”
“What’s the current reading currently?” She half smiled,
start

half

yawned

wishing

as she squinted toward the instrumentation,

could produce a cup of post-Eihiopian katfe. Unfortunately the nearest cup of real hot stimulant was
lightyears distant.
“Have a look for yourself.” He touched a button without
taking his eyes off the river.
She blinked at the readout. “That’s incredible,” she said
it

quietly.

Yes, incredible. No boat was ever designed to travel
against such a current.”
[

140 ]

“What about continuing on

repellers?”

“Don’t tempt me. Sweet of you to suggest it, but it’s too
risky. We could try it for a few hours, but that’s all they’re
designed for. Hopping rapids and avoiding waterfalls, not
steady travel. We’d run down the batteries and probably find
ourselves stuck in an identical position farther Upriver. Can’t
chance it.” He muttered an obscenity.
can’t quit here! We’ve come too far.”
She leaned against the console. “I know how much this
meant to you, Etienne. But it’s not worth risking our lives

“We

for.”

“You

we have

a life?”
interrupted them. “I overhear. There may
yet be a way. I have had long to think on it and would not
have thought it possible, had I not seen what thy spirit boat

He looked at
A new voice

her then.

think

can accomplish.”
Etienne didn’t turn to confront their
Tyl?”

“Do

thee

remember the crevice

visitor.

splitting the east wall,

we

passed the previous day?”
“No. I was too busy looking over the

that

“What way,

bow

to

do any

sightseeing.”
“I

was working on my notes,” Lyra added.

have been watching the Barshajagad, marveling long,
but always watching. There was a trail along the east wall.
It terminates at this crevice. I have been this way once before. I saw no reason to mention the trail, to distract thee
from thy work. We were to travel by boat, not by foot. But
now I see that I must mention this other possibility or all
win end.”
“A trail? I didn’t ... no, wait a minute,” Lyra murmured.
“I did see something. I thought it was an old high-water
“I

line.”

Learned Lyra. A trading trail.”
“Where does it go?” she asked him.
“Up. Up to a high plateau. Not the Guntali. Higher than
Turput but lower than that. High enough so that Tsla can
live upon it. Up above the Topapasirut. The trail is steeper
and more dangerous than the one that climbs to Turput.
“How much more dangerous?”
“It is

a

trail.

[ 141 ]

“Enough

to restrict travel.

But

it

rises

beyond the To-

papasirut.”

Etienne gestured ahead, at the narrow, impossibly deep
canyon. “I thought that this place was the Topapasirut.”
Tyl executed a gesture full of amused negativity. “No. If
you would take the measure of the adversary that still lies
ahead, thee must climb beyond its reach. That is, if thee think
thy spirit boat can go no farther.”
“Point of diminishing returns, Etienne,” Lyra reminded
him. “Every hour we’re using more power to cover less
distance. Can’t you calculate how long it will be before we
reach the break-even point and find ourselves making no
progress even at full power?”
“Soon enough. You say there’s a way to get around this
Topapasirut, Tyl?”
“Above, yes. Beyond, I do not know. I have not been to
that place. But I have gazed on the Topapasirut. If thee
would do likewise, thee must leave thy boat behind, at least
until thee see for thy selves.”

“Leave it where?”
“Turn back to the trail end. I would not have thought
there was a place, but thy boat can rise like a bird from the
water.”
Etienne looked at Lyra.
“It’s your decision, Etienne. You’re the geologist.”
“Hydrology’s not my specialty, though. But it’s starting
to look more and more like we’ve come to a dead end, at
least as far as this section of the river is concerned.” He
looked back at Tyl. “The east wall, you said?”
The Tsla nodded. Etienne turned back to the instruments.
Unwilling to risk turning the boat broadside to the current,

he

lifted

it

on

repellers

and turned

it

neatly in midair before

gently back into the water.
There was a sharp lurch as the river caught the hull.

setting

it

He

used only enough power to maneuver, letting the cells recharge as they raced back downstream.
“This is our best chance, Etienne. We have to see what
we’re up against.”
“I know that, dammit. The canyon has to widen out somewhere above this. It can’t be like this all the way to the arctic
[

142 ]

line.

Too much erosion. There’s a geological anomaly some-

where ahead of us.”
“And it has a name, apparently. Could it be another big
waterfall, like the Cuparaggai above Turput?”
“No. I’m sure of that much, anyway. The water here isn’t
acting like that and there’s no indication of a sharp rise in
elevation at this point. The photogrammetrics are solid enough
on

that score. That’s

why I don’t understand this intensified

flow. But if this Topapasirut’s only the narrowest part of the
canyon, we’ll see how much farther Upriver it lies. Maybe

we can pass above it on repellers.”
By midday they had returned to

the section of cliff Tyl
had spotted. Etienne again lifted the hydrofoil on its repellers, set it down on an exposed beach out of reach of the
river’s grasp.

The crevice to which Tyl had alluded turned out to be
much more than that it was a break in the Barshajagad

—

wall, a sizable side canyon rising toward the sky. And the
winding line against the rocks that Lyra had thought was a
high-water mark did indeed show signs of use. It snaked

along the granitic wall and started up the side passage.
“Now we climb,” said Tyl confidently.
“For how long?”
“Several days, at least.” He turned his gaze upward.
“Homat won’t be glad to hear that,” Etienne murmured.
“Why not leave him to watch over the boat?” Lyra suggested.
“Sensible. We’ll leave one of the porters with him and
carry our own supplies. I don’t imagine he’ll regret missing
the chance to view the ‘birthplace of all river devils.’”
“I will come with thee and leave the others behind, for I

do not share thy trust of the Mai,” Tyl said.
“Homat’s been invaluable,” Etienne replied. “Without his
aid we wouldn’t be here now.”

It

“His kind are not to be trusted.”
“In this instance I think you’re wrong, Tyl,” Lyra said.
was the first time Etienne had seen her openly dispute the

Tsla’s opinion.

Tyl responded with a gesture of indifference. “Then I
recuwill direct Swd to remain behind by himself. While
[

143 ]

perating, he will

keep watch over thy property

— and

its

other

guard.”

A

small stream trickled down the branch canyon, which
was indeed steeper than anything they’d climbed thus far.
As the meters dropped behind and below them, so did the
temperature. The Redowls were obliged to wear their longsleeved and long-legged attire while Tyl and the porters re-

donned their capes and togas. Since they didn’t expect to
find any villagers to trade with, they carried a full stock of
rations.

They ascended to the cloud. At five thousand meters Lyra
was having some trouble breathing, though this was due
more to the unaccustomed exertion than the altitude. Due
to the denser atmosphere, five thousand meters on Tslamaina was equivalent to thirty-five hundred meters or so on
Terra.

As they crested
parted. Ahead rose

the

head, the clouds momentarily
the peak of a steep-sided mountain that
towered above them and the nearby edge of the Guntali. As
they rested, Etienne took a sighting on the peak.
“Eleven thousand meters, most of it frozen.”
“Aracunga,” Tyl said. Etienne noticed that all the Tsla
now wore their sturdiest clothing. They stood some two
thousand meters higher than Turput, at the upper limit of
the Tsla ecological zone. They could climb higher still, but
not comfortably.
After several days of climbing to the east, they set off
northward. Etienne expected Tyl to continue in that direction, but he was wrong. On the second day they turned
slightly to the west, and by that evening the Redowls could
feel thunder again.
They expected another waterfall, perhaps one that plunged
the full five thousand meters to the river below. But it was
no waterfall Tyl led them toward. It was the Topapasirut.
Must be the father of all waterfalls, Etienne mused, still
unconvinced by Tyl’s denials. By the fourth day the thunder
had become so loud they could communicate only by signs.
The Redowls could tap out messages on their wrist computers, but the Tsla possessed no such wondrous devices

and had to make

trail

their intentions
[

144 ]

known through

gestures.

grew damp around them, the rocks treacherous and slick.
Yet as they hiked now through the perpetual mist, the sky
overhead remained clear.

It

Etienne searched in vain for signs of the expected cascade. When they finally reached the lip of the abyss, all was
explained.
It was raining upward. Forced into a narrow throat of the
Barshajagad, the entire volume of the Skar suddenly made
a sharp and unexpected bend from south to west. As a result,
the swiftly flowing river cannonaded into the north cliff face
that formed the base of the mountain Aracunga, five thou-

sand meters below their feet.
This produced a spray that rose on disturbed air to drench
the puny observers clinging to a granite overhang. The solid
bedrock trembled under the river’s impact. Tyl communicated with gestures, but any description was superfluous
before the stupendous sight below.
Etienne knew that this was the Topapasirut, the birthplace
of all river devils. He knew that Tyl had been more than
right when he’d insisted no boat could pass through this
place. The hydrofoil could not rise high enough on its repellers to clear the maelstrom.
Across the canyon, rising from the opposite side of the
abyss, was a metamorphic mass that dwarfed even Aracunga.
“The Prompaj!” Tyl screamed into Etienne’s ear. He took
another sighting.
“Fourteen thousand two hundred meters,” he informed
Lyra via wrist computer. “An impossible mountain. I think
the two peaks were once closer than now. See how the river
bends sharply to the west before turning south again? Tslamaina’s seismically stable now, but a few eons back there
must have been one hell of an earthquake in this part of the
world. See the signs of slippage?” He pointed to particular
strata down in the roaring canyon.
“This section of the surface slipped eastward. South of
here the land went west. The result was the displacement of
the northern third of the Skar several kilometers to the east.
I’m glad I wasn’t around then.”
Lyra tapped out a reply. “I’m not real happy to be here
now. Let’s get away. I’m cold and wet.”
[

145 ]

.

They lingered a few moments longer so he could chip a
few more pictures, take some final measurements. Then they
headed back toward the trail head, leaving the clouds and
hillsides to swallow up the Topapasirut, its thunder, and the
brooding massif that was called Prompaj
They made camp that night in a small cave, drying themselves and their clothes before a large fire. Etienne watched
with interest as the porters groomed each other’s fur.
The Redowls said little. There was no point in belaboring
the obvious. Their expedition had reached its end. They’d
run up against not a brick wall but a watery one.

When

the porters had finished and dressed themselves
once more they gathered close around the warmth of the

Tyl spoke while his companions ate.
“What will thee do now, Learned Etienne? Does the spirit
boat possess some magical power we have not seen that
would enable it to pass through the Topapasirut?”
“It does not,” Etienne replied glumly. “We do have other
machines which can fly through the air and put any bird to
shame, but we don’t have one here. We chose to travel by
boat. It’s all we have. You were right, Tyl. I apologize for
doubting you.”
“You had not seen the Topapasirut, Etienne. No one believes until they have seen.”
“That’s it, then.” Lyra was not as disappointed as her
husband, though she strove to sound as sympathetic as possible. If they could no longer go onward, they would have
to go back, and she still had work to do among the Tsla.
“You’ve been stopped by a geological phenomenon,
fire.

Etienne. What better way to conclude your report? Think
of the reaction among your colleagues when you describe
this place.

Maybe some day we can come back up here with

an aircar.”
He’d been staring

at the floor of the cave.

Now he looked

up, determined. “They’ll be fascinated, but it won’t be the
end of my report.”
“Etienne,” she said gently, “we can’t get through that
chute. You’ve already acknowledged that.”
“I
99

won’t be stopped by the very river I’ve come to sur-

[

146]

She sighed, leaned back against the
“Maybe you’ll accept it by morning.”
“Maybe.”
to

inflated sleeping pad.

He did not, nor did he admit defeat during the long descent
the Skar. He kept to himself and brooded, causing Tyl to

move next to Lyra.
“What ails Etienne?”
“He’s unhappy because he knows we can’t go on. That
means he’ll have to leave his work here unfinished.”
“But it is not his fault. Nothing passes Upriver beyond
the Topapasirut. He has no control over that. It is not as if
he were beaten by something in himself.”
“He knows all that, Tyl, but he is persistent, Etienne is.
Always has been.”
“I see. A Tsla teacher would accept the inevitable; such
constant worry is harmful to the mind.”
“True, but sometimes it can lead to solutions where none
seem possible. I’ve seen him do it before. Within our fields,
Etienne and I are well respected. We’ve achieved success
where others have failed. It’s one of the reasons we were
allowed to make this expedition while other applicants were
rejected. Sometimes, Tyl, blind persistence can succeed

where everything else has failed.”
“I still do not understand why you would
of mind.
with it.”

I

can admire such tenacity, but

I

peace
cannot empathize
sacrifice

the river there was a brief but joyful reunion
with those left behind. Homat didn’t try to conceal his relief
over the safe return of his human protectors.

Down on

“All these days,” he whispered to Lyra later, “trapped
with that Tsla, and him mumbling and chanting to himself
all the time. It was enough to drive a sane person crazy. Did
you find a way to pass this Topapasirut?”
“No, we did not.” To her surprise Homat looked downcast. “I

thought you’d be pleased. That means

we have

to

go back Downriver now, back to the warm lands of the
Skatandah. Don’t you miss them?”
“Very much so, but I have joined myself to your purposes
and therefore am disappointed for you.”
“That’s a very nice thing to say, Homat.” She hadn’t
expected such depth of feeling from the Mai. Nor was it a
[

147 ]

ruse.

He was

genuinely distressed that their journey had
come to an end.
She looked past him, frowned. Etienne was deep in discussion with Tyl and looking more animated than he had in
many days. She strolled over to join them.
“What’s all the excitement about?”
“You tell her,” Etienne suggested to Tyl, his features alive
with enthusiasm.
“On the eastern flank of Aracunga Mountain,” Tyl explained, “lies the Tsla trading town of Jakaie. I have not
visited it myself but it is known to Turput.. It is said that
beyond Jakaie and the mass of the mountain, the Barshajagad once more becomes a navigable river. If thee could
but convey thy craft to that place, thee might safely resume
thy journey
if the story is accurate.”
“An impossible if.”
“Maybe not,” Etienne murmured. He was tense with possibilities. “Maybe we could portage around.”
For a long moment she just stared at him. Then she let
her gaze trace the lower section of the steep trail that wound
its torturous course up the side canyon.
Sure we could. We’ll just hoist the boat onto our shoulders and haul it five thousand meters straight up. Lost your

—

mind?”

Her skepticism didn’t even slow him down. “No, I’ve just
found it Look, the hydrofoil’s made of ultralight material.
The hull’s a carbon filament honeycomb. And we can surmount the rough spots on the repellers.”
“With what power?” she argued. “We’d bum out the cells.”
“We would not. You’re not listening. We’d only use the
repellers to get over real steep places. The rest of the
time
we’d rely on muscle power. Porters, Lyra! Mount the boat
on some kind of platform and pull it up and over.”
She did some quick figuring. “I admit the hydrofoil’s light,
but it’s a relative lightness. You’d still need a thousand
Mai
or Tsla to drag

up a thousand meters.”
looked back at Tyl. “Tell her.”
“There is a draft animal,” the Tsla explained, “that the
Mai use all along the river. It is called a vroqupii. The Mai
use them in teams to pull trading boats Upriver against
the
current. They are strong.” He eyed Homat. “Well,
Mai?”
it

He

[

148 ]

“We

passed many trading
villages below this place. Each should be home to a few
vroqupii. The animals used hereabouts must be unusually
powerful because the current is so fast.”
“Do you think we could find enough to do it?” Etienne

The guide looked

thoughtful.

asked.

do not know.” Homat gazed at the intimidating trail.
Lyra’s dreams of returning to tranquil Turput were slipping away. “Assuming we could find enough animals to do
the job, could we hire enough? Would their owners consent
“I

an undertaking?”
“If they were promised enough money, certainly,” Homat
replied, looking at her as if she’d just disputed a fundamental
law of nature.
“What would we pay them with?”
“Our trade goods,” Etienne said. “We have some left.”
“If we use up our remaining supplies we won’t have anything to give any natives we meet beyond this point.”
to such

we

don’t get beyond this point the question becomes
moot.” She had no comeback for that. Etienne turned to
Homat. “Would these vroqupii be able to climb as high as
“If

Jakaie?”
terms.

He

translated the relevant

measurements

into

Mai

Homat looked uneasy. “We go that much higher than the
home of these Tsla who accompany us?” Etienne nodded.
not sure. But these Upriver tribes are proud. They
might see such a proposal as a challenge.”
“They wouldn’t freeze. It’s not that high,” Etienne said.
Tyl agreed. “Many Mai hunters hike beyond Turput in
search of prey, and their blood continues to flow.”
“How many vroqupii might we need?” Homat wondered.
An intense discussion of weight versus capabilities ensued,
before the Mai felt comfortable in announcing a figure.
“Thirty at least. Forty would be better, fifty best, and
sixty delightful, but I do not think we can find that many
willing to try, not even for a share of off- world treasure.”
“We must try,” Etienne told him.
“Then I will do my best to convince the Brul, as they who
handle the vroqupii are called.” His bald skull glistened in
the reflected cloud-glare of afternoon and he smiled ingen“I

am

uously. “That

is

my job,

is it
[

not?”

149 ]

Etienne nodded once. “Let’s get started. Lyra, are you
sure you’re willing to go along with this?”
She shrugged. “If you’re determined I couldn’t stop you
anyway, Etienne. I think it’s a mistake to sacrifice the rest
of our trade goods on a scheme that has a good chance of
failing, but I can’t argue that it’s your last chance to go on.
Our last chance,” she added with a faint smile.
“I promise,” he told her, “if it looks like we’re not going
to make it, we’ll turn back and return to Turput. I know
that’s what you want.”
She almost said, “I want what you want, Etienne,” but
did not. Their relationship was based on more powerful bonds
than artificial acquiescence. They did not give in to each
other; they agreed on things. She agreed now and having
agreed, considered how best to help.

do you think it can be done with thirty vroqupii?”
“I have watched them pull heavily laden ships Upriver,”
the Tsla replied thoughtfully. “They are very strong. But it
will require more than mere strength to achieve this thing.
It will take cooperation among the Mai who are involved.
The vroqupii can, I think, pull thy spirit boat up to Jakaie,
“Tyl,

but not

the Brul fall to quarreling among themselves.”
“They’ll cooperate!” Homat declared angrily. “I’ll see to

it

if

that they do.”

“And why should they listen to thee?” Tyl replied without
malice. “Thee are a runaway from one of the far city-states
that border the Groalamasan. The river folk do not trust

those

who come from

the lands that

against the Sea.”
am not of the city-states,” Homat said proudly. “Not
anymore. I am of,” he hesitated to glance sideways at Etienne
and Lyra, I am of these folk.” Etienne suddenly felt very
lie

“I

good.
“Don’t include me in that mental family,” Lyra said sardonically. “I’m going along with this insanity but I
don’t
believe in it. If Homat wants to consider himself as one
with
Etienne, that s fine. Idiocy knows no species boundaries.”

Everyone smiled.
We 11 do it, Lyra,” Etienne told her, putting an arm around
her shoulders. “You’ll see. We’ll do it! We’ll get the hydrofoil up to Jakaie, around the Topapasirut, and
down to the
river on the far side. Then we’ll be on our way again.”
[150]

“Sure we will,” she said softly. She inhaled deeply. “Well,
I guess we’d better get on with it. The sooner this is begun,
the sooner it will end.”
“That’s right,” he replied with a grin, “but not the way
you think it will.”
Word was passed down the river, the call going out for
the bravest of Brul mahouting only the strongest of mounts.
Meanwhile the carpenters of the village of Taranau, which
was the last sizable town near the narrowing of the Barshajagad, set about under Etienne’s and Lyra’s instructions
building a platform to hold the hydrofoil. It was to be light
and strong, with double-wheeled axles fore and aft. These
could be bound to the platform which in turn could be attached to the two hydrofoils. Not only would the skeleton
frame provide a maximum of support with a minimum of
weight, the open woodwork also would not block the downward exhausts of the repellers.

Though they

talked as rapidly as their brethren, the Brul

turned out to be less loquacious and argumentative than their
urbanized relatives. They formed a tightly knit society with
rules all their own and wore their pride on their faces. It was
not quite group arrogance.
Lyra learned from Homat that most of the Brul lived
outside the villages in isolated clusters or in single dwellings
with only the immediate family for company. Their lives
were devoted to the care and handling of their vroqupii.
As it turned out the Redowls did not have to exhaust their
store of trade goods. Once the nature of the enterprise became widely known, Brul arrived from distant locations not
to serve for pay but simply to pit the strength and endurance
of their animals against those of their competitors.
Still, the expedition was fortunate in engaging forty of the
massive animals and their owners. After some discussion
among the Brul the vroqupii were yoked to the boat in ten

ranks of four abreast. They walked on pile-driver legs and
their bellies scraped the earth. The vroqupii was all traction
and muscle, its short square head set on a bull neck. A line
of homy plates ran along the upper jaw and swept back to

form a low ridge above each eye, downcurving to shield the
throat.
It

was a

startling

assembly, not the least because with a
[

151 ]

few faintly yellow exceptions, the vroqupii were clad in short,
bristly, rose-hued fur. They grunted and heaved against their
harnesses, anxious to get moving. The Brul sat on the soft
saddle behind the neck frill, alternately joking with and taunting his fellow drovers.
With the rushing roar of the Skar for counterpoint, the
expedition finally got under way. At first there was nothing
but good-natured jostling for position as each Brul strove to
prove that his animal was the strongest. Eventually the drovers settled down to work, conversation fading as each con-

centrated on the task at hand.
The vroqupii plodded onward in comparative silence, even
when they reached the branch canyon and the way turned
steep and difficult. They were used to pulling against the
constant pressure of the river, and the incline did not seem

them any unusual problems. Etienne knew the real
would come during the final thousand meters, when the

to cause
test

turned cold and thin.
Days passed and their speed slowed only slightly. What
did drop off considerably was the amount of joking among
the Brul, as the difficulty of what they were attempting began
to sink in. Etienne had Homat weaving in and out among
the Mai every night, listening for talk of discouragement
or dissent.
The tension was hard on everyone, and when they finally
passed the four-thousand-meter mark, four-fifths of the way
to the top, humans, Tsla, and Mai were as tired as the patient
vroqupii. It had been days since any joking had passed among
the Brul, and the increasingly cold air was beginning to bother
them if not their animals.
air

A few

under the strain. One was killed when, shivering from the chill, he fell from his mount and was crushed
under the heavy feet of the team behind him before it could
be halted. But even those Brul who gave up left their animals
in the care of friends, admonished them to return the prequit

cious creatures in good condition

when

the final goal was
ever was. Forlorn and disappointed, they
straggled back down the trail by ones and twos.
It was the cold that discouraged them more than anything
else. By the time the temperature had fallen to sixty degrees
the Brul were so wrapped up in heavy clothing it was all

achieved

—

if it

[

152]

they could do to cling to their saddles. A steady breeze
tumbled from the flanks of nearby Aracunga, and soon even
Etienne and Lyra had to bundle up.
“Do you think we’ll make it?” Lyra asked her husband
one day as she finished the latest count of the remaining
Brul. “It looks like we just might, if we don’t lose too many

more drovers.”
“Don’t you go

getting confident on me just when I’m
starting to have doubts,” he told her. He blew into his hands.
If the temperature fell much further they would have to dig

jackets out of the hydrofoil’s storage lockers. The Tsla also
looked uncomfortable. It was chillier than it had been during
their climb to the Topapasirut.
As Tyl had explained, Jakaie lay at the uppermost limit
of Tsla habitation. Above that level even the hardiest Tsla
crops withered and died, though one could survive by for-

aging and hunting. Or so it was said.
Forty-five hundred meters, forty-six, and as Etienne’s
nervousness increased, Lyra’s spirits rose.
“We’re going to make it, Etienne. You were right all the
time.

make
when the

We’re going

to

it.”

boat’s sitting in Jakaie’s central
square,” he told her. “I wish I knew why you get more
enthusiastic the closer we come to a crisis point, while I get
“I’ll

believe

it

more and more worried.”
“We complement each other, remember? When I’m down,
you’re up, and vice versa.”
“I thought all you wanted was to get back to Turput.”
“I never thought we’d get this far. Now that we have,
I’m dying to see how the Tsla of Jakaie have adapted to their
harsh environment. There should be different architecture,
methods of farming, cooking, everything. Society as a function of altitude. There’s a whole paper in that.”
“Must be a very close-knit population.”
“I agree, but

speculate in

my

what makes you think so? You usually don’t
field.”

“They have to be close. It may be the only way to keep
warm.”
“Anytime you think it’s getting a little chilly, Etienne, just
consider the poor Mai.” She gestured toward the long team
of vroqupii and Brul as she and Etienne marched alongside
[

153 ]

wonder how low the temperature has to fall
before they become susceptible to frostbite?”
“To freezing, I’d expect, but you’d never know it to look
at them now. Half of them are so cold they can’t shiver
anymore. Too numb.”
Not one Brul had quit for several days now, however.
For those who remained the climb had turned into a grim
contest. None would give up so close to the goal for fear of
being derided by those who stayed on.
the hydrofoil. “I

As

any complaints,
but they seemed to adjust to the colder weather much better
than their masters. Their pace was slower now, more measured, but none had fallen by the wayside. Undoubtedly their
for the vroqupii, they could not voice

short brightly colored fur afforded some protection against
the changing climate. It also helped that when a particularly

steep spot was reached, they were unhitched while one of
the humans lifted the boat and its wheels to the next level

on

repellers.

The Brul looked forward

to such respites with

relief.

Forty-eight hundred meters. Forty-nine.

“Tomorrow morning.” Etienne spoke

as he crouched

across from the portable heater they recharged every couple
of days from the boat’s batteries. He longed for the comfort
of their heated cabin. They slept outside at Homat’s insistence. If they did not, he warned them, they risked losing
the respect of the Brul. “We’ll reach the top of the canyon

tomorrow morning.”

He

put down his self-heating cup of tea and slid beneath
the thermosensitive blanket. The covering was warm but the
ground beneath the sleeping pad very hard.
glance showed
the temperature to be fifty-three.

A

Tomorrow,

mused. After that, two days
of steady travel overland to Jakaie. There they would find
friends, shelter, and fires large enough to warm even the
vindication, he

Brul.

Lyra still sat in front of the heater, staring at her husband.
“You never would know when to say no, would you, Etienne?
A bad habit, one that’ll be the death of both of us one of
these days.” She smiled. “You dragged me all this way when
I’d just as soon have quit and turned back toward home.”
[

154 ]

“Home?” His eyebrows

lifted.

“Well, back toward Turput. I’ve come to think of that as
kind of a home away from home.”
“In spite of the inhabitants’ unpleasant burial rituals?”
“I didn’t spend much time consorting with the dead. I get
to do that on the boat every night.”
“Very funny.” But she was still smiling. Tyl sat nearby,
leading his fellow Tsla in their nighttime chant. Etienne
watched her as she listened to them without reaching for her
recorder. Light from the porters’ fire lit her profile, burning

away the years.
Ten years together. She’d been very beautiful a decade
ago. Now she was hardened, toughened by fieldwork, by
adversity, by too many hours spent away from the comforts
of civilization— and still beautiful. All the poison in her spirit,
all the acid in her voice could not change that.
She grew conscious of his stare and turned back to him.
“I owe you an apology for wanting to turn back.”
“How about a kiss instead? I haven’t had a kiss in a long
time. Apologies I can live without.”
She eyed him uncertainly for a moment, then walked
around the heater to bend next to him, touching her lips to

They were warm against the night.
Then she pulled away, sooner than he wished. Too

his.

brief,

too considered, not spontaneous enough, he thought. But
something, it was something. It had been a long time since
they’d had even that.
He turned over beneath the blanket, feeling much warmed
inside— and not by the heater— anxious for morning to come.

[

155 ]

Ixi.1
Screams, shouts of panic, and the hoarse trilling cries of
the vroqupii woke him, the latter a sound he hadn’t heard
since the start of the long climb up from the Skar. Gesticulating silhouettes rushed past his sleep-filled eyes like the
shadows of ghosts. Only the heater was alive, a steady glow
in the darkness.

Trying to force himself awake he sat up, hunting for the
source of all the disturbance. Suddenly he found himself
rising from the ground. Something had placed tight steel
bands around his shoulders and the back of his neck. He
screwed his head around so he could look overhead, thinking
how strange it was to meet a denizen of hell five thousand
meters away from the center of the planet.
Four long wings beat at the air, protruding from a thick,
flattened body. Wind and a fetid, corrupt odor assailed his
face. Not far from his eyes, altogether too near, was a mouth
full of sharp hooks. A pair of saucer-sized bright blue
eyes
glared down at him. The pupils were huge and yellow.
The odor of carrion was overpowered by a sudden sharp
smell of ozone. The monstrosity shivered. Lyra fired again
[

156 ]

and Etienne found himself falling. He landed heavily on his
blanket and sleeping pad instead of the naked rock. With
two holes burned through one wing, the creature had had
enough. It lifted skyward, emitting a cry very like the sound
the devil must make when gargling.
Etienne rolled over and clutched his right elbow, which
had absorbed the brunt of his fall. It throbbed painfully. He
was fully awake now.
Lyra jostled him as she slid on her knees next to him.
Her eyes were still on the night sky. “Here,” she said, handing him his pistol. “Others are still around.” She gave him
a hand up.
Guarding each other’s backs they stumbled through the
confusion and screaming, Etienne handling the asynapt with
his left hand. The most immediate danger came not from the
nocturnal carnivores but from the bellowing, stampeding

_

vroqupii.

,

t

Etienne fired and fired. Though there was no recoil, his
fingers grew numb simply from gripping the pistol. Eventually the night was scoured clean, however, and he let the
weapon fall to his side. The stars returned, except off to the
north where the air was filled with vast dark shapes, rapidly
receding.

The Redowls returned to their campsite, set the heater
back on its base, and sat down. All around them panic was
giving

way

to muttered curses

and exclamations

in excited

Mai.

Homat joined them,

almost invisible in his cold-weather

gear.

“What were they?” Lyra asked him. Etienne massaged
looking to the north where a last straggler
fled after its companions on ten-meter- wide wings.
“Monsters.” Homat was shivering despite his bulky attire.
“Very rarely do they come down to the river. They must be
more common up here, where the land is better suited to

his elbow,

still

monsters and Tsla!”
Other eyes joined the conference. If Tyl had overheard
Homat’s last words, he chose not to comment. “Strepanong,” he declared, gesturing heavenward with his flexible
proboscis. “Scavengers and killers.” He paused. “They took
two of the Brul. They rarely bother us in the fields, and
[

157 ]

never in the towns. Never have I seen so many in one place
at the same time. The presence of so much meat must have
drawn them.”
‘‘A

bad omen, bad omen,” Homat was muttering. “Per-

we

should turn back, de-Etienne.”
A small invisible needle pricked his elbow and he winced.
“Not after making it this far, Homat. I’m not turning back

haps

now.”
“The Brul may grumble once they restore calm among
their animals,” Homat warned him. “They do not come this
far to fight with monsters.”

“Tyl, repeat what you said about never having seen so
many in one place before. The chances of this happening
again before we reach Jakaie are insignificant, aren’t they?

Tyl?”

The Tsla spoke mournfully. “I can guarantee nothing.
Learned Etienne, though it would be most unlikely.”
“One strepanong is too many,” Homat argued.
“We drove them off,” Lyra reminded him, gesturing with
her pistol. “We injured several of them, maybe fatally, threw
a real scare into the entire flock. I don’t imagine they’ll come
after us again. You tell the Brul that. And from now on
Etienne and I will alternate standing guard at night so we’re
not surprised anymore. If there is a next time they’ll feast
on strepanong, not the other way around.”
“That is no consolation to the families of the two who
were taken.” Homat shuddered at the thought.
“Their families will be compensated,” she promised. “Tell
the Brul that if they turn back now because of a bunch of
carrion eaters they’re no better than children, crying for their
mothers. We’re only a couple of days, maybe less, from our
goal, where there’ll be warm shelter and safety for all.”
Tyl assumed an uncharacteristically haughty air. “That
much can be assured. Tsla hospitality refuses no one.”
“You can also tell them,” Lyra continued with a sudden
burst of inspiration, “that if they insist on turning back now,
we’ll have to find Tsla help to take us the rest of the way.”
Homat smiled at this slyness. Truly de-Lyra was becoming knowledgeable of Mai ways. “All your assurances would
not convince them, but an insult to their reputations! yes,
I will tell them that. I do not think we will have any trouble.”

—

[

158 ]

He

turned and disappeared in the direction of the vroqupii

corral.

Lyra indicated her husband's right arm. “What’s with your elbow?”
He forced a wry grin. “It thought it was a foot. I landed
on it, but I don’t imagine it’s broken. Just feels like it. Couldn’t
you have managed to shoot the damned thing before it got

The Redowls were

left

alone.

me

off the ground?”
“Sorry,” she said dryly. “Be thankful we’re camped on
a relatively wide section of trail. You might’ve been dumped

over a precipice.”
“Wouldn’t that have made for an interesting dive? Time
enough for forty-eight twists with a couple dozen triple gainers thrown in. Unfortunately, I don’t think I would have
survived long enough to enjoy the judging.”
“I’ll try and come to the rescue a little sooner next time.”
He was suddenly solemn as he eyed the sky. “I hope
there won’t be a next time. Insult to their professionalism
or not, I don’t imagine the Brul will stay if we’re attacked
again. Did you get a good enough look at our visitors to
classify them? I wasn’t much interested in their taxonomy
myself, and I didn’t have the best view.”
“It wasn’t a bird. I’m not even sure it was mammalian.
Looked like a cross between a condor and a centipede.”
“Sweet critter. I think we’ll forgo any opportunities for
up-close study.” He grimaced as he tried to straighten his
arm. “I saw enough to know it spends most if not all of its
time in the air.”
“I’ve never seen a quadruple wing arrangment like that
before,” she added, “except on insects, and the strepanong’s
no insect despite its appearance. It had feathers, and plenty

of ’em.”
“I

know.

I

had to smell them.”

He

looked toward the

Tyl was watching them, the fire bright in his
wide, sad eyes. “You’re positive we’re not more than a day
or two march from this town?”
Tyl performed an elaborate gesture with his nose. “I am
positive, Etienne. A passing of the sun once or twice across
the sky will see us in Jakaie. I look forward to it myself, for
adapted to so
I am curious to see how my brethren have
isolated a home. Life must be harder than in Turput.”

circle of Tsla.

[

159]

“But not so hard they won’t be able to aid us?”
“Learned Etienne, the more difficult a Tsla’s circumstances, the more generous he is with his hospitality.”
Lyra confirmed this declaration, as Etienne knew she
would.
There was much grumbling and many more complaints
than usual among the Brul the next morning as they mounted
their vroqupii. That was only to be expected. Etienne thought
he saw several expressions of hatred directed at himself or
his wife, but Homat assured him it didn’t matter whether
the drovers disliked them or not. Only that they respected
them.
Several of the vroqupii displayed new scars, evidence of
attempts by the marauding strepanong to carry them off. At
least the weather had decided to cooperate, and the grumbling rapidly died down. It was almost warm as they set out

up the trail.
They reached the top of the canyon and paused for a brief
celebration, which helped to raise the drovers’ spirits considerably. That night they slept easy, reassured by the sight
of one of the Redowls patrolling alertly with asynaptic pistol
in

hand.

By the following day nearly all dissension had faded away.
The trail now crossed level ground and the Brul paused in
their shivering long

visited before.

They

enough

to study a land they’d never

realized they

were pioneers of a

sort

and a few found they were enjoying the journey.
They were two days in from the trail head. The vroqupii
surmounted the occasional ridge with ease. The beauty of
the lower plateau captivated the travelers, from the rushing
streams beginning their long race down to the Skar to the
stunted but wide-spreading evergreens.
Lyra was particularly interested in a convoluted pile of
brush that Tyl called an aroyt. Covering as much as half an
acre, the aroyt was a single growth that defended its highly
edible trunk with an impenetrable armor of centimeter-long
thorns. There were also clumps of high mossy fungi that rose
to their knees and held melt water like a sponge. Not that
water underfoot was a problem. Most of the trail had been
cut from solid rock. Soil was a precious rarity at this height.

They were approaching a saddle between a
[

160]

finger of Ar-

acunga and a low hill when the two lead Brul who had disengaged themselves from the team to serve as advance scouts
returned at a gallop. That in itself was extraordinary, since
it was the first time the Redowls had seen a vroqupii move
at anything faster than a walk.
Homat hurried to meet the outriders as the procession
slowed. The scouts were chattering loudly to their companions as they traveled down the line.
“Maybe they’ve spotted Jakaie over the ridge line,” Lyra
suggested hopefully. Too hopefully.
Homat rejoined them quickly, his fright apparent in his
expression. “The Brul are taking their animals out of har-

ness.”
front of the team,
could see the drovers working with the harness. “What the

“What?” Etienne looked toward the

devil’s

wrong?”

“Exactly,” Homat replied. “Many devils. Demons.” His
eyes were wide.
“More strepanong? Or some other animal?”
“Not animal, not animal,” Homat insisted. “Demons!”
Etienne could see he was far more terrified than he’d been
the night of the scavenger attack.
Etienne started up the line. “They can’t unhitch and quit
now! We’re almost there.” As he spoke, several vroqupii
were already moving out of file. “You’ve got to make them

Homat.”
“They won’t

stop,

stop, de-Etienne.

The strepanong they can

understand, but no one can fight demons.”
Desperately, Etienne turned to Tyl. “What’s going on?
What are they so frightened of?”
“I am not sure,” Tyl murmured, “but I fear what I may

know.”
are in Jakaie,” Homat went on. He turned to
point toward the saddle just ahead. “Jakaie lies just over
that ridge, but the demons are there. The Brul will go no
further, de-Etienne. They say they are going back to their
homes as fast as their mounts will carry them. They complain
that nothing was said in the contracts about dealing with

“Demons

demons.”

“What kind of demons?” Lyra asked,
sense of the Mai’s panic.
[

161 ]

trying to

make some

“Ice demons!”
“Ah, it is as I fear.” Tyl turned and began talking rapidfire to his companions, the words flying almost as fast as if
he were speaking Mai.
“Not the Tsla too,” Etienne snapped angrily. The first
retreating vroqupii were passing the boat now, heading back
toward the Barshajagad. He stepped toward the nearest.
“You must stay!” he shouted in Mai. The Brul ignored
him. He walked to the next in line. “You can’t leave us here
like this. We have a contract, an agreement.” He struggled
to recall the words Lyra had used to hold the drovers the
night of the strepanong. “What of your commercial honor?”
“To flee from devils is no disgrace,” the Brul announced
with dignity, even as he looked back over his shoulder to
make certain no demons pursued. And that was all any of

them would

say.

In less than thirty minutes the last vroqupii had disappeared over the slope behind them, its Brul urging it to greater
speed. Etienne and Lyra considered their boat, marooned
on a rocky plain, yoked to nothing.
“Ice demons,” Etienne grumbled. “Didn’t they see how
easily we drove off the strepanong?”
“These are not strepanong,” Tyl told him. “Thee must
see to understand as thee had to see the Topapasirut to
understand it. I sorrow for thee. Learned One. As for ourselves, we must go on to aid our brethren in Jakaie.”
“Hey, what about us? Are we supposed to just sit here
and wait for the next flood?”
“Etienne,” Lyra said gently, “you’re not thinking clearly.
You never do when you lose your temper.”
“So enlighten me.”
“This town lies just over the ridge ahead.” She stared
meaningfully at the hydrofoil.
Realization brought embarrassment with it, though the
Tsla did not perceive it. “Just ahead.
have plenty of
battery power and we don’t have to lift too high.” Lyra
nodded, turned to the Tsla. “These ice demons. They wouldn’t
happen to be the Na, would they?”
“What other demons of the ice are there? I thought thee

We

knew.” Tyl gestured toward the boat with
will

use thy

spirit

boat to help us?”
[

162 ]

his snout.

“Thee

“To help you, yes, and ourselves, since we have to get
it into Jakaie somehow. You know what to do?” Tyl nodded
and moved with the porters to climb aboard. The Redowls
followed.

“You wanted

to see this legendary third race, the

inhabits the Guntali,” Etienne reminded her as they

“Looks

one that

mounted

going to have your chance.”
“I’m not sure I like the circumstances, but it doesn’t appear we have much say in the matter.”
They checked out the boat’s systems carefully. It had
been several days since the repellers had been used. But the
hydrofoil lifted easily off the ground and started forward on
its cushion of air. The wooden platform hung beneath the
hull, the huge heavy wheels spinning aimlessly. Bindings
groaned but held.
Jakaie had better be as close as the Brul had indicated,
Lyra thought as she guided them toward the notch in the
rocks. Otherwise they’d have to squat down somewhere until
the cells recharged the batteries.
the ladder.

like you’re

was built into a flank of Aracunga. The architecture
was similar to Turput’s but much heavier construction seemed
to be the rule. The buildings boasted fewer windows. At that
Jakaie

altitude the Tsla

needed to conserve heat.

Off to the north lay irrigated fields filled with soil laboriously collected from notches and arroyos where it had
gathered. The wall was the most obvious difference between
Jakaie and Turput. It was an impressive wall; a good six or
seven meters high but not especially thick.
Apparently Jakaie was high enough for creatures of the
Guntali to mix with those of the Tsla ecological zone. Including, it seemed, the Na. He tried to visualize the Na in
his mind’s eye, using variations of the Mai-Tsla pattern

—

bipedal,

mammalian

type.

And

that

much was

true.

But the

which the new form diverged from those previously
encountered caused the small hairs on the back of his neck

ways

in

to tense.

Several gates broke the town wall and no more than two
dozen Na battered away at the largest. That two dozen Na
would take on an entire town said more for their ferocity
and disposition than all the fears expressed by the Brul.
[

163 ]

Jakaie

was

large

enough

to harbor

anywhere from

five

hundred to a thousand inhabitants, all of whom not only
were on the defensive but appeared to be losing the battle.
Tsla bodies were visible outside the wall. There was no sign
of dead Na though one individual did sit some distance away
from the fight. A big male, it was festooned with spears and
arrows and was busily engaged in plucking them from his
body as if they were so many bee stings.
As they watched from the straining hydrofoil, the gate
gave way under the steady pounding from rocks and small
trees. The Tsla inside scattered as the Na rushed in among
them, and screams of terror pierced the clear mountain air.
“Thee must hurry, Learned Ones, or many will die!” Swd
called from the foredeck.
“We’re moving as fast as we can,” Etienne told him through
the speaker membrane. “This boat wasn’t designed for rapid
travel out of the water.”
Many primitives would have paused at the sight of so
alien an object as the flying boat coming toward them. Not
the Na. Either they did not possess sufficient imagination to
be fearful of strange new shapes or else they were too confident in their

own

irresistible strength.

A

few bellowed

in

the hydrofoil’s direction as it crossed over the wall, but the
assault continued.
The hydrofoil bucked and rolled uneasily as they began

homes and

wasn’t designed to compensate for such uneven terrain. Everyone aboard was glad
when Etienne finally set the boat down in a parklike area
near the center of Jakaie. A few anxious faces, flexible snouts
to pass over

streets. It

aquiver, peeked out at them from shuttered windows and
portholes. The noise of fighting could be heard clearly.
Etienne checked his pistol as Lyra urged him to hurry. “What,
in a rush to shoot some more natives?” he chided her. “How
are you going to justify that in your report?”
“If this town’s devastated we won’t be able to find the
help we’ll need to get us down to the river again.”
“What makes you think the Tsla here have any interest
in helping us? This isn’t Turput.” He scrambled down the
boarding ladder.

“Because we’re going to endear ourselves to them by
helping to repel this attack. Not that I wouldn’t help them
[

164 ]

anyway.” She started toward the broken gate and he had to
hurry to keep up with her.
Anxious to protect her precious Tsla, he mused. But she
was right about one thing: they’d do it if they had to or not.
Tyl and the porters had become more than natives during
the journey Upriver from Turput. They’d become friends.
Tyl and the three porters were offered arms by oldsters
and adolescents. Only Homat did not accompany the reinforcements. He remained with the hydrofoil because between his bulky clothing and the temperature he’d have been
useless in a fight.

they hadn’t encountered violence on Tslamaina before Jakaie, but it was still a shock to stumble onto
the decapitated body of a female Tsla lying in the street. The
head was nowhere around and the sounds of combat were
It

was not

very close.
After the

as

if

Na

broke through, the Tsla retreated to their
strong buildings to harry the invaders with spears and arrows. Etienne and his party rounded the side of one such
structure and halted only a few meters from a cluster of ten
or twelve farmers who were trapped against the wall by a
pair of Na. The farmers were holding the attackers off with
long pikes and sharp tools, yet it was apparent that if something wasn’t done quickly the Na would pick them apart one

by one.
Etienne had no time to admire Tyl’s bravery as their guide
darted forward, weaving with the waddling gait of his kind,
to cut at the leg of one Na with a curved blade. It did not
penetrate the leathery skin very deeply and he had to retreat
in a hurry, leaving his weapon behind.
But the Na had felt it, grunted, muttered something unintelligible, then reached down to pluck the weapon from its
ankle. The creature was four meters tall and covered with
heavy sandals
a thick, shaggy pelt. Its clothing was crude
of some unknown leather, a leathery vest and breastplate,
and a kilt of some similar material. A bone knife hung from
a cord tied around the waist, the blade almost as tall as
Lyra. As its main weapon, the Na clutched a club which
had once been a tree of respectable size. It was panting
heavily and a dark tongue lolled from a corner of its mouth.

—

[

165 ]

That made sense. An inhabitant of the Guntali would have
little use for sweat glands.
Without a word Etienne moved to his left, Lyra to the
right. As he ran he fired. Thick hair was burned black on
the back of a pillarlike thigh. The Na howled and turned its
attention away from the desperate farmers.
The creature’s forehead was very low and its blunt snout
seemed incapable of advanced expression, but there was no
mistaking that snarl of hatred. It displayed four canines, two
upper, two lower. The remaining front teeth appeared to
have been filed to sharp points. One did not have to be an
experienced biologist to realize the Na did not exist on a
diet of vegetables.
It uttered something in words of single syllables as it
brought the massive club down faster than Etienne would
have guessed possible. He dove wildly behind a small wagon
piled high with some kind of vegetation. The club made
kindling of the wagon and splinters bit at Etienne’s exposed
face. As he rolled to his feet he thought suddenly, What am
I doing here? I should be behind a desk at a university,
grumbling over sophomoric student reports and wondering
who’s going to show at the next faculty get-together.
There was no time for regretful contemplation. The club
swung parallel to the pavement and he heard it whoosh as
he ducked and it missed the top of his skull by centimeters.
Then a big hand was reaching for him, six treelike fingers
with hooked nails at the tips.

He

stumbled backward, away from that menacing grasp,
firing as he fell. The bolt passed between the forefinger and
first thumb to strike the Na in the left eye. It let out a thunderous howl, dropped the club and fell to its knees, shaking
violently. The Na was dead by the time it hit the ground.
Etienne tried to rejoin his companions, only to find his
path blocked by the other Na. It charged forward and brought
its own club down with both hands. Etienne barely missed
being pulped by diving behind a nearby wall.
Freed of the need to ward off two attackers, the farmers
fanned out behind the survivor. Pikes and spears and scythes
stabbed and cut at muscles and tendons. The Na roared and
bellowed, frustrated in its attempt to locate the snoutless
Tsla who had slain his companion. As a great tendon was
[

166]

one knee swinging the club in a
wide arc to kill a pair of Tsla who’d closed too quickly.
But now that the Na was down it no longer seemed so
massive or invulnerable. Etienne took careful aim and fired
at the base of the skull. The bone was so thick that it prevented the charge from penetrating to the spine, but the
shock was sufficient to temporarily paralyze the creature
and send it tumbling the rest of the way to the street.
It did his heart good, though Lyra would surely not have
approved, to watch the peaceful, philosophic Tsla jump all
over the body and start hacking it to pieces. Knowing that
his help was needed elsewhere, he left the surviving farmers

finally cut, the beast fell to

to their butchery.

needn’t have worried. The Na were in full retreat,
harried by the persistent townsfolk. He spotted Yulour atop
a crop-loading ramp and climbed up beside him.
“You don’t fight here, Yulour?”
“No, Learned One,” said the slow-witted porter. “I want
to help, but Teacher Tyl tell me no. He say, I would only
end up hurting myself.”
Etienne nodded, commending Tyl’s good sense. He picked

He

his

way back down

the ramp.

The fleeing Na carried huge bales of some kind of dried
meat from a storehouse they’d broken into, while others
hauled off unknown booty in huge leathery sacks. The Tsla
pursued them only as far as the ruined gate.
Etienne saw only one other Na corpse. Perhaps word of
the two deaths he’d had a hand in had been enough to frighten
the rest of the Na into giving up the assault. Or perhaps
they’d gained what they’d come for. He could speculate on
motivation later. Right now he was exhausted and more than
glad to see them go.
Another folk might have pursued

an attempt to recover
their stolen stores, but not the Tsla. There was no room in
their philosophy for active military pursuit. And out on the
open plain they would be at a disadvantage against their
opponents, whose size and maneuverability would not be
restricted by stone walls and narrow streets.
He slowed as he approached the shattered gate, to stare
after the retreating Na. A group of curious locals began to
gather around him. Smiling and making Tsla gestures of
[

167 ]

in

friendship, he forced his

way through them

to find Tyl

deep

a silver-furred elder.
The guide introduced him. “This is Ruu-an, First Scholar
of Jakaie. Ruu-an, make greeting to the Learned Etienne, a
scholar from a world other than ours. He comes here to learn
about us
and as thee have observed, sometimes to help.”
“I am gladdened by thy presence,” the elder said. His
accent differed from that of Tyl and the other Tsla of Turput,
but the words remained comprehensible. “Also that thee saw
fit to put aside thy studies long enough to aid us in a most
desperate time. I have been informed that thee helped to
bring down two of the Na and thereby to hasten their flight.”
Etienne holstered his pistol. “Does this happen often?
From what I saw of the fight I don’t see how you could
in conversation with

.

.

.

survive repeated attacks.”
“The Na assail us infrequently, and usually with less loss
of life. Many times we will simply fall back against the mountain and let them take what they will. They are not indiscriminate thieves and never take more than they can carry.
But it has not been a good time for us and it was decided
this time to resist. I do not think the choice wise.”

“They come

your food?”
hard on us, it

to steal

time is
may also be hard on
they know how to grow food of their own.
Despite their appearance, they have a hunger for the
fruit of the soil. When it is scarce on the Guntali they will
sometimes come down among us. I suppose they cannot be
blamed. The life offered by the Guntali must be very hard.”
“You sound like you’re ready to forgive them,” Etienne
said, eyeing the bodies scattered both in front of and behind
the ruined gate.
“We always do,” the First Scholar told him. “Have they
not souls just as we? They are more to be pitied than hated
for their ignorance and weaknesses.”
“I didn’t see many weaknesses, but I’ve already learned
that you Tsla are more forgiving than we humans.” Already
the townsfolk were busy removing the dead. That sparked
an unpleasant memory.
“After the
funeral ceremonies ... are concluded, what
do you do with the bodies of your deceased?” He could not

“When the
them. Nor do

.

.

.

[

168 ]

I

look at Tyl as he said this. Sensing his discomfort, the guide
discreetly allowed the First Scholar to answer.
“Here we cremate the bodies and then scatter the ashes
upon our fields, so that as tillers of the soil those who pass
on may help the next generation to grow better crops.”
“So they can be stolen again by the Na. You ought to put

a stop to it.”
“That would be a fine thing,” the elder said, “but alas, a
thing not possible. We cannot chase the Na up to the Guntali.
fight in.
It is too cold for us and the air too thin for us to
Up there, they are the masters.
“Similarly, they cannot fight long down here. The thick
hair which protects them from the Guntali’ s cold soon causes
them to grow too hot to exert their great bodies, and they

must retreat.”
“I’m glad I don’t have to depend on the weather for
|

I

my

defense,” Etienne replied. Not that it was within his province
to criticize the way these Tsla managed their lives.
“Actually,” the elder continued, surprising his human audience, “there are times when we trade peacefully with the

Na.”

been told the Tsla served as a conduit between Mai
and Na, but for some reason it just slipped my memory.”
“You must not judge them only by this unusual attack,”
Ruu-an advised him. “There are many times when the Mai
“I’d

also prefer to fight instead of to trade.”

Etienne was glad Homat was still back at the boat. Lisand it
ten, I’m standing here taking in all this information
should be
isn’t even my department. Lyra’s the one who
making a record of your ways.” He looked past them, making
a perfunctory survey of the battlefield. “Where is she, anyway? I haven’t seen her since we split up to try and flank
the two Na we first encountered.”
“Ah, Learned Teacher Lyra,” Tyl murmured.
“Yes. Didn’t she stick with you, Tyl?” Suddenly he was
very cold, the kind of coldness that comes from inside the
body and makes the muscles of one’s arms and legs start to

cramp.
“No. We became separated during the fight. I have not
seen her since. Perhaps we ought to return to the place where
we began the combat.” He sounded concerned.
[1691

There was no sign of Lyra. Not where Etienne and the
farmers had slain the two Na, not in the streets nearby, not
before the gate. The word was passed among the townsfolk.
Surely they’d know her whereabouts. An alien fighting among
them would stand out immediately.
When the word came it was devastating in its finality.

[

170]

hopes for a personal rapprochement, the papers they planned to present to various
scientific societies, the acclaim and acknowledgment and
honors, all suddenly meant nothing beside the hollowness
in his heart. Ten years of hard work had been shattered like
that gate which had so ineffectively protected Jakaie.
Several of the townsfolk had seen the alien female disappear into a Na sack. They were positive she was alive at
the time. Two or three Tsla had been stuffed in the sack with

The expedition’s aims,

his

her.

Etienne and Tyl, accompanied by the First Scholar, rushed
to the narrow street near the gate, following the lead of two
quick search turned up several raggedy fragyoung Tsla.
ments of Lyra’s shirt and something more significant. Battered but still functional, her pistol lay dark against the paving

A

—

stones where she’d dropped it.
Asking without wanting to ask, he looked despairingly at
Ruu-an. “Why would they take her alive?’’
The elder glanced at Tyl, who knew the strange creature
[ 171 ]

better than he, but

no enlightenment was forthcoming. So

he answered.
“I told thee,

Learned Etienne, that when times on the

Guntali are difficult the Na come here to find food. They
are not selective in their diet. Meat is meat to them, whether
recently killed on the Guntali or traded to them by some
merchant ... or the merchant himself. They take live captives to prolong their supply of fresh food, as we do with
our domestic animals.”
The sudden irony of it made Etienne want to laugh, but
he couldn’t, any more than he could cry. All he could do
was stare silently through the broken gate toward the rampart marking the rim of the Guntali, more than a thousand
meters higher than Jakaie.
Lyra was up there somewhere, no doubt occupying her
thoughts with the unprecedented opportunity granted her to
study the culture of the Na at close range. Probably she was
bouncing around in her sack with her fellow captives and
cursing the lack of a recorder. She’d be doing exactly the
same thing when they slipped her on the spit. Her last notes
would detail the eating habits of the Na. He was sure it would
be a paragon of scientific explication and his wife’s final
thought would be regret over the fact no one else would be
able to read them.
“Damn them,” he muttered. “Damn her!” He let all his
anger and hate and frustration flow out over the stones and
an occasional curious onlooker and when he finally concluded the tirade he was ashamed of himself, because there
still

were no

tears.

As he turned back

he discovered he
could speak with extraordinary calmness. It was the peace
to the patient Tyl

of the resigned.

“Do you

think they will eat her soon, or save her for a
while?” How easily the words came now, the absurd words.
Tyl looked to Ruu-an instead of replying. “It is hard to
say. Certainly they have sense enough to wonder at the
differences between her and us. If any among this tribe has
ever seen a Mai, they may think she is kin to them, albeit

from a larger tribe. They may want to sample this new food
right away, but I think they may choose to make a special
feast around her. Thus they would save her for a last meal.”
[

172 ]

have to proceed on that assumption.”
Tyl eyed him curiously. “What can thee do, Learned
Etienne? I am wounded for thee. I was very fond of Learned
Lyra. I learned much from her and enjoyed our sharing of
customs and knowledge. Both pupil and teacher she was,
but there is nothing to be done for her now.”
“You and your damn fatalism! She’s my wife, damn it,
and as long as there’s the slimmest chance she’s still alive
I have to go after her. It’s her own damn fault for being so
careless and putting me in this position, and she knows it.
She’s probably laughing over my predicament right now
knowing that I have to come after her or risk everything
going down the drain. Months of work, years of preparation
all at risk because she didn’t have a care for her fat rear and
let some big dumb cretin of a native stuff her in his shopping
bag. Lost her pistol, too.” He shoved the other asynapt
“I

into his belt.

“I’m going to go back to the boat for our cold weather
gear. Lyra’ll be lucky if she doesn’t freeze to death before
she finds herself on the menu. Or maybe she won’t be lucky.
It depends on how right your assumptions are and how fast
I can move up there.” He scanned the rock wall.
“One thing I can tell from here; I’ll have to hike it. No

way the repellers will last long enough to get me up that.
What about trails? Are there foot trails leading to the plateau,
or do they just follow the easiest route down?”
“Always they follow the easiest,” Ruu-an said. “That is
their way. They make no attempt to hide themselves, for
they have nothing to fear from us. But I do not understand
what thee intend. Learned Visitor. The captured are already

moment

matters not. Thee
saw how the Na fought here in our homeland, constrained
by our walls and overheated as their bodies were. Think
what they will be like to confront on the Guntali, where they
are at home and in comfort. I will meditate on thy mate’s

lost.

Whether

alive or

dead

this

behalf.”

going after her.” He
turned to their guide. “Tyl, you’ll come with me, won’t you?”
“As the First Scholar tells, the captured are already lost
to us. In any case we can do nothing against the Na in their

“Thee meditate thy butt

off.

[

I’m

173 ]

still

”

own

To do

land.

so would only be to add to the rolls of the

departed.”

“How do you know you can’t do anything if you’ve never
tried?”

common sense, dictate our
we are sensible, content be-

“Logic, Learned Etienne, and
actions.

We

are calm because

cause we understand our role in the scheme of existence.”
He reached out to try and comfort his distraught hairless
friend.

must continue with thy work.
Thy Lyra would have wished it. Thee must not grieve for
“Please, Etienne, friend, thee

her.”

“I’m not grieving for her, you gutless wonder. I’m going
after her because she may still be alive.” Then, more quietly,
“I mean no insult, Tyl. I won’t grieve for her unless I know
for a fact that she’s dead.”
“If thee wish to perish alongside her, why, that could be
understood,” said Ruu-an, attempting to make some sense
of an alien reasoning that flew in the face of all logic.
“I’ve no intention of committing suicide.”
“That is what thee will do if thee persist in following the
Na onto the Guntali,” Tyl insisted. “I am sorrowed, Etienne,
but I cannot follow thee. My teachings, my beliefs, will not
allow it. You may ask of any others thee wish.” He did not
add that such a request would be a waste of time.
Etienne forced himself to reply as courteously as possible.
“I respect your beliefs, Tyl. I don’t understand them and I
don’t sympathize with them, I don’t even like them, but I
can respect them. But I’m wasting time standing here trying
to convince you.” He wondered what Lyra would say if she
could hear Tyl’s refusal.
“I’ll go after her myself.”
“Thee will not return,” Tyl warned him.
“Oh, I’ll come back. Look at it like this: I’m going to
acquire additional knowledge. It will be a learning experience.”

“Death

learned soon enough,” Tyl said. “They
“I will go with thee.”

So

is

was he on

who

—

mental preparations and his frustration with the Tsla that Etienne didn’t hear the voice.
Again it said, “I will help thee.”
intent

his

[

174 ]

“Who

said that?”

He

one of the porters. The

turned, to find himself confronting
last porter anyone expected to say

anything: Yulour.
“If thee will have me. Learned One.”
“Have you, yes, and glad of it.” He didn’t think Yulour
could think fast enough to be of much help in a fight, but if
supplies could be piled on that willing, powerful back they
would make much better time. And it would be good to have
company. In that respect the porter’s slowness did not concern him. He doubted he’d be much in the mood for extended

conversation atop the Guntali.

“Why?

Isn’t

against your spiritual principles?”

it

Learned One.” Yulour
fought with the large Tsla words. “I do not have sense enough
to have them.” He looked hesitantly past the human. “Teacher
Tyl must allow. I am bound to him.”
“I

j

have no

spiritual principles,

Tyl was staring curiously at the porter. “I cannot allow
myself to go, nor would thy companions, but if thy conscience is clear and committed.”
“What is conscience?” Yulour asked innocently.
Tyl sighed. “No matter.” He turned to Etienne. “He may
accompany thee as he wishes. I cannot stop him, though I
would if it were in my power. All beings have free will.
Remember this, though: thee will bear a heavy responsibility
if he dies. It will be on thy conscience.”
“I’ll remember that.” Etienne faced his one volunteer.
He’d had little personal contact with Yulour, indeed, with

!

j

|

i

i

any of the porters, preferring to give them

their instructions

through Tyl.
“Thank you, Yulour. I accept your offer of help. It would
be better understood among my own people.”
The porter shook his head sadly. “I do not understand,

Learned One.”
Etienne clapped the Tsla on one muscular shoulder. “It
doesn’t matter. All that matters is that you’re willing to
help.”
“I like
“I

want
“If

Teacher Lyra,” Yulour said with simple

sincerity.

to help her.”

we

can,

we

will,

They hurried back

Yulour.”

to the hydrofoil, ignoring the
[

175 ]

crowd

of curious Tsla which had gathered around it. Homat was
waiting to greet them.
Etienne caught his breath as a blast of superhot air rushed
out of the main cabin. Inside the temperature reached for
the hundred-degree line, forty degrees warmer than the air
outside. Homat’s reaction was exactly the opposite of
Etienne’s. As cold air poured inside he retreated to the pile
of blankets he’d assembled on the floor of the cockpit, curled
up beneath them, and peered out apologetically as Etienne
strode in after him.
“Please do not be angry with me, de-Etienne,” he pleaded.
“Only I was left behind, and I remember how to work the
device that makes the air inside the spirit boat hot or cold.
I could not resist. It’s the first time in many times I have

been

truly delightful

warm.”

Etienne had to smile. “Relax, Homat, it’s all right. I’m
not mad at you.” The smile quickly vanished. “De-Lyra has
been taken by the Na, by the ice demons.”
Homat began to moan and Etienne hastened to cut him
off. “Yulour and I are going after her.”
Homat’s nearly bald head emerged from the smothering
blankets. “After the demons?”
“After the Na, yes.”
“You will not come back.”
“I really appreciate all the support I’m getting,” he mumbled absently as he started rummaging through a storage
locker in search of needed supplies. “I never thought I’d see
the day when Mai and Tsla were in perfect agreement on
anything.”
“After the demons,” Homat whispered. “I I would come
with you if I could.”
Etienne threw him a surprised look. “That’s delightful of
you, Homat, but you know how much use you’d be. The
temperature atop the Guntali’s probably somewhere just
above the freezing mark. I don’t think you could handle that
for very long. No Mai could. The climate here in Jakaie’s
at the upper limit of your tolerance.”
“I wish it were not so, de-Etienne. It is wondrous that
you can move so freely between the comfortable weather of
the Skatandah and the roof of the world.”

—

“Our

special clothing helps to
[

make that possible, Homat.”

176 ]

He held up a thermal coat just excavated from storage.

“I’m
more concerned about the atmospheric pressure above the
six-thousand-meter line. The air will be thicker than at a
corresponding altitude on my home world, but thinner than
I’d like. We have some methods of compensating for that,
too.”
Into the large backpack went a half dozen supplementary
breathers. Each consisted of a facepiece designed to fit comfortably over mouth and nose and flexible metal tubes that
fit over the ears and behind the head to hold the contraption
in place. The tubes contained pure
2 under pressure and
would serve equally well under water. For high altitude use
they’d last much longer, since their full flow wouldn’t be
required.
Two ascents from the bottom of the Barshajagad had prepared him for the coming climb. All that he feared was the
possibility of having to do some running at high altitude. He
wondered how Lyra was handling the thin air and low temperatures. She was wearing long clothing when the Na had
attacked, but that wouldn’t suffice if the nighttime temperature dropped below freezing. It might be that all that stood
between her and freezing to death at night was the warm
presence of her fellow captives.
“Yulour, will you be warm enough?” he asked his sole
companion when all was ready. The porter wore several
layers of toga and two capes, in addition to a cloak pulled
tight over his head.
“I will be fine, Teacher. Please not to worry about me.
It upsets me when I see anyone worrying about me.”
Tyl and Ruu-an waited at the main gate to see them off.
With typical Tsla matter-of-factness, masons and carpenters
were already hard at work repairing the broken barrier. Ruuan presented one stocky villager who would guide them to
the base of the incline the Na usually employed for their

0

travels.

“Do they ever leave a rear guard behind,

or anything like

that?” Etienne asked the First Scholar.
Ruu-an made a negative movement with his trunk. “They
have nothing to fear from us since we never pursue them.”

That sense of invulnerability should be my greatest ally,
Etienne mused. Once safely back in their own territory atop
[1771

the Guntali the Na would relax. Counterattack would be the
last thing they’d expect. The shock should be considerable.
But he didn’t delude himself into thinking that they’d run
off in panic. The Na weren’t the type to run.

No, he’d have

to rely

on

surprise.

Even with two

fully

charged pistols he doubted he could hold off an entire tribe
of the giants for more than a couple of minutes.
“We’re wasting time.” He led their local guide toward the
wall beckoning to the east, moving as rapidly as practicable.
Yulour fell in step behind, the big pack bobbing easily on
his broad shoulders.
Tyl and Ruu-an watched them go.
“What a strange folk,” the First Scholar declared. “I listen
in amazement to the accomplishments you tell me they have
achieved, and then something like this is done, something
which a child of but a few years can see is useless.”
“They are full of contradictions.” Tyl’s gaze was still on
Etienne’s retreating back. “One moment they are very wise
and the next, foolish as little Mai. I think their souls must
be in perpetual confusion.”
“Thee believe they have souls, then?”
“I am convinced of it, though other teachers of Turput
argue otherwise.”
“It may be that their minds are variable, that they are
adults one moment and cubs the next. Very strange folk. I
am glad I was able to meet and talk with one of them before
they died.”
“Yes, I will miss them. The female came to me day after
day and asked endless questions, which allowed me to make
a close study of her and her ways. Now that they have left
us we will have only that to remember.”
He turned and helped the elderly Ruu-an as they started
back toward town, continuing the discussion as they walked.

There were plenty of switchbacks which over the years
the Na had developed into a recognizable pathway, so the
climb was not as difficult as Etienne first feared. He still had
to stop at regular intervals to catch his breath.

Common

sense insisted on calling regular halts while his nerves tried
to force him to greater haste. The supplementary breathers
[

178]

wouldn’t

last forever

one clamped over

and he

tried to ration the

flow of the

his face.

Despite the frequent pauses they reached the plateau
sooner than he’d dared to hope. Gaps in the thick clouds
afforded only an occasional glimpse of Jakaie and its valley
sitting far below and behind them. Above the rest of the real
world brooded the mountain called Aracunga. A thick cloud
of ice crystals trailed southward from its crest, looking like
smoke flowing from a volcano. In the distance rose a white
ghost, the impossible bulk of the sky-scraping Prompaj Massif.

A few trees

stood ready to greet their arrival, thin wispy
branches applauding their achievement at the behest of a
steady wind. Nearby, green-brown bushes clung to the
ground. Etienne bent to examine the nuts they produced,
found them hard to extract from the poor soil. They hugged
the earth with hooks of wood.
In the light dusting of snow they saw tracks of animals
that walked on broad but delicate feet, with long strides.
Etienne visualized something tall and thin running fast. As
they left the rim they encountered larger spoor, indication
that a large predator had recently passed.
Whenever their course was in doubt Yulour would drop
his head toward the ground and employ his oversized proboscis to sniff out the scent of the Na.
“Not far,” he told Etienne by the end of the day.
“No reason for them to cover ground.” Etienne squinted
into the growing darkness, an occasional snowflake tickling
his skin. “Probably they’ve picked a comfortable spot to
relax and reminisce about their attack on Jakaie. If they have
that much sense, that is. We should come up on them soon,

then?”
“Yes, soon.” Yulour straightened. “Then what we do?”
“I’m not sure. Depends on how they set their camp.”
They saw the glow from the earth before Yulour caught
the scent of the tribe. The fire itself wasn’t visible because
it lay in a depression. Heeding Etienne’s request for silence,
Yulour followed the Teacher as they crept up the side of the
low ridge and found themselves looking down into a small
crater in the rocks.

It

was deep and

tection against the wind.

On
[

offered excellent pro-

the far side, stone overhung

179 ]

and the alcove was packed with sleepy,
sated Na. Only a few of the primitives were moving, mostly
to tend to the roaring fire. The odor from the burning chips
part of the depression,

was

strong.

time Etienne saw Na females, along with
two-meter-tall cubs. Unlike the children of most species, the
offspring of the Na were not cute. They moved nervously
in their sleep, their bare feet kicking toward the warmth of
the fire.
Vegetation was unusually abundant in the depression, not
only due to the presence of nutrients unintentionally supplied
by Na but also because the hollow served as a watertrap.
The pool lay directly below Etienne, the fire on the far side.
large pile of dried animal dung helped to reflect as well
as freshen the blaze.
Yulour pointed and whispered with childlike excitement.
“Look there. Teacher, look there!”
Etienne’s gaze traveled to the right of the fire. Stone and
bone had been heaped together to create a crude kitchen.
Attached to a long bone suspended over a smoking fire was
a shape that he didn’t immediately recognize. It took him a
moment to see that it was a dead Tsla shorn of its fur. He
glanced sideways at his companion. There was no fury, no
hatred in the porter’s face.
“It doesn’t bother you?”
“What bother me, Teacher?”
Etienne gestured toward the firepit. “They’re cooking one
of your own kind down there.”
“Everyone must eat,” Yulour said ingenuously.
Etienne turned away. Obviously a great deal more research would have to be performed before they could fully
understand the Tsla.
Of more immediate interest was the cage that rested against
the far right-hand base of the depression. It was made of the
curving rib bones of some big creature, lashed together with
cured sinew. Four no, five Tsla were clustered together
within. Along with one figure clad in bright blue. His pulse

For the

first

A

—

—

raced, threatening to set his fingers trembling.
Lyra was alive and apparently intact, from what he could
see. The collar of her shirt was buttoned all the way up over
her neck and her long hair was wrapped around her face.
[

180]

The Na had

carrying sacks in with the prey, and
Lyra lay beneath one for further protection from the cold.
single young male squatted sleepily in front of the cage,
idly tossing pebbles into the fire and ignoring his charges.
“Soon he may sleep, Teacher,” Yulour said of the guard.
“He’d better.” Etienne checked to make sure both pistols
were readily accessible, along with the supplementary
left their

A

breathers.

Then he backed

carefully

down

the slope and

circled the depression.

When they

climbed up again they topped the rise directly
behind the cage. Then they waited.
It was well after midnight when Etienne stirred himself
for another look down into the hollow. Tslamaina’s moons
were masked by cloud and most of the light in the depression
came from the central bonfire. He watched the motionless
guard for another half hour before he could be certain the

Na was

asleep.

“What must

do, Teacher?” asked Yulour.
“Just stay here and keep quiet, and wait for us.”

“Be

I

careful, Teacher.”

“I will, Yulour.”

come down

thee need me,” he added anxiously
as Etienne slid on his belly over the top.
“I know you will. You’re a good friend, Yulour.”
“I thank thee, Teacher,” whispered the porter, over“I will

if

whelmed by
I

I

the compliment.
Etienne half-slid, half-crawled down the incline. The tribe
dozed like the dead beneath the rocky overhang. He checked
his wrist. It was twelve degrees below freezing. He was quite
comfortable but he worried about Lyra. If the temperature

j

I

I

!

i

I

fell

much

further she

would have

difficulty

walking

until

he

could get her into her own thermal suit, which was stuffed
into Yulour’ s copious backpack.
He reached for a purchase only to see the rock tumble
down the slope. It came to rest against the back of the cage.
The guard did not stir. Etienne followed the stone as rapidly
as practicable, assuming a kneeling position behind the cage.
“Lyra,” he whispered intently, shifting his gaze from her
to the guard and back again. Bodies stirred within the cave

J

but no one rose from sleep.
[

181 ]

“Lyra!” Her head jerked around in the darkness and she
shoved her hair aside.
“Etienne?”
“Who the hell else would it be?” He pulled one of the
pistols

and carefully adjusted the

setting after quickly in-

specting the lashings holding the cage together. “I’m going
to try and bum through the material holding these bones.
Be ready, for God’s sake!”
He started working, the pistol’s faint hum absorbed by
the wind overhead and the crackle of the central fire. Lyra
moved quietly to wake her fellow prisoners. They had enough
presence of mind to keep quiet, save for one who whispered
in surprise, “It is the mate of the stranger who is with us!”

Lyra shushed him.
“Here, as Etienne cuts these loose, take them up and lay
them somewhere aside.” The Tsla moved silently to comply.
He smiled to himself. Fatalistic in philosophy the Tsla
might be, but clearly that didn’t extend to sitting dumbly by
if the chance of escape presented itself.
“Etienne, what the devil are you doing here?”
“Saving fair maiden from an incipient barbeque.” Another
lashing split and he started on the bonds above it. One of
the Tsla males gripped the base of the loosened section to
prevent its falling.
Lyra sat clear of the humming pistol, shook her head.
“Somehow I never thought you capable of the heroic gesture,
Etienne.”
“Lyra, shut up. I’m busy.” Another series of sinews gave
way and he started on those holding a second bar as the Tsla
carefully removed the first.
The second bone popped clear easily and again the Tsla
moved it aside. Lyra was first out and Etienne caught her
as she stumbled. Her muscles were numb from cold and

confinement.

For an instant he thought she might have suffered some
unseen injury. She quickly dispelled that concern.
“I’m in one piece, though I thought I’d suffocate in that
damn stuffsack.” The Tsla were filing out wordlessly behind
her, looking around in bewilderment. “We’re up on the Guntali, aren’t we? The sack was opaque, so I couldn’t get any
bearings.” He nodded. “No wonder I’m so cold.”
[

182 ]

“Fill

me

“We

are grateful,” said the senior Tsla

on the details later,’’ he advised
anxiously past her toward the dozing guard.

I

in

her, looking

among the

cap-

tives.

“Be grateful when we’re safely back in Jakaie,” Etienne
admonished him. “Follow me and stay low” He started up
the slope on his belly, glancing back once to make sure Lyra
was on his heels. “You need any help?”
“No. It just feels good to be moving again.”
As soon as they dropped over the dark side of the depression he extracted her thermal suit from the supplies. She
was so cold it took her three times as long as normal to climb
inside.
“I

am gladdened to see thee, Teacher. We feared for thee.”

She looked

i

i

I

Yulour in mild surprise, peering past him
to see the others who had come with her husband. Her
at

disappointment in the darkness was evident.
“Etienne, you wouldn’t believe the habits of these Na.
Their cruelty isn’t studied, of course. It’s simply their way.
But their victims suffer needlessly. As a matter of fact I’d
have to say that based on preliminary studies which admittedly were not carried out under the best of conditions, they
have no redeeming social characteristics whatsoever.”
“You’ll think of some as soon as you get warmed up.
You’ll end up with a balanced report. You always do.”
“Maybe, but I don’t feel I’m in a very balanced mood
right

now.”

When the last of the Tsla captives reached bottom Etienne
addressed them hastily. “As you know, I am Learned One
Lyra’s mate. We’re going back to Jakaie. Stay together and
no talking unless it’s absolutely necessary. We have to travel
as rapidly as possible. If anyone gets lost or falls behind for
any reason ...”
“We know what we must do,” said the senior Tsla. “But
we do not know the way back to our home.”
“We do, so stay close by us.” Holding Lyra’s hand tightly
in his own he turned to follow Yulour. The rest of the Tsla
trailed behind in perfect silence.

[

183 ]

fxivj
They shambled on through

the cold and wind all the rest
of that night, following Etienne’s lead. He glanced constantly
at the instrumentation on his wrists, but was glad he could
rely on Yulour’s sense of smell for confirmation of their
course. The rising sun was welcomed not only for the warmth

provided but as a further aid to direction. Aracunga was
a more reliable beacon than any readout on a tiny screen.
it

They were well down

the

trail

toward home when a boul-

der the size of a small house fell past them in awesome
silence, to pulverize a basaltic outcrop below. It missed
Etienne and Lyra by a few meters.
Instinctively he pressed his back against the cliff. “Landslide,” he muttered.
Yulour made a quick, sharp gesture of disagreement,
looked upward. “Na slide.”
A glance toward the Guntali showed a single enormous
hirsute shape leaning over the edge, gesticulating angrily and
stomping the ground. The mouth made sounds that were
swallowed by the wind. Then the figure vanished.
“Coming after us,” Etienne commented with unexpected
[

184 ]

calm. “I'd hoped they wouldn’t. I wonder how many of them
there are.” He pulled on Lyra’s hand. “Can you run?”
She clutched her pistol firmly, nodded.
“Remember now, hon, we don’t want to harm any more
of the native population than is absolutely necessary,” he
said dryly.

“Pardon

my

lack of objectivity.

The

rotten cannibalistic

bastards.”

“No

time for gory details, love.”
Trying to make as much speed as possible, they raced
down the pathway. No more small mountains crashed down
around them, but by the time they reached the base of the
cliff they could hear bellows and roars behind them.
Twists and turns in the descending trail made it impossible
to tell exactly how near their pursuers were. Voices could
carry a long way in the clear mountain air. Then they broke
out of the talus at the base of the cliff and found themselves
running along a well-beaten road.
The Tsla who’d joined Lyra in escaping shouted warnings
to the farmers who toiled in the fields. Tools were flung
aside, seedlings left in pans as everyone ran for the safety
of Jakaie.
Yulour put a hand on Etienne’s shoulder, bade him turn
as he pointed with the other. “There, Teacher!”
Etienne saw, no raiding party this time, but the entire
tribe stumbling down the cliff face in pursuit. Females and
awkward adolescents brought up the rear. Evidently the rescue was an outrage sufficient to infuriate the Na beyond
reason.

They ran slowly but with ground-eating

strides.

Out

in

and much too close behind were males hefting clubs
bigger than a man.
“Come on, move it!” he shouted at the farmers who had
begun to lag behind.
“We’ll make it with plenty of time, Etienne.” As Lyra
spoke her right foot located the only hole in the road and
she went down in a heap, immediately rolling over on her
back to clutch her ankle. Pain replaced confidence on her
front

face as she cursed her clumsiness.
“Not broken,” she was finally able to gasp out.
“I know that, stupid,” he said as felt gingerly of the
[

185 ]

al-

ready swelling knot. He looked past her. He couldn’t tell if
the Na had seen her go down. The farmers and escapees

were nearing the town wall now.
“Hurry, Teacher,” Yulour implored him. “There’s

little

time.”

“Get up, Lyra,” Etienne ordered her. She threw him a
look of anger mixed with determination. Using his shoulder
and an arm for support, she struggled to her feet. They
limped toward Jakaie. The agony in her ankle started her
crying silently, but she didn’t stop.
Etienne did so, however. “Too slow. We’ll never make
it.” He bent under her and her pain gave way to startled
surprise.

“Etienne!” She was across his shoulders. “Put me down!
You’ll end up killing both of us.”
“Lyra, you talk too much.” She bounced awkwardly on
his shoulders as he ran. There was no pain, but the considerable weight soon had him panting heavily. Without the
supplementary breather’s steady flow of pure oxygen he
couldn’t have done it.
“Teacher, can I help thee?” Yulour waddled alongside
them. Something went whomp! against the earth off to their
left, smashing a small bush to kindling. The Na club was
much larger than the unlucky shrub.
Etienne wanted to look back to see how close their pursuers were but he couldn’t spare the wind. The city gate was
very near now, the repaired entrance gaping invitingly. This
time armed Tsla waited on the walls, waving and shouting
to urge him on. Encouragement was one thing he didn’t need.
Already his legs felt like lead determined to sink toward the
center of the planet and Lyra, lovely sweet Lyra ... if only
she were a little less voluptuous.
Something struck the small of his back and he almost
went down. But he staggered, regained his balance and ran
dull flame began to bum just above his coccyx as
on.
waiting hands reached out to relieve him of his burden.
They set Lyra down alongside him as he sucked at the
last of the breather’s air, breathing like a man who’d just
finished a long underwater swim. Shouts and yells penetrated
his exhaustion.

A

[

186 ]

“I’m too

tired to sit up,”

he wheezed. “What’s happen-

ing?”

“Don’t ask me. I’m the one with the sprained ankle,

re-

member?”
“Pity you couldn’t have sprained your mouth.”
“Be of good cheer. Teacher,” said the solicitous Yulour.

He moved

toward the gate.
Long moments passed with Lyra massaging her ankle and

“I will find out.”

j

Etienne slowly regaining his strength.
“That was a dumb thing to do,” she finally told him. “You
could have gotten a hernia.”
“Excuse me,” he said between gasps. “Next time I’ll drop

you.”

“Next time I shoot myself before I let them take me.”
She saw the expression on his face and looked away. “So
it’s bad xenology. I can’t help it. I have feelings too. What
jon earth made you try something like that, anyway?” When
he didn’t reply she pushed at his shoulder. “Roll over. I want
to see your back. I saw the tail end of that club hit you.”
With an effort he turned onto his side. Her fingers moved
across his waist, making him wince.
“Could have busted your spine,” she murmured gently.
“You’ve got a hell of a bruise.”
“I can tell. Where’s Yulour?”
She looked toward the gate. “I don’t see him, but so far
it looks good. There’s still a lot of yelling and screaming on
the walls, but the new gate looks much stronger than the old
lone.” Her eyes returned to him. “You’re an idiot, Etienne.
i

I

You saved my

life.”

“That was the idea.”

“Why?”

He slowly rolled back, stared blankly at the sky. “Damned
if I

know.” His face contorted as the

fire in his

new

back spread

nerves.
“It never ceases to amaze me, Etienne, how often you
can do the right thing and then say just the opposite. Stay
there. I’ll get something from the boat.” She started to rise,
flopped back heavily. “I forgot. I can’t walk.”
“What a sensible, always alert pair we make,” he murmured. “If only our sponsors could see us now.” He would
to

have laughed

if

he hadn’t been so
[

187 ]

tired.

“Thank you

for saving

my

life,

Etienne, whatever your

motives.”

“Anytime. Don’t mention
me sit up?”

it.

Do you

think

you can help

warned him.
Several faces were suddenly staring down at them. One
was familiar.
“Hello, Tyl.” Etienne clasped his knees toward his chest,
trying to alleviate some of the pain in his back. The nerves

“Be

careful,” she

there argued with every millimeter of effort.

Tyl executed a most profound sideways Tsla bow. “We
did not expect thee to return. Learned Etienne. Thee were
in the right and we in the wrong, and most grateful am I to
be proven so. It was a grand thing thee did. Songs will
commemorate thy deed. And this one’s, whose service is
unprecedented.” He indicated Yulour, standing in front of
the crowd.
“I don’t understand, Teacher,” Yulour said.
“Dear, sweet, brave Yulour,” Lyra murmured. “I know
thy customs and why thy kinfolk did not come, but why did
thee?”
“It seemed a good thing to do, so I did it.” He looked
embarrassed.
“I’ll make it up to you,” she told him.
“Make ... up to me? I do not understand.”
“I know you don’t. Do you understand what I mean when
I say that Etienne and I thank thee very deep?”

“Thee are welcome,” the porter replied gravely. “Now I
must go and find my friends.”
Tyl watched him go. “A peculiar soul, but many-times
blessed,

“He

I

think.”

certainly has our blessings,” said Lyra.

toward the wall.

She looked
The shouting had ceased and the Tsla were

leaving the top of the palisade, chatting easily

among them-

selves.
“It

seems the

Na

have given up and gone away.

Do you

think they might attack again?”

“They vented evil gestures and many shouts,” Tyl informed them, “but I think they will not come back for some
time. They are not animals and know they cannot break into
[

188 ]

fOl

Jakaie without

first

surprising

its

people. This time there

was

no surprise, so they have gone.”
“So we’re safe?” Etienne mumbled.
“Yes, all are safe now. Jakaie owes thee a debt for the
dead thee have restored to them alive.”
Dl

Etienne’s back improved slowly under Lyra’s ministering
^ hands. The worst of it was the body wrap she made him
wear. It enveloped him from beneath the armpits to below
his waist and he walked like a recently resurrected mummy.
Among the prosaic Tsla the novelty of the rescue quickly
wore off and they returned to their daily chores. But there
were frequent, shy visits from those he’d saved and from
their relatives and friends to thank him.
The debt they owed, they insisted, could never be repaid.
(Until Tyl came aboard the hydrofoil one morning to see the
patient.

“There was a meeting.” The temperature in the main cabin
ojwas seventy-five and Homat sat shivering off in a comer.
“What kind of meeting?” Lyra asked.
“A community meditation. I am sorry thee were not incited, but there was no time. I have made the people aware
of thy problem. Thy wooden undercarriage is still serviceable, is it not?”
“The wheels haven’t fallen off, if that’s what you mean,”
Etienne replied.
“There are not here the large draft animals like the Mai
have. No vroqupii. There are lekkas but they are for riding,
not for pulling. Unlike Turput, here the land is cultivated
mostly by hand. But we are Tsla. The Tsla are strong.” He
flexed both arms and they saw the muscles ripple beneath
,

short fur.

“All Jakaie will assist. Will it not be easier to lower thy
boat back to the bottom of the Barshajagad than it was to
bring it up?”

Etienne considered their guide’s words, trying hard to
restrain any excitement. Excitement hurt his back.
“Sure it would be easier, but still a difficult descent.”
“I have talked long with Ruu-an and the other elders.
There is a way north of here that descends to the Skar and
bypasses the Topapasirut. They say also that the way is
[

189 ]

longer and gentler than that which climbs the side canyon
we used. They say, Etienne and Lyra, that it can be done.”
“Who am I to dispute Ruu-an?” said Etienne. He felt like
shouting but restrained himself lest he strain something.

“When can we

start

down?”

“Soon. The families of those thee saved demand the honor
of taking up the ropes nearest the spirit boat, where the work
will be the hardest.”
“Our thanks go out to them,” Etienne said.
“Thee can thank them thyself.” Tyl readied himself to
leave. “It will take some time to organize provisions and find
the rope sufficient to secure thy craft. Thee will have ample
time to thank thy new friends and repair thy back.”
“Wait a minute,” said Lyra, frowning. “What about the
Na? What if they come back when the town is nearly deserted, or catch everyone out in the open?”
“This too was discussed during meditation. They will not
come near Jakaie for a long time, so embarrassing to them
was their defeat. And after a few days of descent the temperature will grow much too hot for them to follow us.”
“We won’t argue with that, will we, dear?” He stared
meaningfully at Lyra.
As usual, she wasn’t intimidated. “If the townsfolk feel
confident of their security, I don’t see why we shouldn’t
permit them to bounce you all the way down to the river.”
In contrast to the agonizingly difficult haul up from the
bottom of the Barshajagad, the descent to a rocky beach
northwest of Jakaie and the bulk of Aracunga mountain was

almost relaxing. There were a few rough places, easily surmounted by the hydrofoil’s repellers, but as the Tsla promised the slope was far gentler than the steep side canyon
route on the southern side.
Chanting in unison as they leaned into the heavy ropes,
the Tsla were able to lower the boat on its wheeled cradle
faster than the Redowls expected. It was hard to imagine
the vroqupii and their Brul doing the job any more efficiently
than the citizens of Jakaie. It helped that there was none of
the sense of competition among the townsfolk that there had
been among the Mai. Homat grudgingly conceded that sometimes cooperation was worth more than skill and strength.
[

190 ]

I

When
hull

wooden

was removed from the
and the boat bobbed once more in the waters of the
at last the

cradle

Skar, Etienne passed among the villagers trying to thank
personally each and every Tsla for their help.
Ruu-an chided him. “Too many thanks If thee would truly
thank us, thee may share thy knowledge with us when thee
return this way. We will be waiting to take you up and past
the Topapasirut a second time.”
No obstacles ahead to hold us back now, Etienne thought
excitedly. No more blank spaces on the topographies, no
second Topapasirut. According to the Mai, the Barshajagad
began to widen once more north of that place. For the moment they still floated between immense sheer walls, but
now that the birthplace of river devils lay behind them the
stark cliffs no longer seemed quite so forbidding.
The seven of them reboarded and the Redowls settled
into their boat with a sense of relief. It had become their
home and refuge, and it was good to be surrounded once
more by familiar objects and the comforts of an advanced
.

technology.
As Etienne

the boat float free in the current, the townsfolk assembled on the shoreline set up a plaintive, haunting
chant of farewell, as different a music from the whirling
frenzy of the Mai as Ligeti is from Gregorian chant. The
swift current pushed the hydrofoil out into the center of the
let

river.

Lyra stood on the foredeck alongside Tyl, executing with
him the Tsla posture of good-bye. The song of farewell was
beginning to fade with distance when Lyra turned and called
to her husband. “Don’t you think that’s enough? Let’s move.”
He made a face up at her. Suddenly she was concerned.
“What do you think I’m trying to do?”
She pressed her face to the plexalloy. “What do you mean
you’re trying?” They were accelerating steadily, but in the
wrong direction. Only the boat’s internal stabilizers kept
them from spinning in helpless circles like a leaf caught in
a flash flood.
“Everything’s functioning except the intake feed.”
“Dammit!” She rushed for the nearest gangway.
As she looked aft she saw the canyon narrowing further
behind them, forming the immense granitic funnel which
[

191 ]

”

Etienne had theorized constituted the upper limits of the Topapasirut. In the distance and coming rapidly closer she could
make out thickening mist and the first faint, threatening rumble of water attacking rock. She dropped through the gangway and in seconds stood alongside her husband.
“Everything checks out, everything. Except the intake
feed. Every time I try to open her wide she locks shut on
*****
IH6

”
•

“Emergency override?”
“Forget it. I’m still trying, though.”
“Repellers?”
“No way. We used our stored power during the descent
from Jakaie. We need time to recharge or else we can recharge by moving Upriver. Of course, if we could move
Upriver we wouldn’t need to recharge.” He worked rapidly
at the diagnostic computer, canceling unhelpful replies to his
queries. Unfortunately, those were the only type of reply he
could extract.
The rumbling astern was becoming thunder. Dense mist
enveloped the narrow cleft of the canyon. He switched the
stem scanner to sonic and tridee black-and-white graphics
appeared on the screen as ultrasound penetrated the obscuring mist. In a very few minutes the current would slam
the helpless boat into the unyielding sheer cliff that was the
upside-down waterfall, the Topapasirut. Fragments of the
hydrofoil would boil out of the water Downriver, to be wondered at by any Mai who encountered them on nameless
beaches. Of the crew there would be only a memory. Nothing
so fragile as flesh and blood would survive the coming concussion.

The boat was enveloped

in

a storm as the river rained

toward the sky.

“Do something!” Lyra shouted above

the crash of the

water.

“Do something

yourself!”

She eyed him a moment before turning to disappear below. Her voice reached him via the engine room intercom.
“Everything looks okay. The fuel cells are produc
“I can see that on the readout!”
“Just letting you know what I see down here. The engine’s
quiet, and
wait a minute.”

—

—

[

192 ]

“That’s about what we’ve got left.” The boat vibrated
anxiously beneath his feet. Would they know when they hit
the cliff? He couldn’t begin to calculate their velocity.
“Try it now!” Lyra ordered him.
He ran numbly through the restart procedure, was startled
when the Function light turned green. He stabbed the accelerator, bringing thrust up to maximum.
For an eternity they hung motionless in the vortex, suspended in fog between open water and oblivion. Then very
slowly the hydrofoil began to creep Upriver. To Etienne their
progress seemed infinitesimal. His anxiety was heightened
by the knowledge that whatever had shut down the flow of
water to the jet once could do so again at any moment.
Gradually their velocity increased to the point where the
boat could rise up on its hydrofoils. As the river fell away
beneath the hull, relinquishing its grasp, they started to make
some real speed. Thunder faded behind them.
As they left the mist Lyra emerged from belowdecks. Her
hair was strung like paint across her face, alternating with
rivulets of sweat. She stank of Skar.
“What did you do down there?” He spoke without looking
at her, refusing to take his eyes off the controls lest something else fail before they were out of danger.
“Emergency surgery.” She slumped into a seat. “Very
complicated.” She held up something in her right hand. As
he turned to look he saw that she was wearing heavy-duty
insulated work gloves.
half dozen glistening worms twisted in her grip. They
had dark heads.
“These were glued to the conduit just above the main feed
to the jet. Watch this.” She held up a small diagnostic probe
loud
with her left hand, touched it to the tail of one worm.
buzzing filled the cockpit and the readout on the front of the

A

A

tool

went berserk.

“Local relative of the terran gymnotids. Generates quite
a current for its size. They must have thought they’d found
themselves a nice new home when they slipped in through
the mesh intake strainers on the foils. Every time you ordered
the boat to open the intake feed they responded with a corresponding jolt. No wonder the computer couldn’t locate the
source of the short-out in the system. It was external. You’d
[

193 ]

order the feed opened and these

little

cuties

would short

it

countermanding the directive.”
She rose and turned to open one of the ports in the cockpit. With great deliberation she flung her slimy acquisitions
shut,

as far out into the river as possible. Then she closed the port
and spoke toward the stem.
“You can come out now, Homat.”
Hesitantly their Mai guide emerged from the heated storage locker in which he had secreted himself. “We’re not
going to die, de-Lyra?”
“No, we’re not going to die. Not today, anyway. The
spirit boat is functioning normally again.”
He crept out to join them, still encased in his cold-weather
gear to combat the cabin’s air conditioning. Soon that air
conditioning would no longer be required. That would be no
comfort to Homat, who would continue to pile on clothing
the nearer they drew to Tslamaina’s arctic circle.
The population of Jakaie was still assembled along the
riverbank. As the spirit boat reemerged from the mouth of
destruction, alien voices expressed relief. The villagers lined
up quickly and once more the occupants of the hydrofoil
were treated to the chant of farewell as Tyl and his companions performed the gestures of good-bye.
“Calm acceptance,” Lyra murmured, “no matter what our
fate.” She was standing on the foredeck alongside their Tsla
friends. “Tell me, Tyl, what would the reaction have been
if we hadn’t come back out?”
“There would have been no reaction that thee could have
seen, save that after a suitable time they would have begun
a funeral chant instead of one of farewell.”
“There didn’t seem to be any panic as we slipped downstream.”
“Why should there be? There was nothing they could do
to help us,” he explained patiently. “Thee should know,
Lyra, that we are not given to violent displays of emotion
in public.”
“I recall. Would any of them have grieved for us in private?”
“I imagine so. But they could do nothing to help us.”
“Just as nothing could be done to help those who’d been
taken by the Na.” Etienne spoke from inside the cockpit,
[

194 ]

addressing his wife in terranglo. “I don’t care what the level
of mental serenity is among these people, they’re not going
to make much progress until they dump this fatalism. If they
don’t watch out, the Mai are going to push forward to develop a complete, advanced technological civilization. The
Tsla will end up becoming wards of the Mai, just as it will
be the Mai who will push out to tame the Na and the Guntali.”
“Specious argument for radical change,” Lyra shot back.
“The Tsla are content as they are, much happier than the

Mai.”
“Sure, and the ancient Polynesians were happier and more
content than the caucasoids who ministered among them,

and we remember what happened

to their culture.”

The Tsla

are a
different race, occupying aradically different ecological niche.

“Etienne, the analogy doesn’t apply here.

not the same thing at all.” And she launched wholeheartedly into a lengthy dissertation on history and anthropology that both Homat and Tyl desperately wished they
could understand.
It’s

Upriver, according to the best information available to
Ruu-an and the elders of Jakaie, two last immense tributaries
fed into the Skar. the Madauk and the Rahaeng. Beyond that
lay the far narrower but still impressive Upper Skar, and

unknown

lands.

Several hundred kilometers above the Topapasirut the
geology of the land altered radically. The gorge of the Barshagajad widened and the river rose in frequent steps, reducing the depth of the canyon. The Redowls were constantly
being wakened from sleep by the insistent beeping of the
computer. Since the boat could not negotiate rapids on autopilot, Etienne or Lyra would stagger sleepily forward to
run the whitewater or lift the hydrofoil past it on repellers.
The steady rumble of the rapids was in stark contrast to
the silent river south of Aib. At night Tslamaina’s four moons
transformed the streaks of white water into thousands of
pale crystalline tentacles. Not all was difficult, however.
There were quiet stretches of relatively calm water of great

beauty.

They began
Skatandah.

As

to relax for the first time since leaving the
the temperature grew chillier and the river
[

195 ]

ancient bed they encountered fewer signs of settlement, as the land was fit only for Mai hunters and gatherers. Occasionally they saw a few ramshackle houses
clustered around poorly irrigated plots. No elaborate ter-

climbed

its

races had been built there.
Shaped by a harsh land, the local Mai were a hardier breed
than their southern cousins. They were also open and much
more honest. Or perhaps they were just so startled by the
appearance of the hydrofoil and its strange inhabitants that
the urge to thieve never crossed their minds.
“I’m not sure that’s it at all,” Lyra theorized one day.
“The truism seems to hold among nonhuman primitives as
well as among our own kind that the poorer the people and
the more isolated their homes, the more trustworthy and
helpful they are. Hardship seems to breed a need for companionship which extends to lending assistance to any who

come your way.”
Etienne did not argue with her because he was more interested in the locals’ openness and lack of fear. They were
startled but there was none of the fearful paranoia or jealous
awe the Redowls had encountered farther south. He surmised it was because everything was new to these pioneers.
For all they knew the Redowls came not from another world
but from some unknown distant city-state bordering the
Groalamasan. When one shares a world with two other intelligent races it’s not difficult to accept the existence of a
third.

They expected to encounter a few Tsla villages, but Ruuan told them to expect none, and the information supplied
by the elders of Jakaie turned out to be accurate. Whether
the abandonment of the northern latitudes by the Tsla was
a decision of choice or due to some unknown circumstances,
Lyra could not determine. Homat and Tyl argued about it
long into the nights, with the Mai staking a claim for greater
adaptability among his kind and Tyl retreating into calm
conviction that a perfectly good reason existed for shunning
such a barren land.

A considerable surprise awaited everyone aboard the boat,
however, when they reached the confluence of the three
great rivers. Where the Madauk and Rahaeng joined their
[

196 ]

volume

to that of the Skar, several small villages
trading posts, no more.
It

was not

their existence or location that

travelers, but rather the population

and hunters mingled

had grown,

shocked the

—Mai and Tsla traders

working side by side with a lack

freely,

of self-consciousness that was stunning when compared to
the uneasy peace maintained by their southern relatives. The
need to work together to survive in a harsh land had overwhelmed ancient suspicions and inhibitions. Homat and Tyl

were

much by

the implications as by the reality.
“It bodes well for the future,” Lyra commented. “Maybe
when the Mai gain the technology that will enable them to
startled as

and work

and the Tsla the ability to
move more freely through the humid river valleys, they’ll
discover this living example of racial cooperation waiting up
here to show them the way.”
live

in colder climates

“They cooperate here

in

order to survive,” Etienne ar-

gued. “Without that external pressure, technological advancement may only heighten ancient conflicts, not solve

them.”
“You’re such a

damn

pessimist!” she said angrily.

He

shrugged. “I look at things the way they are, not the
way I want them to be.”
“And so do I, or are you making one of your frequent
criticisms of my objectivity?”
“It’s just that it’s so much easier to be objective about
this.” He hefted a sample of dark schist chipped from the
riverbank where they had anchored inshore the day before.
“On Earth this would be called precambrian or Vishnu schist.
It’s much older than its terran equivalent, however. There’s
nothing subjective about it.”
“Lucky you.”
“Nobody forced you into xenology. You chose it.”
“I sure did, because it’s a damn sight more exciting and
interesting when the subjects of your studies can talk back
to you and help you with your research. Better that than a
life of drudgery and dirt. My work provides me with new
revelations every day.”
“All well and good, so long as

involved with your revelations.”
[

197 ]

you don’t get personally

Too

late to retract,

he

thought furiously. Once more his mouth had moved faster
than his brain.
She eyed him strangely. “Now what’s that supposed to

mean?”

He

escape into silence, stared at the rock walls
about them. The cliffs on either side of the river were barely
a thousand meters above the water now.
“When we first arrived in Turput,” he mumbled, concentrating on his instruments instead of looking at her, “you
spent an awful lot of time,” he hesitated over the right word,
“meditating with Tyl.”
“It was very instructive,” she replied. “I’m still not following you, Etienne.”
“I thought maybe you were diving a little too deeply into
your work.”
“I don’t
” she broke off, gaping at him. Then her expression twisted into a smile. “Well I’ll be damned. You’re jealous of Tyl, aren’t you? Jealous of a primitive mammalian
tried to

—

alien.”
“I didn’t say that,”

he snapped quickly. “There you are,

jumping to conclusions again, seeing things the way you want
to see them.”
“Well you can relax, Etienne.” The smile grew wider.
“Among the Tsla the length and shape of oversized probosces are important sexual characteristics, but a flexible
shnoz holds no attraction for me whatsoever.”
His head jerked round and he stared at her. “I just said
you were spending a lot of time with him, I didn’t mean to
you’ve got a dirty mind, Lyra.”
imply that
“You mean a dirty husband. Etienne, I can’t believe you.
I don’t know whether to be flattered or insulted.”
“Oh hell,” he muttered, embarrassed to the soles of his
feet, “be busy.” Footfalls sounded behind them. “Anyway,
our passengers are coming in.”
“So what? They can’t understand terranglo.”
“Don’t be so sure. I’ll give the Tsla this; they’re quick
on the uptake. Don’t be too surprised if we learn that they
can draw a few inferences from our private conversations,
especially when their names are mentioned.”
“Not just a dirty mind, a dirty paranoid mind,” she mur-

—

[

198 ]

mured, but she broke off when Tyl and
dled

of

his

companions trun-

in.

Homat was sandwiched between two of the porters, a ball
thick cloth and fur among which only eyes and mouth

were visible. “I can’t go outside anymore, de-Etienne,” he
whimpered. “No more.”

/

[

199 ]

fxvj
Days passed and

the temperature

fell

slowly, but outside

the hydrofoil the climate was working dramatic changes on
the landscape. Though sheets of frozen water hung from the

much reduced

cliffs,

hundreds of

fast

streams flowed into

the Skar.

Homat was squatting in the main cabin behind the cockpit,
heavily bundled and warm but far from comfortable.
Etienne had been mulling the problem for several days.
Now he spoke to their Mai guide. “Maybe we can fix something up for you, Homat.”
“No matter, de-Etienne. I will not go outside any more.”
“Lyra, what about trying to fit him with one of your spare
thermal suits? You’ve got two backups. You two are about
the same height, though you’re much more—”
“Watch it,” she said wamingly from her seat.

Rubensesque. Homat would swim in a suit, but couldn’t
you concoct some kind of strap so that the sensors would
stay close enough to his skin to function, and adjust the
thermostat for Mai comfort?”
[

200]

see what I can do.” She escorted the nervous Homat
down to the lower deck.
Several hours later they reemerged. The thermal suit ballooned around Homat’ s arms and legs but she’d managed to
“I’ll

secure the fabric around his torso.
“It’s still a little loose. I had a hard time convincing him
he couldn’t wear his furs inside because the thermal sensors
had to have some skin contact. He finally gave in, but I
thought he was going to turn blue before he finally got out
of his old attire and into the suit. It wasn’t hard to adjust
the circuitry.” She put a hand inside one sleeve, pushing
back the elastic material. She drew her fingers back hastily.
“Are you sure you’re okay like this, Homat? It’s hot

enough

in there to

bum.”

Their guide was jubilant. “For the first time in many many
days I am truly comfortable,” he replied. “So delighted I
am! Thank you, de-Lyra, thank you all much!”
“What about you, Tyl?” Etienne asked the Tsla who rested
on the floor behind him. “Will you and the others be able
to handle the weather here if it’s necessary to go outside?”
“We have our double capes and hoods, Etienne, and we
can tolerate colder climes than thee. We will be all right, as
long as it does not prove necessary to remain outside for too
long.”

Etienne unexpectedly leaned forward and the hydrofoil
lurched sharply to port. “Sorry. Instinctive reaction.” He
pointed. “What’s that?”
small mountain stood in the shallow water by the riverbank. The mountain had a half dozen legs, two of which
were busy in the water. As they watched in fascination the

A

multi-ton beast brought up a twisting hundred-kilo fish in
hooked claws, transferred the catch to a long snout lined
with sharp triangular teeth. For so massive a creature it
moved with blinding speed. Long black hair covered the
entire body and dragged in the water.

Eyes with narrow pupils peered out at them from beneath
bony ridges. Etienne edged the hydrofoil toward shore for
a closer look. As he did the beast turned with a deep grunt
then galloped away on all six legs, its catch clutched firmly
between extended jaws.
“I have never seen anything like that before, de-Etienne.”
[

201 ]

As he spoke Homat made

rapid protective signs across his

chest and stomach.
“I have,” Tyl said softly. “A Hyral. I have seen only two
such before and both were dead, having fallen over the edge
of the Guntali.”
As they stared the hirsute fisher crested a slight slope,

where

dropped its catch between its mate and two massive
roly-poly cubs before turning to throw a penetrating, highpitched roar toward the boat.
Lyra was staring through her recorder as she committed
the new discovery to their records. “Family group. I wondered what else the Na ate.”
“Speaking of the Na,” Etienne said as he steered the
hydrofoil back into the middle of the river again, “it’s cold
enough here for them to come right down to the water, but
it

we

haven’t seen any.”
“Perhaps they stay away from the river out of superstition, some kind of taboo.”
“I wouldn’t think that. Not with all the fish to be had in
these waters.”

“Maybe

the air’s too thick here.

as the Guntali near Turput.
still

We’re not nearly as high

wouldn’t matter. The river’s
wide and deep enough to protect us.” She looked
It

thoughtful.

“Something

have to be done about the Na, Etienne.
We’ve seen proof that Mai and Tsla can work together, but
the Na appear too primitive and combative to be brought
into any worldwide interracial process without extensive education and a great deal of care. Just because I’m not fond
of them doesn’t mean I want to see the other two dominant
will

races exterminate them.
“They’re not animals. They’re intelligent and have developed a rudimentary society. If you consider the amount

of territory they control then a case could be made that they
and not the Mai or Tsla are Tslamaina’s dominant life form.”
“I’m glad we don’t have to make the ultimate decisions,”
he replied. “Someone else will have to decide whether it’s
right to intervene in local affairs to protect the future of the
Na, and that’s a long way down the road.”
*

*
[

202 ]

*

ii

!

Though the Skar’ s course twisted in a steady curve farther

eastward, they continued to travel north toward the planet’s
sole ice cap. The occasional appearance of the sun through
the uneasy clouds did little to warm them. Despite this Homat
spent an inordinate amount of time out on deck, luxuriating
in his thermal suit and the freedom it provided, a freedom
to laugh at temperatures that would have frozen an unpro-

Mai in minutes.
They saw evidence of

tected

the ice cap before they set eyes
jupon it. It announced itself as a brightening ahead, where
the ice reflected the sun back against the undersides of scud-

ding clouds. The next morning they lifted on repellers to
clear still another rapid, turned a bend in the river, and saw
the southernmost edge of the frozen rampart.
The once awesome canyon of the Barshajagad had been

reduced to a meandering river valley. Numerous waterfalls
tumbled down the melting edge of the cap. They would freeze
solid again during the night.
They did not have to trace

dozens of the streams to locate
the source of the river Skar. The much shrunken but still
navigable stream emerged from a huge hole in the wall of
|ice, having eroded a tunnel a hundred meters high at the
entrance. Etienne guided the hydrofoil in until it floated beneath the lip of the vast cavern. Then he carefully nudged
the boat ashore, scraping bottom several times before beach-

i

ij

on the gravel.
Overhead the ice had thinned and sunlight poured through
the translucent, frozen ceiling, tinting the ice a pale blue and
illuminating the river for a distance of several dozen meters
from the entrance. Then it was swallowed by cold night.
Cold water dripped from smooth icy stalactites, stinging the
upturned faces of the crew as it stood on the deck to examine the surroundings.
“What a beautiful place,” Lyra murmured. Somewhere a
faint echo concurred with her opinion.
The four Tsla kneeled in a circle, chanting and making
ceremony
signs. The Redowls waited respectfully until the
had concluded before Lyra inquired as to its purpose.

ing

give thanks,” Tyl explained. “We feel in our souls
far
a great warmth, as must thee, for thy journey has been
longer than ours.”

“We

[

203 ]

“We

couldn’t have made it without your help,” Etienne
told him, “and without the aid of your people.”
were
“All given freely in the pursuit of knowledge.
glad we could help.” Swd and Yij likewise expressed their
feelings, while Yulour stood nearby and looked on with be-

We

mused contentment.
“What do we do now?” Homat

inquired, peering out

through the eyeslits in the cloth that covered his face. “Do
we begin our return tomorrow? A long journey.”
“I know you’re anxious to go home, Homat, but we’ve
come all this way to see the source of the Skar and we’re
not leaving until we do so.”
Homat sounded puzzled. “But have done so, de-Etienne.”
He gestured at the spacious cavern and the distant darkness.
“What other source can there be?”
Etienne smiled as he turned to point into the blackness
beneath the ice. “This isn’t the river’s source. Somewhere
back there it emerges from the mass of the ice cap, probably
in the form of a hot spring. I can’t think of another mechanism which could have bored so deep a cave in the body
of the ice. I need to record it.”
Homat’ s eyes grew wide. “You can’t mean to go back in
there, de-Etienne! This is the top of the world. Who knows
what devils and monsters lie in wait for us in the night which
lives throughout the day?”
“Why should any lie in wait,” Lyra asked gently, “since
no one ever comes here? If any did live back in there they’d
long since have given up hope of any meals coming to visit
them.”
“You argue very plausibly, de-Lyra. My mind wishes to
believe you, but my insides are not convinced.”
“If you’d feel safer you can camp on the shore here and
wait for us to return. I doubt the river runs very far back,
hot springs or not.”
“No, no, I will come with you,” the Mai insisted bravely.
“I would rather do that than stay here alone. You are certain
there is not far to go?”
“I can’t be sure, but I’d be willing to bet we’ll have less
than an hour’s journey in the boat. If the water becomes too
shallow, we’ll travel the rest of the way in on repellers.”
[

204]

I

i

“Why do your words

not

make me

feel confident, de-

Etienne?”
“Relax, Homat.” He turned to Lyra. “When we reach the
source I want to take some core samples. This must be very
old ice and the geologic history of the planet is stored here,
conveniently waiting to be thawed out for study.”
Lyra offered no objection. Their goal was within reach.
Soon they would begin the long journey back to warmer
climes. Let Etienne enjoy his fieldwork for a day or two.
There was no reason to rush now that they’d arrived at their
intended and eventual destination.

looked to his right, deeper into the cavern. “There’s
a nice wide spot. I’m tired of rocking. The water there is
gentle and shallow. I’ll move us over and set the foils down
on the gravel. Be nice to sleep without rocking for a change.”
“Second the motion,” Lyra said. “It should be safe enough.
There’s no sign of carnivores about, no bones or dung on
the beach, and the water should keep any small vermin clear
of the boat, assuming this enviroment is benign enough to

He

permit their existence.”
to
“I’ll run a good charge through the hull. That ought

keep off any late-night visitors.”
“It would be delighted to sleep so quietly,” Tyl agreed.
“Then it’s settled. We owe ourselves the rest,” Etienne
declared. “First thing tomorrow morning we’ll go Upriver
to the source so I can get my samples. With luck this ice
may predate the collision that created the Groalamasan. That
will give me plenty to do on the way back Downriver.”
“You did enough griping about the heat down south to
back to it,” Lyra
fill a book, and now you can’t wait to get
chided.
“I’ve always been cold-natured, Lyra, you know that. It
doesn’t mean I enjoy sweating down to skin and bones,
though.” For a change the argument was friendly. In its own
way that was as great an accomplishment for the two of them
as was reaching the head of the Skar.
Lyra was sound asleep when the muffled scream woke
her. She blinked as her head lifted from the pillow and she
stared across the cabin. Soft green lights from ship s instrusoft wheeze alongside indicated
mentation lit the darkness.

A

that her

husband

still

slept.
[

205 ]

The scream had barely faded and she was beginning to
wonder if she’d dreamed it when suddenly a cluster of the
green lights changed to red and a warning horn started to
blare. Etienne woke instantly, slid off the bed and struggled
with his pants.
“False alarm?”
“I don’t know,” she told him, still straining to hear. “I
thought I heard something yell.” The horn continued its racket
as a soft knocking sounded at the door. Lyra opened it as
she fought with the seals of her blouse.
“What is happening?” Tyl asked sleepily. The remaining
Tsla clustered in the corridor behind him. “There are strange
noises outside and Swd thinks he smells something even
though we know we are protected from the air outside.”
“Noises and smells and you think you heard something,”
Etienne muttered as he sealed his coat. “That settles it.” He
pushed past Tyl on his way to the cockpit.
The light of three of Tslamaina’s four moons poured
through the transparent plexalloy. The horn continued to
shout as Etienne strained to check the instruments. “Don’t
see anything outside. No abnormal readings. We haven’t
moved from where I parked us yesterday evening and the
hull’s still electrified.”
“I’ll

from

check astern,” Lyra told him. She removed her pistol

its

charging

slot.

“Watch yourself,” Etienne admonished her.
With the Tsla following curiously she worked her way
aft. There was no sign of Homat, but that didn’t worry her.
Anything less than a complete upset of the boat would not
be enough to pry him from the comfort of his overheated
cubicle.

Cautiously she cracked the stem doorway. Freezing air
brought her all the way awake. The rumble and gurgle of
the shallow river was the only sound as she stepped out onto
the rear deck.
A glance forward showed only darkness. There was no
movement in the upper reaches of the cavern. Outside only
the moons moved in patient procession against the sky.
Something shorted out, she thought, wondering if some other
strange local critter was somehow playing havoc with their
instrumentation.
[

206]

j

A heavy

weight landed on her right shoulder. She went
down hard. The asynapt went flying across the deck. A big
chunk of dead log lay next to her.
The Na who had thrown it now peered over the gunwale,
eyes glittering in the moonlight. Several similar hairy faces
joined the first. One huge, muscular arm reached over the
top of the railing and Yij disappeared over the side.
Tyl and Yulour took Lyra under the arms and hauled her
toward the doorway. A second club flew toward them. It
landed short, booming across the metal deck.
Through the wash of pain that radiated from her shoulder
jLyra gasped, “The gun. .get my gun!” The source of the
scream must have been a Na who’d made contact with the
electrified hull as it tried to board the hydrofoil.
Careful not to touch the metal another Na took aim with
an axe. The bone blade was a meter across. At the last instant
Swd lunged into its path, to fall gushing blood and life back
jagainst Lyra, the weapon’s intended target. Yulour had to
kick the nearly split body aside as they fell inside.
Etienne was there to help, his eyes on Lyra’s shoulder
where the club had struck. She moaned when he touched
.

her.

He

!

closed the hatch, then ordered her to

move

her right

arm.
“Hurts like hell, but it works,” she told him.
“Rotate,” he said curtly. She did so, turning the arm palm
up, then palm down. “Lucky you.”
“Not so lucky,” she told him painfully. “My pistol’s outside. That’s twice I’ve lost it when I needed it most. Going
to have to work on my grip.” She glanced at Tyl. “Did you
see where it landed?”
“The lightning thrower flew through the air. I saw not
where it landed.”
“The little metal tool,” Yulour mumbled frantically, trying
to keep abreast of what was happening, “I saw where it is.”
“Why didn’t you go after it?” Lyra asked him. “I told you
to go after it.”

Yulour looked away, hun. “We were more concerned
with saving thee, Lyra,” Tyl told her. He looked at the porter
and said gently. “It’s all right, Yulour. Tell us where the
lightning thrower landed.”
[

207 ]

“In the water,” he said brightly.
“Oh hell!” Lyra looked up at her husband. “I’m sorry,
Etienne, I’m sorry. I never saw them. We went out on deck,
everything seemed normal, and then something landed on
me like back taxes.”
“Never mind that now. Just take it easy with that shoulder.”
Something went whang atop the cabin and everyone looked
upward, but the metal held. Thin as it was, the alloy was far
too tough to yield to mere bone and stone.
“What will we fight them with?” Tyl wondered. “It is dark
and they are very close.”
“We don’t have to fight them with anything, Tyl. Help
Lyra forward.”
Outside the cockpit was a choice scene from Dante. The
hydrofoil was surrounded by at least thirty of the towering
aborigines,
spitting

who were jumping up and down, howling and

and gesturing angrily

The Na carefully
and when one of them

at the boat.

avoided all contact with the hull
attempted to express his feelings by urinating on it, they no
longer tried that either. They did use long spears and the

ubiquitous clubs to hammer on the sides. The wood and
stone were poor conductors and the Na had discovered they
could flail away at the hull without risk to themselves.
As the Redowls watched, one especially massive warrior
tried to vault over the railing. He didn’t quite make it and
grabbed a hold with his hands. His lower body slammed into
the hull and he lit up in a shower of blue sparks. When the
thick fingers finally let loose the huge body splashed into
the river.
Etienne assumed the pilot’s chair, his fingers flying over
the controls.
muffled roar sounded aft as the engine came
to life. The hydrofoil lifted half a meter on its repellers and
shot forward, scattering Na. One didn’t dodge quicldy enough,
and a sickening thud sounded from the bow as the aborigine

A

was knocked

aside.

Nightscope screens came

alive, revealing the rest

of the
war party falling astern. Several bodies bobbed in the shallow water together with pieces of the individual run over by
the boat and a smaller silhouette: Yy. Angrily Etienne spun
the hydrofoil on

its

axis

and sent
[

208 ]

it

roaring

down on

their

attackers, plowing through the now panicky Na and sending
several additional bodies flying. The sound of metal meeting
flesh momentarily filled him with an unholy delight and he

damned himself even as he pivoted for another run.
As the Na threw their weapons aside and scrambled onto
the beach he bashed through the survivors two more times.
not even
turning to hurl an occasional insult back at their intended
prey. Etienne slowed as he beached the boat on the far side

By then they were in full retreat outside the cavern,

of the Skar.
“The middle of the river’s still deep enough here to prevent them from crossing after us,” he muttered. “Stay here.”
He took his pistol as Lyra assumed the pilot’s seat, favoring
her injured shoulder.
“One nighttime stroll on deck’s enough for this little lady.”
He smiled thinly at her by way of reply.
Tyl and Yulour followed him aft. The doorway opened
easily, readmitting the night. He had a sudden thought, closed
the door immediately and directed the Tsla to wait for him
as he disappeared belowdecks.
He reappeared carrying a pair of long metal rods, showed
one to Tyl. “These are for making seismic soundings in spots
inaccessible from the boat. Never
take them.” The Tsla did so.

mind what

I

mean, just

“Those are explosive charges on the tips. Small lightnings.
There are five charges on each pole. You press this here,”
and he showed the fire buttons to his companions, “after
you’ve touched the end of the pole to your target. They’re
difficult to use, but they were not designed as weapons.
They’ll be effective if you have to use them, though.”
“I understand, Etienne,” Tyl told him, lightly fingering
the fire button. Etienne turned to the other Tsla.

about you, Yulour? Do you understand? See, you
press there after you touch whatever you want to stop with
the other end of the pole.”
The porter eyed him blankly, his expression a bovine
mixture of sadness and confusion. Sighing, Etienne carefully
set the second pole to one side.
“Never mind. Stay close as we go outside.”
He cracked the doorway to the deck for the second time.
Outside it was silent as the departed, an unfortunate simile.

“How

[

209 ]

Holding the asynapt out in front of his body he edged out,
keeping low and nearly stumbling over the cleaved corpse
of Swd. The porter had been a faithful worker, obedient and
always ready to lend a hand. Now he was only a lesson in
Tsla anatomy. Etienne found he was too mad to be sickened

by the

sight.

Tyl and Yulour stayed tight on his heels. Three Na bodies
lay draped over the stem rail where they’d perished in a lastditch attempt to board the boat. They looked even bigger up
close than they did from a distance. Etienne inspected the
shore. Nothing

mouth of the

moved on the

gravel.

The

river itself and the

were equally devoid of life.
“Shouldn’t have let them surprise us like that. Always
underestimating. You’d think we’d have learned our lesson
by now.”
ice cavern

am

sorrowed,” Tyl said solemnly.
“Nothing for you to be sorry about, Tyl. The responsibility’s ours. We’re the ‘masters of superior technology.’”
He let out a rueful laugh. “Some joke. It’s just that we
haven’t seen Na or signs of Na since that day back in Turput
and I didn’t expect to encounter them this far north. Shows
how adaptable they are. I didn’t think. I’m the one who
should be sorrowed.” He gestured at Swd’s body.
“Now two more of your people have died.”
“Death comes to all of us eventually,” Tyl replied. “You
ask that I not sorrow for thee. Now I ask that thee sorrow
not for us. Swd and Yij achieved what they could not have
in a dozen lifetimes, because of thee and thy mate. Their
souls are grateful to thee, not angry.”
“Well I’m angry! Damned angry. Angry at myself, angry
.” the wind went out of him with a rush as Yulour struck
at
him in the midsection and drove him backwards. As a result
the small spear passed beneath his arm and pierced his side
instead of his spine.
Tyl whirled and leaped to jab the end of the seismic probe
against the neck of the Na who had thrown the spear. He
pressed the fire button. With a sharp report, the Na’s head
blew off its wide shoulders, arching into the darkness in a
spray of blood and bone fragments. It landed in the water
with a splash.
Yulour was rolling away from Etienne, who lay on his
“I

.

.

[

210]

back, staring up at the roof of the ice cave. With great care
the porter extracted the spear. Blood quickly rushed from
the wound. Tyl rose to alert Lyra but she’d heard the explosion and now joined them on deck.
Her eyes widened as she saw the extent and depth of the
wound. She vanished belowdecks again and reemerged mo-

ments

later carrying the boat’s first-aid kit.

Etienne was breathing raggedly as she worked to halt the
flow of blood. His pulse was racing and uneven.
“What happened?” she asked the Tsla as she worked.
Tyl explained while Yulour looked on helplessly. “That
one,” and he indicated the decapitated body of the Na who
had thrown the spear, “was not dead but only pretending.”
Lyra saw that the headless corpse was spraddled across

was shielded from the full charge.
much inIt lay still, waiting for its chance. They have that
telligence, anyway. Too damn much intelligence by half, the
hairy bastards.” She glanced up at Yulour. “Throw them
over the side, and be careful not to touch the metal outside.

the

two other bodies.

It’s still

“It

holding a charge, a

spirit

death.”

“Yes, Teacher.”
Yulour showed his considerable strength by disengaging
each corpse in turn and shoving the dead weight into the
water. Then he returned to carry Etienne into the Redowls’
cabin.

Both Tsla looked on respectfully as Lyra ministered to
her husband. A third figure joined them later.
“I didn’t know what to do, or how to help.” Homat looked
very small alongside the two Tsla.
“Be quiet, Homat.” To his credit the Mai said nothing
more, remaining silent alongside his taller companions.
They watched as Lyra slowly passed a small plastic device
over Etienne’s side and chest. When she finished and put it
aside her expression was grim. Etienne tried to reassure her
by smiling, but the pain made it difficult.

doctor?”
“Well
“You’re bleeding internally. I can stop it temporarily. I’m
afraid it may be an arterial lesion. I have to stop it, Etienne,
or you’ll bleed to death. I wish I knew more surgery.”
“Thank God you don’t,” he whispered. “You’ve spent
.

.

.

[

211 ]

twenty years messing up
up my insides as well.”

my

mind.

I

don’t need you fouling

“We’ve got to get you back to Steamer Station where
they can fix you properly. You know how good the thranx
physicians are.”

funny when you think that they’re better
than human surgeons, them not having any bones and all.
How long can you ‘temporarily’ stop the bleeding?”
She didn’t look at him. “I don’t know. The spear went a
long way in, Etienne. I can seal the break and stop the
bleeding and close you up, but there’s no guarantee it won’t
break open again anytime. If it does, I don’t know if your
circulatory system will accept another heat patch.
“The computer says you should rest as much as possible.
Some medication will help. But you can forget about jumping
around boulders and cliff sides or you’ll tear your guts open
“I

know.

It’s

again.”

be a good little boy.” Despite the mild sarcasm his
ready acquiescence confirmed the seriousness of the damage. Normally she had to strap him down to get him to take
“I’ll

a vitamin

pill.

mind off the injury by explaining
how the surviving Na had lived long enough to fling the
She

tried to take his

spear.

“We won’t be that careless again,” she finished. “Not that
think we’ve anything more to fear from this particular band.
First thing in the morning we’ll start back Downriver. As
soon as we get within reception range of the Station we
I

.

“No,” he said sharply.
“No? No what?”

“No we can’t

start

home first

thing in the morning.

We’re

not finished.”

“Maybe we aren’t, but you are. We’ve come all the way.”
“Not

We go

on

end of the river first,
then we can turn back. Not before then. I’m not leaving until
we reach our last goal. If you try to stop me I’ll throw a
tantrum and kill myself.”
“Listen to me closely, Etienne, because I may only be
able to say this once,” she said softly. “You are an utterly
impossible man. You have no more sense in you than a
quite, Lyra.

[

to the

212]

You would try the patience of Job, let alone
little woman like myself.”
He squeezed her hand tightly. “I love you, too.”
sponge.

“That’s what

around?”
“I know.

I said.

a tired

Who would I shout at if you weren’t

A good target is hard to find.”

rubbed at the moisture welling up
in her eyes. “Which is why I’d like to keep you around for
another couple of days or so. My shoulder still hurts. That
we can keep joking about. There’s nothing funny about the
hole in your ribs.”
“You’re telling me?” He let loose of her hand. “Lyra, you
have to do this for me. I’ll be very careful. No climbing, no
quarrying. If I can help it I won’t even bend over. Yulour
can help me get around, can’t you, Yulour?”
“Yes. Yulour is strong, Teacher. I can carry thee wherever thee wishes to go.”
“Too risky, Etienne. You must let that side heal as best
“I agree.” Angrily she

it

can.”

way back

promise I’ll stay in the cabin for
months. It can heal then. But it would be insane to turn
around and head back when we’re only a few hours from
the end of our journey. I want those ice samples! We don’t
have anything else to compare to them and taking them
from the edge of the ice cap won’t mean nearly as much. If
you insist, you and Tyl can take the corings and I’ll just
watch.” He paused, added quietly, “Besides, if this turns
out to be my last expedition I’m damned if I want anything
left undone.”
“Don’t talk like that,” she said quietly. “I’ll kill you if you

“On

the

I

talk like that.”

Somehow he manufactured another smile. “Then we’ll go
on?”

No more than half a day.

don’t want to spend
a night in glacial darkness. Whether we come to the hot
springs or whatever, we go on for half a day and then we
turn around.”
“Fair enough. I wouldn’t want the repellers to fail in here,
anyway. And I promise to let you do all the heavy work.”
“All right.

I

“You’re so good to me.” Twenty years, she mused. Twenty
[

213 ]

years of performing in the same play together and they each

had their lines down pat.
She prayed she would be allowed to keep acting opposite
the same male lead.

[

214]

I

XVI

soundly the remainder of the night. Lyra knew
because she stayed awake at his bedside monitoring his condition. The computer’s diagnostic program indicated that the

He

slept

had been halted. Getting the arterial wall
and surrounding flesh to heal would be a much slower and

internal bleeding

more difficult process.
The machine assured her of an

eighty-five percent prob-

of survival for her husband, provided that he adhered
to all instructions, took his medication and ultrasound treatments regularly, and received proper surgery within six
months. There would be no permanent damage except posability

sibly to

some tom lemnisci in the area. That would keep him

out of any gymnastic competitions. She greeted the evaluation with relief.
They would have to be exceedingly cautious during the
return journey. No chances could be taken, no more violent
encounters with belligerent life forms, intelligent or otherto
wise. Her studies among the elders of Turput would have
wait.
[

215 ]

One
at least

half of a

two

to

component whole was

useless,

and

it

took

make a team.

Exhaustion and darkness finally conspired during the early
hours of the morning to send her into a deep sleep. When
she awoke it was to discover that most of the morning was
gone. He was upset when she woke him for his breakfast
but didn’t argue very strenuously. Instead he sought refuge
from his discomfort and fear by making delicious wisecracks
about her cooking and waiting on him. She enjoyed every
criticism.

At Etienne’s insistence Yulour carried him forward and
they installed him on a raised pallet so he could see out
through the cockpit bubble. Lyra settled herself behind the
controls.

hummed

as it lifted above the water. She
turned inward and sent the boat toward the black maw that
was the rear of the cavern. There was no sign of the night’s
attack. The current had mercifully carried off the three bodies Yulour had shoved over the side.
Lyra would have been gratified to learn that her husband’
opinion of the Tsla had risen several notches. Not because

The

hydrofoil

of their calm acceptance of their fates or their precocious
knowledge of the intricate workings of the mind, but because
of the way in which they handled themselves through one
crisis after another.

Ice swallowed distance and daylight until the mouth of
the cavern had been reduced to a distant dab of white ink.
Lyra switched on the hydrofoil’s running lights and fore and
aft search beams, bringing gasps of surprise and admiration
from Tyl and Homat. From the pilot’s chair she used the
two beams to scan the opposite shore. The river continued
to narrow beneath them. Fish fled from the intruding illumination.
Surprisingly, the ceiling of the cavern remained far overhead, testament to the length of time the Skar had been
flowing. They flew slowly along the winding tunnel beneath
millions of tons of permanent, ancient ice.
“Spirits live here,” Homat murmured nervously. “This is
the top of the world. Spirits live here.” Beneath the roof of
the planet even the thermal suit

him warm.
[

216]

was hard pressed

to keep

“We

should be taking periodic samples from the shore
gravel,” Etienne told Lyra.
She eyed him uncertainly. “Think you can handle the
controls?”
He grinned. “They’re no heavier than the breakfast you
fed me. Yulour, give me a hand up, will you?”
After making sure Etienne wasn’t working in pain, she
donned her own thermal suit and a long-handled scoop and
went out on deck. She gathered samples for another thirty
minutes before she was obliged to scream at him.
“Stop the boat, stop the boat!” Her tone was urgent, not
alarmed. He nudged the requisite controls and the whine of
the hydrofoil’s repellers died as it settled into a meter of
frigid water.
“What is it?” he called toward the speaker membrane in
the bubble wall. His first concern was that she had spotted

Na, but that didn’t jibe with her attitude. She was
standing by the railing, staring off to port.
At the shout, Tyl had bundled up and rushed out to join
her, with Yulour close behind. Homat crowded close to
signs of

Etienne.

you think you can make it without
hurting yourself.” Now she sounded funny, he thought.
“What is it, what’s wrong?”
“Everything’s wrong. You’ll see.” That was all he could
get out of her as he painfully worked his body into his own

“Come

out on deck,

if

cold gear.
started for the gangway Homat reached out with a
delicate hand. “Don’t go, de-Etienne. Spirits live here.”

As he

Gently he disengaged himself from the Mai. “Lyra’s not
confronting any spirits, Homat. We don’t believe in spirits.”
“No one does, until the spirits come for them.”
“A good point, but I’m willing to bet they’re not coming
for us here.”
Yet when he stood on deck and stared at the cause of his
wife’s excitement he found himself seriously considering
Homat’ s warning. For while the spirits did not present themselves for inspection, they had left ample evidence of their

presence.

The Redowls gazed quietly at the shore
the silence. “What is it, Learned Etienne?”
[

217 ]

until

Tyl broke

“I’m not sure, Tyl. I think they’re machines of some kind.
At least, they look like machines.”
Using the tiny remote control he’d brought from the cockpit he aimed both searchlights. The powerful beams swept
into the side cavern Lyra had discovered, illuminating unpredictable metallic blue forms and piles of twisting, curving
gray shininess. Yellowish- white coils of tubing connected
separate structures and smaller adjuncts of green and deeper
yellow protruded from the larger shapes.
“You don’t know what this place could be?” he asked the
Tsla.

have never heard of it, Etienne.
visited here, to my knowledge.”
“I

No

Tsla has ever

Lyra’s breath congealed in the cold still air of the cave.
“We’ve got to have a closer look.” She glanced over at her
husband, her companion in discovery. “If the Tsla didn’t
build them it’s almost certain the Mai didn’t.”
“Then who? Surely not the Na?”
“You ask the simplest questions. Get back to the controls
and move us over before you fall down.”
He nodded, returned to the cockpit. As those on deck
steadied themselves the hydrofoil lifted out of the water once
more. Etienne pivoted the craft and moved inshore, setting
down halfway between river and revelation.
Lyra broke out hand beams from the ship’s stores and distributed one to each of their three companions so that even
Homat, who had to be half-dragged from the cabin, had his
own source of light. In addition they could control the spotlights mounted atop the boat by means of two remotes. Thus
armed against the dark they climbed the polished gravel to-

'

ward the alien construct.
It was clear that the facility had not escaped the ice intact.
Bits and pieces of metaloceramic matrix littered the ground.
But the damage seemed minor.
“Wonder how old this place is?” Lyra whispered.

“No telling ’til I can run some analyses.” He bent carefully
knees and picked up a section of some tubular material.
Tiny strands of opaque metal were embedded in the core
and protruded slightly from the ragged end. He ran a finger
along one of the flexible filaments.
at the

“Not

glass.”
[

218 ]

“Poured quartz?”
“Silica-based, anyway. That’s not all.” He handed it over.
Her arm dropped a centimeter before she could recover
from the initial surprise. “My god, that’s heavy. Any ideas?”
She turned it slowly in her hands, examining the metal.
“Alloy of iridium; something in the platinum group, anyhow. Hard to say for certain just looking at it.”
Homat could not understand the strange alien words, nor
was he sufficiently versed in metallurgy to comprehend even
if the Redowls had spoken in his own language. It did not
matter, because regardless of what the humans decided, he
knew what this spirit home was constructed of.
Solid sunit.
More sunit than jreal addicts

saw while

lying dazed and

dream-couches. More sunit than the most
avaricious philosophers could conjure up in their imaginations. More sunit than even Moyts possessed.
The old merchant’s story was true, his dying admonition
to the Zanur of Po Rabi founded on fact. He had been to
this place of spirits and had returned with the proof of his
tale. Homat swelled with pride. No Tsla had visited the spot
before, but an old Mai had done so. His travels had killed
him, but not before he had made truth his tombstone. And
of all the Mai only he, Homat, had duplicated that epic jour-

doped on

their

ney.
the strange shapes and terrifying forms were pure
sunit, but there was more than enough laying about to shock
the members of the Zanur who had sent him on the journey
in the guise of a scout. Here was wealth enough to buy more
than businesses and trading vessels, storehouses of grain or
gems or the services of others. Here were riches sufficient

Not all

to

buy a

Phisi

city-state entire, to

purchase

all

of

Suphum

or

Ko

—or both.

Enough wealth to purchase the world.
Stunned by the visions before him, he wandered among
the spirit buildings, hardly daring to touch the solid gray
masses of the precious metal. Lyra warned him not to stray
too far. She was concerned by the obvious effect the discovery was having on their Mai guide, though she did not
realize its source.

Some

of the constructions towered two hundred meters
[

219 ]

toward the ceiling of the cavern, where the ice cap had drawn
away from the metal. The reason for such spaciousness was
self-evident, revealed by mere touch. Much of the metal
surrounding them was comfortably warm.
“Not a great deal of heat,” Etienne commented, “but a
lot of energy is involved. Some kind of mechanism is still
functioning here, protecting this place from encroachment

by the

ice.”

“No sound,”

she replied.
“Insulation. Makes sense in a cold place.”
“It’s more than that,” she said, running her fingers over
the smooth frostfree flank of a contorted metal ellipse.
“There’s nothing moving anywhere, no vibration from within.
I think the heat may be a characteristic of the alloy.” Removing one of her gloves, she searched the ground until she
found a short thick chunk of the yellowish material.
“This has broken away. See the ragged edge?” She leaned
back. “Probably fell from somewhere higher up. There’s no
telling how long it’s lain here, but it’s just as warm as the
intact stuff. Generation of heat’s a property of the metal.
The damn stuff’s exothermic.”
“All right, I’m convinced. And not only is it exothermic,
I think the property’s variable. The temperature of the metal
is just high enough to hold back the ice without melting a
big hole in the ice cap.”
“Maybe,” she said quietly, “this installation was built before the ice cap moved so far south. Maybe the glaciers
moved over and around it, burying it here.”
“That would make this place a minimum of ten thousand
years old, given what little we know of Tslamaina’s geological history.”

She said nothing.

They continued their examination, but they found nothing
to suggest the nature of the builders. Everything was a solid
mass, seemingly formed whole from molds. They found no
doorways and no windows, nothing to hint at the builders’
size or shape. Only smooth-sided featureless geometric
forms. Equally striking was the absence of visible controls.
“If this is a fully automated installation,” Lyra pointed
out, “designed to function for a long period of time without
supervision, there would be no reason to expose sensitive

controls to the cold.”
[

220 ]

!

“Possible.

We’d have a better idea if we could tell whether

operating now, or dormant, or kaput.”
“Instruments,” she murmured. “Sit down and rest,
Etienne. I’ll be back in a minute.” She turned and jogged
toward the hydrofoil, gathering up the two Tsla as she ran.
With their help she set up several sensitive probes next
to the hull, aimed them at their discovery, and began to take
readings. Some of the instruments operated efficiently from
a distance while others required her to pass among the structures with remote sensors.
Except for the heat emanating directly from the metal,
from the standpoint of radiant energy the enigmatic erections
were dormant. The residual readings that appeared on the
instrumentation matched the output of their flashlights and
the hydrofoil’s batteries. Though the examination could hardly
be considered exhaustive, considering the limitations of their
equipment, the Redowls agreed that regardless of what the
constructs had been designed to do, they weren’t doing anyit’s

thing

A

now.
library search informed

them

that self-exciting exo-

—

until then.
thermic metal alloys had existed only in theory
As for the machines themselves, their design did not match
the technological architecture of any known civilization.
However old it was, most of the alien technology seemed
to be in excellent condition. Though fragments littered the
ground, there was no evidence of extensive degeneration
within the metal or ceramics themselves.
While they couldn’t give a date to the installation or a
name to its builders, they could determine the composition
of the materials used. In addition to iridium, Etienne noted
the presence of two dozen alloys that defied chemical and

spectroscopic analysis, including one thin metallic whip that
the computer insisted was an alloy of metallic sodium, despite the fact that in the damp air of the cavern there wasn’t
the slightest evidence of oxidation on its shiny surface. When
they dipped it in the river and nothing happened, the Redowls
thought they could hear Homat’s beloved spirits move a little
closer.

of the spirit boat was still strange to Tyl, and he
was having trouble finding the fresh lightning pack that Lyra
called a battery cell. He rummaged carefully through the

Much

[

221 ]

A

noises
storage bay, trying to disturb as little as possible.
overhead caused him to pause.
Curious, the Tsla climbed the walkway. His snout was
extended, the tip probing the air. The sounds drew him upp
from the hull, through the second deck and onto the upper.
He walked past the humans’ sleeping quarters, past the place
of food they called the galley, until he was standing in the
passage that opened into the open bubble of the cockpit. He
stared for a long moment before speaking.
“What do thee here, Mai?”

around. When he saw who confronted him he relaxed. “I am simply curious. We Mai are
always curious about new things.”
Tyl gestured with his snout, a mildly insulting display.
“Thee should be outside helping our friends.”
“I know, I know. I’ll be there again soon. But it’s so cold
out there, so cold.” He shivered.
“I am cold outside also, but the coldness is settling now
Startled,

inside

Homat spun

'

1

me.”

understand you, meditator.”
“Thee linger too long and too frequently over the important places of this craft. For several days now I have noticed
this. Thee have always stared as our friends worked here,
but never more so since the attack by the Na. I think that!
this interest has escaped the attention of our friends, who
though sophisticated in many ways are childishly naive ini
others. They are preoccupied with their study of our world
and ways. But I am not so occupied, nor so naive. This
unnatural interest of thee must be remarked upon.” He turned
“I don’t

:

-

'

to leave.

“Stop there, meditator!” The

chill

had suddenly slipped

from Homat’ s body into his voice.
Slowly Tyl turned. His gaze fell to the device the Mai
clutched firmly in his left hand. It was heavy for the sixfingered grip and Homat had to support part of it with his
other hand. But the correct end was pointed at Tyl. He had
seen the device in operation often enough to know that much.
“Mai,” he whispered, managing to combine a whole paragraph of insults into the inflection he wrapped around that
single noun.

Homat was

neither impressed nor intimidated.
[

222 ]

The Tsla

j

overawed the Mai, but not him, not Homat. The
hairy ones were bigger and stronger, but not necessarily
smarter. No, size was no indication of intelligence, as he
usually

fully

planned to prove.

“Do you know what

this is?”

he

said, enjoying himself

thoroughly as he gestured with the device he held. “This is
the humans’ lightning thrower. I have seen it operate many
times. It may be difficult to build, but it is very simple to
use.” He pointed toward the clip holsters attached to the
lower part of the control console.

“They sit there in their little homes, drawing strength from
the spirit world until they are ready to serve the humans.
These spirits are stupid. They do not respond to sacrifices
or prayers or offerings, but will serve any who learn the
rituals of operation. I have made an extensive study of such
rituals these past

many months.”

“To what end?” Tyl inquired softly even as he estimated
the distance between them.
“You have seen the sunit that sleeps here, and the other
metals. Enough wealth to buy half the world.”
“I am sure,” Tyl said carefully, “that the humans would
not object to thee returning with enough of the gray metal

make

thee wealthy until thy passing.”
“I'm sure they would allow me to bring a small amount,
but not any more than would interfere with the plain rocks
de-Etienne has already collected, for example. Why should
I bow and scrape for a beggar’s pouchful when I can have
all that the spirit boat can carry?” He produced a thin Mai
smile. “I can have the spirit boat itself. The sunit will make
me master of Mai. This vessel can make me master of the

to

Groalamasan.”
anger dissolved into sadness and pity. “Poor
Mai, Thy dreams are so much larger than thy body.”
“Are they?” said Homat hoarsely. “I planned to wait, but
you push me toward delightenment. The Tsla have always
pushed the Mai. In the end we will overwhelm you. See,
Tyl’s

initial

how simple the humans’

spirit

devices are to work?

You just

touch this little round thing here ...”
Etienne looked up from the base of the metallic mass he
was studying, using the crutch Lyra had fashioned for him
[

223 ]

from a scoop net, and glanced back toward the boat. The
glare from the two powerful spotlights made him squint.
“Did you hear something, hon?”
Lyra lifted her eyes from her work. She was trying to
decide if some scratches they’d discovered on one wall might
be writing. “Hear what?”
“The boat. I thought I heard something arc.”
She shrugged. “Missed my ears.”
He thought a moment, glanced to his right. “Yulour. Did
thee hear anything from the spirit boat?”
The patient Tsla was sitting on the ground, playing with

some colored

stones. “I heard nothing, Teacher.”

Just then Etienne

saw a shape approaching them. “Here’s

Homat. Maybe he heard something.”
Lyra returned to her studies and Etienne waited until their
guide emerged from the glare. “Homat, you were near the
boat. Did you hear something?”
“Yes, Etienne.” He sounded odd, Etienne thought, though
he couldn’t define the difference. “I heard. It was your lightning thrower dealing spirits.”
Lyra heard that, slowly rose from where she’d been sitting.

Etienne spoke precisely. “The lightning thrower?

mean

it

went off?

How

You

did that happen?”

“The way it always happens.” The Mai was careful to
keep his distance from Etienne, despite the severity of the
man’s injury. He removed the pistol from the pocket of his
thermal suit. Etienne stiffened and Lyra backed toward the
metal wall behind her.
“It happened,” Homat continued, his confidence starting
to build, “when I touched this place you call the trigger. I
touched it and called upon the lightning spirits. I, Homat,
did this.”

Etienne struggled to choose the right words. “That’s a
very dangerous thing to do, Homat. You don’t know what
you’re doing. The lightning spirits can be very unpredictable.
You could hurt yourself.”
Homat laughed softly. “You clever humans. You come
here from another world, with your wonderful magical devices, and you try to make us think none but you can make
[

224 ]

them work.” He shook the asynapt at them. “Well, I can
make them work!”
“Where is Teacher Tyl?” Yulour asked uncertainly, looking past the Mai toward the hydrofoil.
“Be quiet, simpleton. The meditator is dead. I killed him,
with this.” He shook the pistol again.
“But whyT Lyra cried as she looked toward the boat.
Homat’s voice was as icy as the air around them. “To
make certain that I did know how to call upon the lightning
’

very easy. You just touch this trigger place
here.” One finger eased toward the firing button.
Etienne negotiated a couple of awkward steps backward,
spirits.

Truly

it is

leaning on the crutch.
“Don’t be frightened,” Homat told him. “I don’t think I
have to kill you. Besides, I need your arms and your backs.”
“What for?”
Homat looked past him, his eyes afire. “To load the spirit
boat with the gray metal, the sunit.”
“The iridium alloy? Your people value it too?”
“More than any other thing of this world. It will make me

master over much of

it.”

you take some sunit back with you,”
Lyra said. “Enough to make you rich, if you wish. We promised you a reward for helping us.”
“The meditator said much the same thing. I take my own
reward, Lyra. I want to take back as much sunit as the spirit
boat will hold. We will make room by throwing out the
useless things you have gathered during this journey, bits of
plants and rocks and clothing and cheap trinkets.”
“Homat, you can’t! We need to take samples of your
world back for study.”
“You don’t listen, Lyra. What is important to you does
not matter now. It doesn’t matter that your civilization is
smarter than that of the Mai. It doesn’t matter that you are
smarter than me, though I am not so sure of that anymore.
It does not matter that you are larger and stronger. This is
all that matters now.” He gestured with the asynaptic pistol.
“I have not touched it since we fought the Na. It slew the
meditator. I am certain it can slay you. This is something
even we simple Mai can understand.”

“We

don’t care

if

[

225 ]

“Irquit wasn’t the Zanur’ s representative,” Etienne said

accusingly. “It was you all the time.”
“Oh, no, Etienne, she was a representative of the Zanur.
both were. But she was in charge over me, and I couldn’t

We

not need her around, watching as I made
careful study of your magic. I knew we would fail at Chan-

have

that. I did

grit.”

“So you’re a traitor then. To your city-state of Po Rabi,
to your Zanur, to your Najoke de-me-Halmur.”
Homat dug his toes into the ground, a sign of disrespectful
disgust. “From this moment on Najoke de-me-Halmur is
nothing. He is become less than the grains of gravel that roll
from the mouth of this cave, less than the droppings of the
prewq upon the fields. The Zanur is become nothing. Po
Rabi itself is as nothing beside the wealth that lies here. If
I choose I will buy Po Rabi for a winter home. I will be Moyt

over

all.”

Lyra fought to restrain her temper. “Now listen, Homat.
Maybe you can operate that pistol without burning your foot
but running the spirit boat is another matter entirely.”
“Is it so? I have watched for a long time now while you
thought me shivering and cowering behind you for protection. Already I have steered the spirit boat once. I think truly
it is not so complicated to use. A very few controls run it
mostly, and one allows the spirits within to run by them-

off,

selves.”

“Even an autopilot needs occasional instructions.”
“Does it? I think you try to deceive me. We will see.”
“And what happens,” Etienne pressed him, “if we don’t
return and our friends come looking for us? They’ll find the
boat and they’ll find you.”

“Perhaps. If they do I will shiver and cower some delighted more and explain that you were slain by the Na and
that I, Homat, not knowing what else to do, was returning
the spirit boat to its rightful owners. I think they will let me
keep the sunit and award me honors for my bravery and
dedication.”

“Even assuming you could run the boat,” Lyra said, “how
can you get it past the Topapasirut without the help of the
Tsla of Jakaie?”
“I think they will believe
[

my

226]

story also. If they are re-

luctant to believe, there are other ways.” He gestured past
them toward the mountain of metal. “The Tsla are also traders. They are not immune to the promise of great wealth.

Not all the hairy ones sit and meditate their lives away. They
work hard in their shops and fields and when they come

down

to the Skar, wealth changes hands.

other reason

why

I

know

this

And

there

is

an-

can be done.”

“Another reason?”
“An elderly merchant of Po Rabi preceded us to this place.
Without lightning throwers, without this wondrous delighted
clothing you have given me, without a spirit boat, he came
to this place, stood perhaps on this same spot, and returned
to Po Rabi with proof that he had done so. With all your
wonders at my command, I cannot fail to do as well.
“But why this talk of your not returning? I bear you no
malice, and I need your strength to load the sunit into the
spirit boat. Then we will see. It would be easier if you agreed
to help me return to the Skatandah. Perhaps I will even let
you keep your boat. You will not have the useless rocks and
weeds that you have gathered, but you will still have the
magic images you make of them.
“One thing is certain: you have no other choice but to
help me. If you do not, it will take longer to load the sunit
with the help of only this simple one,” he gestured toward
Yulour, “but it will be done nonetheless. And I will surely
you.”
“Yulour and I will help load your precious sunit,” Lyra
said bitterly, “but Etienne cannot. If he does much lifting
he stands a good chance of reopening the wound inside him.”
“If he does that you can fix it again.”
“I don’t think it can be fixed again, at least not in the
same way with the tools we have on the boat.”
“He works like you and the Tsla or he dies now. I cannot
spare the attention to let him sit and watch for a chance to
kill

surprise

me.”

Etienne limped forward. “I’ll watch myself, Lyra, don’t
worry. I can rig a sling and work with my left arm.”
“Our specimens,” she muttered disconsolately. “Everything we’ve worked so hard to assemble, the first pieces of
the puzzle that would enable us to start buiding a picture of
this

world’s ecology,

all

thrown away.”
[

227 ]

“They won’t do us any good

if

we

don’t live to deliver

them.”

“Not so stupid,” Homat said approvingly. “I didn’t think
you were that stupid.” He gestured again with the muzzle
of the asynapt. “I do not like this place. Let us hurry.”
Though he worked very carefully, the pain in Etienne’s
side never let him alone. The internal bleeding didn’t start
again, but Lyra ached in her own heart as she watched him
struggle to load the heavy alloy.
Homat supervised the loading silently and displayed not
a twinge of remorse. The lower hold was filled and they
began stacking piles of broken metal on the second deck.
Yulour carried twice his share of the load as he toiled quietly
next to his

human

friends.

Several days later an exhausted Lyra, sweating inside her
absorptive thermal suit, slumped to the ground and spoke
sullenly to

Homat.

“That’s all she’ll carry.”
“No, there is yet room,” Homat insisted. “Much more
room. You must continue.”
“Listen to me, Homat. The sunit, the metal, is very heavy.
If you stack any more on the upper decks you’ll ruin the
boat’s stability. All the sunit in the world won’t do you any
good if you turn over in the middle of the Skar.” She held
her breath as she dropped her gaze to the ground. Actually
the hydrofoil could carry another ton or so in comparative
safety, but she doubted Etienne would last another day.

Homat looked
Enough

to

“Very well. That is enough.
and I can always come back for

uncertain.

buy two

cities,

more.”
“Fine,” Etienne commented. “Now let us help you deliver
your damned fortune so we can go our separate ways, which

won’t happen soon enough for me.”
“Or if you insist on trying to take the hydrofoil back by
yourself,” Lyra added, “at least let us go with you as far as
Turput. We can find transportation back to Steamer Station
from there, and by the time we reached our outpost you
could be halfway around the Groalamasan.”
“And then what?” Homat inquired suspiciously, his inherent Mai paranoia surging to the fore. “Then you’ll or[

228 ]

ganize your friends and come looking for poor Homat with
more of your strange weapons, to punish him and steal his
glory.” His grip on the asynapt tightened.
Slowly Lyra got to her feet. “Homat, don’t be a fool.”
“Truly that is not my intention.”
Etienne was backing toward the silent mass of alien metal.
He stumbled and Lyra rushed to help him, her eyes never
leaving the pistol.
“There’s no need for you to do this, Homat. We won’t
come after you. It’s not worth it to us. It’s not worth the
spirit boat. We can always get another.”
“Can you?” She knew enough of Mai psychology to see
that he was working himself up good and proper, trying to
excite himself to the point of pushing the trigger. Killing Tyl
was one thing. Mai and Tsla disliked one another and sometimes fought. But the thought of slaying them was something
new. There were powerful spirits involved, strange alien
spirits, and he was still unsure of himself.
He was going to do it, though. She could see it in his
eyes, read it in the way he stood, hear it in his voice. The
scrawny bald little humanoid primitive was going to kill the
two of them in cold blood there at the top of his world,
beneath a ceiling of ancient ice, their backs to an enigma
that would now never be properly studied.
“I will keep the slave,” Homat said solemnly. He gestured
toward Yulour, who stood nearby looking worried and confused. “I will make use of his strength on the homeward
journey. Him I do not fear, but I do not trust you. I cannot
stay awake all the time to watch you. As soon as I slept you
would forget all your promises, set aside your assurances,
and toss poor Homat into the Skar to take his chances with
the fish.
“It is not I who is destined to be food for fishes. Not
Homat the brave, Homat the great.” He took aim with the

heavy

pistol.

“When he

on me,” Etienne whispered as he took
a step forward, “run for it. I’ll take the shot and if you can
get beyond the ship’s lights you’ll have a chance.”
“No, I won’t...”
“Don’t be an idiot!” he said huskily, taking another step
forward. /‘Now of all times.” The muzzle was shifting to
settles

/

[

229 ]

cover him, Homat’s finger moving toward the trigger. “Use
your legs, Lyra. For both of us.”
The tears were coming again, blinding her worse than the

from the spotlights. She didn’t know what to do and
there was no time to make careful decisions. If only Etienne
wouldn’t be so damn logical! But he was right. If she could
hide in the darkness of the cavern there was an outside
chance she could slip aboard the hydrofoil without Homat
seeing her. She was bigger and stronger than the Mai.
Homat saw her start to back away and moved the muzzle
back to cover her instead of Etienne. It was impossible to
outrun the charge, but the heavy weapon was awkward in
Homat’s grasp. Etienne saw that he was anticipating Lyra’s
flight and steadied himself to leap between them to take the
glare

shot.

He

didn’t

someone else.

The same thought had occurred to
Certainly no one, least of all Homat, expected

have

to.

Yulour to interpose himself between the

pistol

and

its in-

tended targets.
Etienne didn’t have time to wonder at the Tsla’s unaccustomed assertion. He was shoving at Lyra with his left
hand.
“Now, run now.”
Lyra was gaping at the Tsla. “I don’t understand. Yulour
doesn’t act on his own.”

“Don’t worry about it now, shut up and run!”
She left him leaning on his crutch as she whirled and
bolted for the blackness to their left. Homat turned to aim
at her, but once more Yulour made certain his body was
between hers and the gun.
“Get out of the way, moron!” Homat shouted. Yulour
stood quietly, holding his ground. “I said get out of the way!
I need you for the journey Downriver.”
He could hear the gravel flying from beneath the human
female’s boots. Of course, he could abandon both of them,
leave them to die slowly, but he was furious that his carefully
rehearsed triumph might be spoiled by a simpleminded Tsla.
He stared over the barrel of the lightning thrower.
“You brought this on yourself, idiot. I’ll just have to get
along without you. Downriver I’ll find plenty of willing backs
with sensible heads atop them.” He touched the trigger.
[

230]

There was a bright, crisp flash of light as the asynapt
fired, accompanied by a familiar faint crackling sound.
Etienne shouted, “No!” and tried to throw himself at Homat.
Given the distance that still separated him from the Mai, it
was a futile gesture. A sharp pain ran from his side down
his left leg and he crumpled despite the support provided by
his crutch.

Dust stung his eyes as he lay staring dumbly across the
gravel. Yulour had not fallen under the impact of the charge.
He hadn’t fallen because he was no longer there.
But something else was.

[

231 ]

I

XVII ]

For an instant Etienne was positive that the charge had
struck him instead. That would explain the illusion. Or perhaps the silent Yulour possessed the power of old. He blinked,
and the illusion remained. His side still flamed. His nose was
running.

It

was

real.

Where Yulour had been, what Yulour had been rose four
meters toward the roof of the cavern. It was slim and silvery.
The coldly viscous sides twisted and flowed like the ripples
from a pebble dropped in a pond. Indeed,
what had been Yulour looked a lot like a tower of opaque
water. Where an internal ripple reached its apex the silvery
hue became suffused with other colors: gray and white, blue
and purple. They spread in irregular chromatic blotches across
portions of the unstable tower, fading gradually back into
that spread out

the silver.

Homat

stood motionless, the asynapt still clutched convulsively in both hands. Probably he could not have dropped
it had he wanted to. Suddenly all the terrors, all the childhood
fears, all the old Mai stories of demons and devils and evil
spirits that he had automatically absorbed as he had matured
[

232 ]

had
and

solidified before his bulging eyes.

He

started to tremble

of his bowels. He was trying to scream but
only a thin whispery whine passed between his parted lips.
Through his pain Etienne thought he heard Lyra shout
from her hiding place back in the artifacts. She wasn’t trying
to maneuver behind Homat now. All she could do was stare
in wonder at the tower of pulsating quicksilver that had been
Yulour. Of the three who saw, it might have been that she
was the most stupefied of all, for only Lyra Redowl was
familiar with the folklore and mythologies of half a hundred
worlds, and thus only she knew that what stood before them
in the cavern had a basis in hypothesized reality.
or had it? No one was certain
It had been seen before
because no reputable evidence was ever presented to conclusively prove the existence of such a creature. Rumors
gave it different names, of which the one that stuck was
lost control

—

more hopefully descriptive than verifiable.
“I’ll be damned,” she murmured in awe, “a Mutable.”
Etienne heard and the word sifted through his numbed
brain. A Mutable. Folktales spoke of them not only on
commonwealth worlds but on the worlds of the AAnn empire
and the inhabited globes that turned

in

emptiness outside

the boundaries of the principal political entities. Every spacetraversing civilization had legends of encounters with true
shape-changers, silhouette shifters, metamorphs.

Mutables.

But myths and fraud dissolved in the dank cavern before
the glittering reality that had been Yulour the slow-witted
Tsla. Legend or folktale or hallucination made real, whatever
that
it was it had saved Lyra’s life. Its intentions beyond
were shrouded in speculation.
lay there staring at the rippling silvery shape,
likely the first
it occurred to him that he and Lyra were
human beings ever to see a Mutable in its natural state.

As Etienne

had protected Lyra. That was all that really mattered.
He wondered if the body’s constant movement might be
an indication of some permanent instability. As he wondered, the tower turned slightly, showing a suggestion of
what might be an eye near the top. The deep gray oval swam
first,
in a sea of silver. A second might drift alongside the
It

[

233 ]

beyond

his sight. It

might have a half dozen hidden dupli-

cates.

Traveling like a tree on greased treads, the Mutable moved
single pseutoward the hydrofoil. The motion was silent.
dopod emerged from the center of the tower, formed tentacles that reached for the asynapt in Homat’s shaking fingers.
As he watched, Etienne wondered how the creature had

A

shaken off the effects of the burst from the pistol.
He wasn’t given the opportunity to observe the result of
a second shot, because the Mai let out a single final massive
shudder, then fell sideways onto the gravel. The gun fell
from limp fingers.
At this the tentacles withdrew. It mattered not to Homat,
whose crumpled form lay motionless now near one of the
boat’s hydrofoils, knees drawn tight against the thin chest,
all hint of aggression fled along with the life force. The cause
of death was clear and no autopsy could have made it any
clearer: Homat had died of fright, murdered where he’d stood
by his own guilt and thousands of years of accumulated racial
fears.

The Mutable
it

Then
and moved away. Rocks and

inclined forward over the Mai’s body.

straightened, pivoted slowly,

gravel were depressed where it had passed, as if a large,
heavy ball had rolled across the ground where the Mutable

moved.
Despite

its

size the creature traveled with ease

and a

Lyra kept her eyes on it as she helped
Etienne back to his feet and handed him his crutch. She
could recall no legend of a Mutable’s harming anything, but
that was small comfort as she stood in that cold, dark place
graceful fluidity.

supporting her badly injured husband.

Though no

were

Lyra thought the pair of
large gray spots atop the silvery mass were focused on her.
“Please do not be afraid,” the Mutable said. It spoke
pupils

visible,

clearly, in Yulour’s familiar voice,

though without that Tsla’s
slowness. “Yes, I am what you call a Mutable. I am the
native you knew as Yulour. Please do not be alarmed.” The
upper portion of the tower inclined toward the hydrofoil. “I
did not mean for that one to expire, but as are all his people
he was a prisoner of his own private terrors. You, however,
are more mature and not subject to such.”
[

234 ]

“Don’t give us too much credit just yet,” Etienne found
himself mumbling. “I’m scared as hell.”
“You must not be frightened.” The Mutable’s voice was
almost painfully gentle.
“Mutables don’t exist except as rumors,” Lyra murmured.
“That

is

how we

prefer to exist.

It simplifies

much.”

Etienne to stand on his own and stepped forward, extending a hesitant hand. “I don’t want to offend,
could I touch you?”
but
“If it is required to establish my existence in your mind.”
“It’s not. I know you’re here. It’s just something I’d like

Lyra

left

—

to do.”

“Then please do so.”
She lightly pressed against the

silvery flank, discovered

took an effort of will not to
jerk her fingers away, not because it was too hot but because
the surface was in constant motion. She stepped back, her
that

it

palm
I

felt like

warm

vinyl. It

tingling.

you two don’t mind,” Etienne said, “I’m a little tired.
I think I’d better sit down.” It was a measure of his exhaustion that he allowed Lyra to help without his uttering a
“If

single wisecrack.

“You
does

it

said,

‘it

simplifies

much,”’ Lyra repeated. “What

simplify?”

“Our work.

We are caretakers, we

“Caretakers? For

Mutables.”

whom?”

“For the Xunca.”
Lyra frowned. “Never heard of ’em.”
“But you know of the Tar-Aiym and of the Hur’rikku,
who dominated this grouping of stars, this galaxy, until they
destroyed each other in a great war.”
“Yes, I know the histories,” Lyra replied. “Both races
have been gone, from this portion of the galaxy anyway for
at least a hundred millennia.”
“The Xunca predate both. They are so ancient little more
Whether
than their memory remains. We are their caretakers.
we are an independently evolved race or machines fashioned
by them, we ourselves do not know. We know only our
work.”
,

[

235 ]

,

“These Xunca lived and ruled before both the Tar-Aiym
and the Hur’rikku?”
“They did not rule. They simply were. Their probings
reached regions that can be expressed only by pure mathematics. Reached beyond this galaxy, beyond the satellite
clusters of stars you call the Magellanic Clouds. They went
such places.”
“You imply a technology capable of traversing an intergalactic gap,” Etienne observed. “Such technology is not
possible.”

The Mutable admonished him gently. “Did not your own
kind once say the same of faster-than-light travel, before
they learned of space-plus and null-space? I say to you that
they the Xunca did this thing.
“This world you call Horseye and that the dominants call
Tslamaina is itself a product of Xunca technology.”
“This planet is a construct?”
“No.” Thoughtfully the Mutable moved to its right so they
could observe it free of the glare from the hydrofoil’s lights.
It was a gesture of courtesy and Etienne let himself relax
further.

“The Xunca did not build this world, they modified it to
suit their needs. The asteroidal collision which produced the
oceanic basin now filled by the Groalamasan’s waters was
not an astronomical accident.”
“Why do that?”
“The Xunca required a large body of water which would
circulate only in one direction, whose currents would never
change. The positioning of the four small moons assures this.
Here the oceanic currents flow eternally in the direction you
call clockwise.
“This peipetual motion, driven by lunar gravity, never
needs refueling or maintenance. It exists and was designed
to drive great engines buried in the ocean floor. Since Tslamaina is tectonically stable and has been for eons save for
one regrettable massive earth tremor, there is no danger of
the machinery’s being destroyed by subduction. It sits and
waits, ready to be driven by the mechanism of the ocean
currents. The currents that scour the bottom of the Groalamasan are very powerful by the standards of most worlds.
This construction was necessary because there are no other
[

236]

stable oceanic worlds in this area.

The machinery

is

shielded

by space-going peoples. It has lain dormant
for tens of thousands of your years.”
“How many tens of thousands?” Lyra wondered aloud.
“Enough to total several hundred millions.”
“And you’ve been ‘caretaking’ the facilities all that time?”
“We are long-lived or well-designed,” the Mutable exagainst detection

I

plained matter-of-factly.
“I don’t care,” Lyra argued. “ Nothing lives for a hundred
million years!”
“The rocks beneath your feet do. Our internal structure
resembles them more than it does yours. You may be interested to know that a smaller installation, similar to that
which sleeps beneath the ocean of this world, exists on yours.”
Lyra started. “On Earth? Nothing like what you describe
has ever been found. Is the shielding against detection that
effective?”

“Yes, but that installation was destroyed by your world’s
continental drift. It was emplaced when your continents were

one large land mass and there was a single, much larger,
world ocean like that on Tslamaina. The Xunca were not
omnipotent. They could not plan for every eventuality.
“But that was only a small relay and its loss not vital to
the system. The main transmitter was constructed on this
world. The three local intelligent life forms evolved independently long after its emplacement. They do not suspect
its existence. None do.” He gestured past them.
“This is a tiny portion of the transmitter’s antenna system.
Most of it lies beneath your feet. It is our task to see that it
remains in operating condition, together with the extensive

can be linked.”
“Can it operate through the ice cap?”
“No. In the event that the transmitter system becomes
melted.
active, a portion if not all of this ice will be
the
Etienne’s thoughts moved rapidly. “That would raise
every major city
level of the Groalamasan enough to flood

relay network to which

it

on Tslamaina.”
The Mutable sounded apologetic. “As I have said, all this
not
was designed a very long time ago, and the Xunca could
this will ne\er
foresee everything. However, it is possible
all the hundreds
occur. The system has not become active in
[

237 ]

of millions of years since

many

more

millions

it

was fashioned.

will pass before

Who knows how

anything happens?

may

ever happen.”
“Nobody builds something like this,” Etienne muttered,
“thinking it will never be used.”
“Why not, Etienne?” Lyra said with disarming calmness.
“What about the security alarms people put in their homes?”
She looked startled. “Is that what this is?”
“We do not know what the system is for,” the Mutable
replied sadly. “Not one of us knows. We are only caretakers,
not operators or builders. We do what we were instructed
to do eons ago. Watch over the system and insure that it
remains intact.
“Do not think that we merely sit and wonder. We discuss
and debate. We have our own culture. Now and then we
assume one of the shapes of the space-going races and visit
each other, for only one of us is assigned to each world. We
assist one another in diagnosing and solving problems, but

Nothing

generally there is little to do. The Xunca built for the ages.
But as to the purpose of the system, only the Xunca themselves know that.”
“What happened to them?” Etienne asked. “If they were
such masters of science, why did they let the Tar-Aiym and
the Hur’rikku usurp their place?”
“The Tar-Aiym and the Hur’rikku usurped nothing. Both
races rose to power in the vacuum left by the departure of
the Xunca. They did not force the Xunca to leave. The Xunca
were never forced to do anything. They departed because

they found something their technology could not cope with.”
“Then why leave this elaborate system behind? To let
them know when it was safe for them to return? You must
know something about it?”

“Only that

it

will

become

tended to react to manifests

active

itself.”

whatever it was inThe Mutable hesitated.
if

“We do know that it involves one particular section of space.”
“Can you be any more

specific?”

of the constellation you call Bootes,
as seen from your Earth, but farther out. It is an area of
modest size, some three hundred million light-years across,
encompassing a volume of approximately one million cubic
“It lies in the direction

megaparsecs.”
[

238 ]

i

Etienne frowned for a

moment

until the figures

quoted

by the Mutable linked up with something in his memory.
“The Great Emptiness. We’ve known of it for hundreds
of years. It’s a ‘modest’ region, all right. It ought to be as
filled with galaxies and nebulae as any other section of space,
but it’s not. There’s nothing there, astronomically speaking.
Some free hydrogen and a few isolated stellar masses of
uncertain composition.”
“This we know,” the Mutable admitted. “What we do not
know is how the Xunca transmitter is involved.”
“I’d rather it were connected to something simpler to
explain,” Etienne muttered. “We humans are a gregarious
bunch. We like crowds, not big emptinesses.”

“You

are concerned.”
“It seems the Xunca were. Don’t you sense some kind of
threat?”
“We do not worry, nor should you. Too much time has

passed without anything happening.”
“Then you do think a threat of some sort is involved.”
“We have had much time in which to evaluate possibilities. When one’s entire existence is devoted to a single task,
there is a fair amount of time to devote to idle speculation.
I must admit that some of us believe the Xunca system to
be a warning device.”
“Strange, but your words don’t give me much comfort,”

Lyra muttered.
|

could allay all concerns. We wish no less
for ourselves. You should know that. We have had to content
ourselves with a saying: ‘the Xunca moved in mysterious
“I

i

wish that

I

ways.’”
Etienne forced himself to think of more immediate matof vast empty sections of space, of alien
devices lying dormant for incalculable eons waiting for some
unknown problem to manifest itself, of caretakers who could
ters. All the talk

change

their

ilizations,

shape moving unobserved among different

was making him

dizzy.

to talk about something he could relate to.
Xunca
task, then, is to ensure the inviolability of the

He needed
“Your

civ-

system.”
“That

is

so.”
[

239]

Etienne drew Lyra close to him. “Then that means you
must have decided by now what you’re going to do with us.”
“It has been a very long time since this transmitter was I
checked,” the Mutable said quietly. “In that time this river
has enlarged the cavern considerably around it and opened
a wide entrance. That must be sealed with ice.”
“You’re avoiding my question. What about us?”
“I have enjoyed the opportunity to study you for many
days, Etienne Redowl man. It would have been simple to
let the native dispose of you or to do so myself.” Lyra’s arm
tightened against her husband’s back. “But after hundreds
of millions of years of dedication to a single task, one develops a high respect for indigenous life forms that have
succeeded in developing intelligence without destroying
themselves in the process. When one is governed by insights
that may be more than a billion years old, one develops laws
and insights of one’s own. And there is one thing more.”
Etienne allowed himself to hope, wondering what ancient
philosophical conclusion might stay the executioner. “What’s
that?”

You

are simple, uncomplicated, primitive.
But you are likeable. Many peoples do not place likeability
high on the list of survival traits.
do. I do. I like you for
yourselves and for what you are, what you represent.
are not merely components of a carefully constructed machine.
are also individuals. As such we can admire individuality in others. Your persistence and dedication,
“I like you.

We

We

We

—

—

your” was that a smile atop the silvery column? “immutable devotion to your chosen professions reminds me of
our own.”
“I’m glad you like us,” Lyra said. “I think we like you.
But how do you plan to insure that we don’t bring others of
our kind back to this place, to tell them the story and show

them the

of the transmitter?”
“I will see to it not only that this cavern is sealed, but
that the transmitter is moved
and shielded so that your
most sensitive instruments cannot relocate it no matter if
they spend years scanning the northern hemisphere of this
world.
tip

—

what I have told you to your colleagues,
we have observed enough of humankind for me to believe

“As

for relating

[

240 ]

that

you would not be taken

You

seriously.

And

there

is

a third

me

your word.”
Lyra glanced at her husband, then back at the Mutable.
“I hope to live a while longer yet, but I never expect to be
flattered like this again. For what it’s worth you have our
word.”
‘‘Thank you, woman. It is done, and I am much relieved.”
“I only wish,” she added, “that Tyl could be here to give
protection.

his

word
“I

done

am

will give

also.”
sorry. Revealing

lightly. I

my

true nature is not something
held back in the hope that the Mai would

spare you and I could then help you return safely without
exposing myself. I could do nothing for the Tsla.”
As they stared the Mutable’s exoderm began to flow and
ripple violently. They stepped back as the silvery skin started
to cloud over with patches of dark gray. These changed to
white, pale yellow, and then became a rich hazel color. Simultaneously the sentient tower began to collapse, the internal structure shrinking and compacting. The transformation
was accomplished in utter silence. Once more Yulour the
Tsla stood before them.
“I thought you would find my company during the return

journey less unsettling in this guise. I hope my company will
not upset you. I have already set in motion the machinery
necessary to conceal the transmitter from potential prying
minds.” Indeed, as she stood there listening Lyra was certain
she could detect a rising hum from behind them, and a slight
vibration beneath her feet.
“I enjoy your company,” the Mutable went on, “and have
not had the opportunity to spend much time among your
kind since I have never been assigned to a human-occupied
world. You are an interesting adolescent race.”
“You’re certainly welcome to our interesting adolescent
company,” Etienne replied dryly. As if they could prevent
the creature from accompanying them if it so desired. “Whatever your motives, you did save our lives, even if you did
compel us to share a mystery that we know won’t be solved
in our lifetime, let alone your lifetime.”
“Myself,” Lyra said dreamily, “I prefer to think the Xunca
went away for personal reasons and that they left this relay
system behind to help whatever intelligences might arise in
[

241 ]

their absence. That’s a nice thought,

anyway. I’d rather think

of any people that brilliant as altruistic rather than indifferent.”

They started down the slight slope toward the hydrofoil.
Yulour moved to help Etienne, who flinched, but only for a
moment; the fur against his arm was real, the smell pure
Tsla.

They gave Tyl a formal farewell, and Lyra restored some
lightness to a situation weighty with solemnity by suggesting
Etienne carry out the standard Tsla funeral ritual. That
sparked an affectionate exchange of insults to which Yulour
listened with interest.
Etienne finished it by doing something he hadn’t done in
quite a while. He took Lyra in his arms and kissed her long
and hard. They stood enfolded in each other for a long time,
and Yulour watched that with equal interest. Such mayfly
relationships were not for his kind, but there was a decided
poignancy to them that forever escaped those condemned
to near immortality. The Mutable sighed an ancient, silent
sigh, no louder than the winds that move the hydrogen between the stars. Existence for these people was a brief explosive flash of consciousness, then limbo. A breath of life
blown by in a rush of emotion and a few hasty thoughts.
The Mutable could only empathize. For it life was an
infinite march toward an unknown end. Besides, there was

work

to do.

Etienne assumed the pilot’s chair, nudged several touchplates, looked uneasy. Lyra moved next to him.
“Trouble?”

We’ve had these spotlights on for a lot
longer than we planned. The batteries are drawn down too
low to power the engine, much less the repellers. We’re going
“Looks

to

like

have to

it.

drift

out until the current and the sun can re-

charge us.”

Yulour studied the control console for an instant. “I think
I can help. No reason not to, now.”
The un-Tsla’s right arm began to change. Fur and muscle
became a single thin strand of faintly radiant metallic silver.
The tendril slipped through the small opening of a power
socket. A tremor ran through the boat as a half dozen readouts suddenly flared brightly.
[

242 ]

“Sorry. The resistance was less than I thought,” Yulour
explained as the silver tendril was withdrawn and became
an arm again. “It is not only that a Mutable is powerful.

A

Mutable is power.”
“Also handy to have around for a difficult trip. Nothing
like a couple of hundred million years of specialized evolution to give you an effective jump-start, though it does
seem a bit disrespectful somehow.” Lyra seemed bemused.
Etienne tried again and the engine whined to life. The
hydrofoil rose two meters above the gravel and pivoted toward the river. Spotlights illuminating their way, they commenced the long journey down the Skar toward Turput,
Steamer Station, and eventually, home.
There they would take a long sabbatical to write their
official report, one which would be haunted by memories.
Somehow that report no longer seemed as important as it
had when they’d started their expedition up the Barshajagad.
Very little seemed important anymore, beyond the way Lyra
clung tightly to Etienne and how he played with strands of
her hair.

Behind them the visible tip of the Xunca transmitter was
engulfed by arctic dark. It brooded motionless now but soon
it would move. Within the seemingly solid mass pimesons
and guons and bits of matter and bits of stuff that wasn’t
matter traveled their assigned pathways at speeds approaching that of light as they had for uncounted centuries.
Unnoticed by uncomprehending humans or caretaking
Mutables, one tiny section suddenly showed signs of activity
where for ages there had been none. The unusual movement
at the subatomic level within might intensify or it might shut

—

down

again.

But something was happening. Something had triggered
a minute portion of the machinery beyond that which was
responsible for normal maintenance. How soon the something might require attention, not even a watching Mutable
might have said. “Soon” was a relevant term, an abstract,
a precession through infinity. For a more specific explanation of what it meant in this instance the Xunca would have
to be consulted.

Wherever they were.
