ALAN DEAN FOSTER
FLINX IN FLUX 

The man end of the table wore his attitude like
a mask. In another place and time the intensity of his
speech and gestures might have seemed unnatural, but
they were perfectly appropriate for his present surroundings. He was a roly-poly sort of fellow topped by a short
brush of inspired hair that, crawled down to his shirt collar. Unlike his diatribe, his attire was simple and neat.
With his mouth shut he looked quite ordinary. So did his
five companions, save one. With that single exception,
none was especially tall or muscular. They differed in
coloring, though there was nothing unusual about that.
They were of different ages. They came from different
backgrounds and different worlds.
What had brought them together in this small room at
this particular time was a burning fanaticism, a bond
stronger than epoxene or duralloy cable— a cause each
was willing to die for. They were true believers, and they
knew without a shadow of a doubt that their cause was
at the

just.

When

discussing

it

they were transformed. At such

times they sloughed off their daily personas and lives as
easily as a lizard sheds old skin. They sat before one
another fresh and gleaming, like the holy crusaders they

knew

they were. Each brought something different to the

The man who was speaking contributed money.
Another brought strength and physical skills. The man
seated beside her was naturally cunning. The six complemented one another even as they shared the same pascause.

sion.

They were the leaders of a growing band, having been
chosen by their associates to make the hard decisions, to
determine targets and courses of action.
The man who was speaking was known to his compatriots as Spider. It was an accurate description of his
mind, not of his physique. When he spoke of the Cause,
he no longer looked so genial. His eyes seemed to bulge
from his face, and his mouth contorted in a humorless
grimace.

None

knew each other’s real names. It was
way. The others had adopted names such as

of them

safer that

Flora and Lizard and

Ormega— identification borrowed

from the natural world
serving. Ecology was

were dedicated to pretheir creed, worshiped without
They had created unnatural rela-

question or hesitation.

that they

tionships in order to better maintain the natural ones be-

tween species. Relationships that the civilization of the
Commonwealth was dedicated to destroying. Such was
their perception.

They were not alone

in these beliefs, but they

were

alone in their methods. They had moved beyond reason
into the realm of religion, a place where nonbelievers

were heretics to be stopped by whatever means necessary. For years they had been biding time, gathering
strength, testing the limits of their organization with sub-

probes here, tiny strikes elsewhere. A chemical plant
sabotaged, construction of a shuttleport abruptly delayed, a few crucial votes influenced by money, persuatle

sion, or occasional blackmail:

all

in the

name of

the


Flinx in Flux


Cause. With each new success, each achievement, their
confidence blossomed and new recruits were gleaned.

The organization had grown beyond being a nuisance. It was now officially classified as a Problem, albeit still a minor one. Higher visibility meant more
scrutiny by the authorities, more difficulty in soliciting
adherents. They were no longer preaching to the already
converted. The organization had reached a plateau. They
could collapse in upon themselves, stagnate, or take the
great leap forward. It was time to metamorphose from a
cause into a movement.
Making that transition meant announcing themselves
to the Commonwealth at large. It meant making a statement that could not be ignored, showing how far they
were willing to go to support their beliefs. It was time at
Until recently.

last for a

major

effort, for a

spectacular display that would

bring them the kind of universal recognition they had
heretofore shunned but

now demanded. Time

for a

dem-

onstration on a scale sufficient to bring double, triple the

number of doubters flocking to their banner.
Time to show the forces of destruction that they were
a power to be reckoned with.
So it was that the six had gathered in this cramped and
stuffy chamber, under the assumed names that they had
come to regard as their only important ones, to decide
the where and when and how of the announcement they
were going to make. Though they had no official leader,
usual

Spider spoke
articulate

first

and longest because he was the most

among them.

When

burning with the Cause, Spider could be spellbinding. His body was a mistake of familial genetics.
Within that rotund, jovial shape dwelt the soul of a tall,
sepulchral
stalked the

whose spiritual ancestors had once
torture chambers of earlier inquisitions. He

figure

never hesitated, never second-guessed himself. Because
he knew. Knew what was right, what was just, what had
to

be done. His companions listened with respect. All

Alan Dean Foster

4
felt as

he did but could not put their emotions into words

as facilely.
It

was dangerous

for

As

place these days.

them

to gather together in

one

a result of recent activities, the or-

ganization had suffered injuries, though no deaths. But
those activities had sparked more than the usual casual
interest on the part of the authorities, enough interest so
that the six

had had

to take circuitous paths to reach this

meeting place in safety. Each was certain he or she had
made it unobserved. Extreme caution was their shield,
anonymity their protection. No one knew which worlds
the organization had cells upon. The government was
persistent but clumsy, easy to fool.
Soon it would not matter. In one blinding strike for
Mother Nature they would voluntarily cast off their cloak
of secrecy and announce themselves to a dazed Commonwealth. Every newsfax, every tridee would declare
their name and purpose. Their purifying gesture would
beget an avalanche of support that would shake the foul
industrialists to their knees, and a new era of respect and
love would

dawn

across this portion of the galaxy.

random

of course. They were as
intelligent as they were dedicated. Even an act mounted
It

would not be

for publicity

a

act,

must have behind

it

a legitimate purpose.

Given the extent of the cancer, they had no lack of targets to chose from. There was so much to be done and
so little time in which to do it. Now, at last, after so
many years of planning and building and laboring in secret, they could begin the real work. From now on the
government and big corporations and ravening exploiters
would have to deal with the avenging angel of the emergent organization.

And

if

some of them should

die in the process? All

had agreed long ago that the righteousness of their cause
was well worth dying for. What mattered an individual
life here and there when the sanctity of whole worlds was
at stake?

Spider concluded his presentation with a brief recapit-

Flinx in Flux

5

ulation of the current situation before nodding to the

woman

seated to his right. She called herself Flora. Her

eyes were blue, and her hair was the hue of spun gold.

She was taller than any of the men except Stick, who sat
quietly on the opposite side of the table. Her body was
like desert heat. Gazing at it caused men to hallucinate.
Stardom and fame could have been hers via the tridee
networks, but such superficialities did not interest her.
She had much more in common with Spider and Stick
and the others seated at the table. The Cause excited her
in a way no man ever had.

She was a biologist, not a

starlet.

natural seductiveness of her voice

When

she spoke, the

masked

the intensity

of her devotion to the Cause. Her dedication and early

overcome the organization’s initial
resistance to her beauty. Now she was looked upon as
merely another soldier. By herself she had induced two
governments to alter their positions on issues important
to her colleagues: one by persuasion, one by blackmail.
Now she held up what looked like a fragment of fabric
half a meter square and five centimeters thick.
“Do you all know what this is? It’s a new product and
currently only available in limited quantities on the luxury market.” The perfect slash of her mouth twisted,
accomplishing the seemingly impossible by muting her
beauty. “I ’ll tell you what it is: the latest and greatest
military training had

perversion of the natural order for profit.”

“Verdidion Weave, isn’t it?” Ormega opted as she
leaned forward for a better look.
Flora nodded brusquely. “A previously untouched organism from a previously unspoiled world. It’s been genetically altered to enhance the comfort of a wealthy few,
though there are plans afoot to lower the cost by increasing production.” She made it sound like an oath framed
in flaming quotation marks. “In other words, the bastards responsible for this plan on expanding their operation throughout the planet of origin.”
Spider folded his hands in front of his belly. “A per-

Alan Dean Foster

6

world for our first major public operation. There are
no mitigating circumstances involved. It’s not as if these
slime are altering grains to feed additional mouths. This

feet

a deliberate attempt to manipulate a natural environment purely for profit. We’re going to stamp it out, shut
is

it

down

so thoroughly that every other

company

in the

business will think three times before trying anything
similar on any other virgin world.

“As you

all

know, our operations

until

now have been

limited to saving a single species here, a lifeform there.

This time,

my

friends, an entire world will

be looking to

We

have before us the opportunity to
ensure the future tranquillity of a complete ecological
system. We’re going in with a sword this time instead of

us for

its

salvation.

a scalpel!

going to be expensive and dangerous. Anyone
who wants out can stay behind, and they won’t be thought
the worse of for their decision. If our preliminary sortie
brings us the information we need, our chances of success will be greatly enhanced.’’
“I guess I’m not as familiar with this Verdidion Weave
“It’s

background as some of you.” Ormega was the
only other woman in the council of six. She was small
and dark and a lot older than Flora, but there was a powerful bond between them. They were bishops in the same
church. Ormega did not envy Flora her youth and beauty,
and Flora respected the other woman’s experience and
knowledge.
“It’s a complex and highly adaptable organism, as is
much of the life thus far cataloged on this frontier
world,” Flora explained as she laid her sample on the
table. “Structurally it resembles the mosses, though it’s
far more advanced than its relatives on Earth or Hivehom
or any of the other damp planets. Initially it was believed
that its reactions were purely piezoelectric in nature, but
further research by the exploiters indicates it’s more complicated than that.” She smiled wolfishly. “We’ve been
and

its

Flinx in Flux

1

intercepting their confidential corporate transmissions for

some time now.
“In

does not respond usefully, but
these soulless people have been playing with its DNA.”
“What’s it been modified for?’’ Lizard asked.
“Carpet.’’ Flora spit the word. “Just carpet.’’
“You mean people walk on it?’’ Ormega murmured.

“A

its

natural state

it

living creature?’’

“It can support considerable weight. Stepping on

it

doesn’t appear to cause any injury. Watch.’’

Flora placed the square of living material on the floor.

Everyone rose or turned his or her chair for a better view.
As they looked on, Flora stepped in the center of the
dense growth. The green-and-rust-colored tendrils responded by rippling toward her feet to offer additional
support.

“If you lean one way or the other,’’ Flora explained,
“the carpet actually shifts to ease you in the direction
you want to go.’’ Her companions could see that the glistening substance was moving her slightly to her left, like
a tightly-packed column of ants.
Gingerly she stepped off the section of living carpet.
The tendrils stopped moving. “It’s a communal organism that can be grown in much larger sections. Or sections can be shaped and bound together to fit any room.
It draws necessary moisture from the air and is nonphotosynthetic, so

walking on

it

air,

requires no light. Walking on

and

it

even exudes a

it is

like

faint hibiscuslike

Her exquisite blue eyes blazed, and her voice grew
“But it was not created to serve as a floor covering

odor.’’
taut.

for privileged mankind!’’

“In

its

natural state,’’ Spider told them, “the

Weave

away from pressure, not moving to supA much more natural and reasonable reaction.
He nodded toward the altered growth.— “is an

reacts by pulling

port

it.

This’’

—

abomination. It should not exist.’’
Flora removed a tiny perfume flask from the curved
upper pocket of her jumpsuit and dumped the contents

Alan Dean Foster

8

middle of the square of Verdidion Weave. Spider
tossed a small incendiary capsule on top. The six watched
silently as the mutated moss burned itself to a charred
in the

crisp.

them to think that the object
of their loathing might feel more pain from being incinerated than from being walked upon, but that did not
matter. It was not a natural growth but rather the prodIt

did not occur to any of

uct of perverse experimentation.

It

should not

Thus, they wasted no more thought on

its

exist.

destruction

than they would on the destruction of those responsible

The Weave, like those who
were responsible for its existence, was not worthy of
sympathy or understanding. It continued to smoke punfor such a biological outrage.

gently for several minutes following the cremation of the
last cell.

Before the last of the smoke had faded away, the man
who called himself Lizard was on his feet and speaking.
He was slim without being sleek, neither was he gaunt
of face like Stick. He was, in fact, exactly ordinary in
appearance, of average height and build and younger than
most of his colleagues. In many ways his very ordinariness made him the most dangerous member of the group.
It allowed him to move unobserved in a crowd, to peer
over people’s shoulders without drawing attention to himself, to wear the garb of harmlessness.
His profession was equally innocuous. So was his private life. Not even his wife suspected his membership in
the organization. She would have been startled to learn
that he was one of the six ranking officials of what she
thought was a harmless fraternal business society.
Yet whenever Lizard discussed matters dear to the heart
of the organization, a sudden change came over him. His
expression would tighten, and a nervous tic would begin
in his left eye, increasing or lessening in intensity according to the passion of his speech.
At the moment he was in complete control of his emotions. Cool heads were needed now that they had decided

Flinx in Flux

9

announce themselves to a corrupt civilization. Cool
heads would be needed to carry out their mission successfully. Lizard had acted as the organization’s point
man on more than one occasion.
He was also responsible for the oversized image that
now flashed on the wall opposite Spider’s seat. Neither
to

the table nor the walls nor the floor appeared to conceal

anything as sophisticated as a holographic projector,
which was a tribute to Lizard’s abilities. He could make

machinery blend into ordinary surroundings with the
same ease with which he blended into a crowd. Homogenizing technology, he called

it.

The hologram showed a small portion of the galaxy.
As the six looked on, it shrank until only the stars of the
Commonwealth were visible. The view narrowed further
until they

by only

When

were looking

at

an unspectacular star orbited

five planets.

the view reached the third planet out,

it

halted

and the image of a world began to pirouette before them
like a dancer on a stage. Lizard resumed his talk, statistics spilling from his mouth. His colleagues showed only
passing interest in information about gravity and diameter. What interested them was the world’s unique and
heretofore undisturbed ecology.

“Longtunnel,” Lizard was saying. “Only a minuscule
portion’s been explored so far, but enough to hint at the
natural marvels the place contains.

Though

the atmos-

phere’s quite breathable, the climate’s inhospitable in the

A

tough place to move around on.’’
“Thanks for small blessings,’’ Ormega whispered.
“Too small, sadly.” Lizard’s left eyebrow began to
twitch. “You know what the enemy’s like. If they see a
profit, the weather’s not going to be enough to stop
extreme.

them.” He returned his attention to the holo.
“Only one settlement so far. Little more than a scientific outpost.” He gestured with a finger. Responding
to his directional body heat, the image reacted by becom-

Alan Dean Foster

10

ing a slightly curved section of planetary surface.

plex cloud patterns boiled above

“The one company we’re

Com-

it.

particularly concerned about

branch of a major Trading House.’’ His eyes glittered, and vitriol stained his voice. “Their small size,
however, has not minimized the amount of damage
they’ve been able to do in a short time. The speed with
which they brought that pitiful Verdidion Weave onto the
market is proof of that.’’
Murmurs rose from his companions as he lowered his
controlling finger. “Right now the scale of commercial
development is limited. Unfortunately, there’s nothing
else on the market like the Weave. Demand for it is soarisn’t a

ing as

its

properties

know nothing and

become known. Those who order

care nothing for the fact that

its

it

de-

velopment is a crime against nature.
“We would not be assembled here if we were discussing the harvesting of a normal growth, but the Weave is
the product of the worst kind of unregulated genetic
nipulation.

And

work trying to
His voice was

company that produced
bend many other lifeforms to
the

rising

and the

it is

ma-

hard

at

their will.”

of his eye accelerating.
the forerunner of a panoply of
tic

“Verdidion Weave is
abominations. The defenseless lifeforms of Longtunnel
are particularly amenable to genetic alteration. To those
for whom exploitation of the innocent is a middle name,
the world is a biological gold mine!” Aware that he was
shouting, he strove to moderate his tone.
“I have seen some of their proposals for additional
bioengineered products, to be produced by manipulating
Longtunnel’s indigenous lifeforms. Most are the product
of a single brilliant but morally bankrupt mind, that of
the head of this firm’s bioengineering division. This individual is the one cog in the company’s machine which
I do not think they can easily replace. Skill at bioengineering

is

cheap. Intuition

is

priceless.”

“This individual was responsible for the development
of the Weave?” Stick wanted to know.

Flinx in Flux

11

Lizard nodded.

“Then
mined

I

think our course of action has been deter-

for us.’’ Flora’s exquisite face

ant to look upon.
will at

“By

was

less than pleas-

excising this particular person

one stroke learn what we need

to

know

we

to suc-

cessfully conclude our mission as well as eliminate a

possible future blemish on the natural order.’’

“That was

my

Spider clasped his hands over

intent.’’

back in his chair. “Longtunnel is
both a suitable and an appropriate place for us to have
our little coming-out party. The crimes being committed
his belly as he leaned

against nature there are of the worst sort, yet the firm

which

is

behind them

is

neither too large nor too dan-

gerous for us to deal with
have opened only a single

A

my

Furthermore, they
wound on this otherwise prisefficiently.

which we will suture
and heal. We will simultaneously announce ourselves,
serve warning upon our enemies, and cure a cancer before it can spread. It is agreed, then?’’
There was no need for a show of hands, no need even
for words, though several of them did nod approvingly.
Spider turned to Lizard. The two men were individual
components of a greater whole, each like one leg of an
insect working to carry the body to a chosen destination.
“I take it your people are ready to move?”
Lizard nodded briskly. “Ready and anxious. They’ve
been practicing for a long time. They’re eager for the
chance to finally do something.”
“They’ll have their chance. We’ll all have our
chance.” Spider’s brooding gaze swept around the table.
“No more clinging to shadows. No more limiting ourselves to issuing manifestos and inserting tracts in obscure faxes. No more begging for public service time on
the major tridee services. After Longtunnel our name
will be on everyone’s lips. The entire Commonwealth
will know what we stand for. The undecided will rally
to our cause. Then we can begin in earnest to reverse the
tine planet.

wound,

friends,

Alan Dean Foster

12

tide of exploitation

which has dominated government

policy for far too long!”

They would have raised a

toast to their decision

and

to

themselves save for the fact that none of them consumed
alcohol or indulged in other narcotic substances. How
could you preach the purity of the natural world if you
could not keep your own body clean? They got high on
one thing only: the passion for the Cause. The true
Cause, the holy war against the rapacious despoilers of
multiple environments, against the polluters and DNAnarchists.

There were other organizations

that professed to

knew them

work

what they were:
weak, feeble, and uncommitted. Only those around the
table were the true shock troops of the coming ecological
for that end, but the six

for

jihad.

Lizard did something, and the holo vanished as though
it had never been. They rose from their seats and began
to leave the meeting room, whispering among themselves, excited but

under control. Everyone knew what

he or she had to do to make the operation a success. And
it had to be a success. The robber barons and their Frankensteinian servants had been given a free hand too long.
Now it was time to amputate.

They kept their voices down and dispersed rapidly.
Time had taught them patience; experience had taught
them caution. As they filed out of the nondescript structure into waiting vehicles or walked to the nearest public
transport, they were already rehearsing their next moves,
each concentrating on his or her assigned duty.
They certainly did not look much like the members of
the ruling clique of a burgeoning terrorist organization.

Chapter Two

While Alaspin attracted its share of visitors, few of
them were tourists. The majority were scientists for
whom an unpleasant climate was merely a minor impediment to research. Here, at least, it was a consistent impediment. The weather in the broad, high-grassed savannas and the dense jungle that bordered them changed little from month to month. There were only two seasons:
wet and not so wet.

The

scientists

and ruins

name

to study the thousands of temples

by an advanced civilization too shy even to
which was thus called Alaspinian by default.

left

itself,

They had

came

left

extensive records of their travels through-

out this portion of space, but practically nothing about

themselves. Yet they had chosen to live and work in primitive structures

of stone and wood. Nothing was

known

of their disappearance, though the theory of racial sui-

numerous adherents.

was almost as if, embarrassed by their achievements, they had simply
cide had

It

disappeared some seventy thousand years ago.
13

Moved

Alan Dean Foster

14

away somehow, others said. For if they had committed
racial suicide, where were the remains?
Fragile bodies, the suicide supporters insisted.

Or

cre-

mation in the jungle. These were theories upon theories
that brought mild-tempered xenoarcheologists to blows,
all impossible to prove because among the millions of
carvings and records that had been left behind on small
cubes of micronically etched metal, there was not one
picture of an Alaspinian. There were endless images of
plants and animals and landscapes and structures, but of
the people who had recorded them, nothing.
It was one of those worlds where the thranx were more
at

ease than their

human

compatriots.

The

hot,

humid

climate was like a breath of fresh steamed air from
to them.

The

larger

permanent research

installations

home
were

by thranx, while their human counterparts came
and went rapidly, gleaning bits and fragments of knowledge suitable for a paper or thesis before fleeing for
all staffed

cooler, drier worlds.

Prospectors outnumbered scientists in the frontier
regions. Alaspin was rich in valuable minerals. Many of
those who called themselves prospectors, however,
avoided the rich alluvial plains of the savannas in favor
of mining the limitless ruins, where the digging was eas-

and the “ores” more highly concentrated; already
refined, in fact. A perpetual state of limited war existed
between prospectors and scientists.
To those engaged in research, the prospectors were despoilers of tombs and destroyers of a still poorly understood alien heritage. Some of the more reckless and less
caring explorers would not hesitate to tear apart a newly
uncovered structure in search of a single marketable arier

tifact,

thereby rendering the entire

site useless for sci-

entific study.

Meanwhile, the poor prospectors, unsupported by fat
research grants and surviving largely by their wits in a
hostile environment, complained that the authorities always sided with the big institutes, while they already had

Flinx in Flux

more

15

and ruins than could be studied in a
thousand years. They argued that every additional site
they discovered only added to, instead of subtracting
from, the sum of scientific knowledge.
In between drifted a small group of hybrids acknowledged by both sides, solitary individuals who were both
prospector and scientist, travelers in whom the desire to
learn warred constantly with greed.
Standing apart and aloof from the combatants and their
eternal bickering were those who had come to Alaspin to
make their fortune by other means. They came to serve
the needs of prospector and scientist alike. For money,
since no one came to Alaspin for his health. The climate
was rotten, and the native lifeforms inimical.
Not every scientist was supported by a recognized institute. Not every prospector was grubstaked by a large
company or criminal consortium. So stores were needed,
and entertainments sufficiently simple and garish, and
located

sites

servicing facilities.

The people who ran those businesses

were the only ones who could really call themselves citizens of Alaspin. They depended on the planet for their
livelihood. They were there for the long haul, unlike the
scientists who dreamed of making the Great Discovery
or the prospectors who pondered the one Big Strike that
lay

in

the next vine-cloaked temple,

the next virgin

stream.
Lastly there was Flinx.

He belonged

none of the recognized classes that
flitted across Alaspin ’s humid surface. He was not there
to prospect and he was not there to do research, though
he studied hard everything he encountered. Solitude was
to

primary backer.
The scientists thought him a peculiar student working
on a thesis. The prospectors recognized a loner when
they saw one and considered him one of their own. Who
else but a prospector would have an Alaspinian flying
snake, or minidrag, constantly riding his shoulder? Who
else would discourage casual friendships and conversahis

Alan Dean Foster

16

Not

tion?

that the

The presence of

young man had

to discourage actively.

his horridly lethal pet kept the curious

well away.

To those who were bold enough or ignorant enough to
sidle up next to him on the street or in the dining room
of the small hotel, he was always polite. No, he was not
a student. Nor a prospector either. Nor did he work for
one of the planetary service corporations. He was on
Alaspin, he freely admitted, to perpetrate a

homecom-

On

hearing this, his questioners invariably departed
more puzzled than they had been before accosting him.
Flinx treasured everyone he encountered, both those
ing.

questioned him and those who recognized Pip’s distinctive blue and pink diamondback coloring and hurriedly crossed to the other side of the street when they
saw him coming. The older he grew, the more fascinating
he found mankind. Until recently his immaturity had

who

prevented him from truly appreciating the uniquely diverse organism that was the

As

human

race.

were equally interesting in their
own way. Their social system was very different from
mankind’s. For all that the two species got on supremely
well, they had different individual priorities and beliefs.
Yes, he was becoming quite a student of people, regardless of their size and shape and where they happened to
wear their skeletons. Part of it was that he kept looking
for another as unique as himself. So far he had not found
for the thranx, they

one.

As he pondered, he wielded

a machete.

traordinary primitive instrument, no

chunk of sharpened metal. Cheap

It

was an ex-

more than

a large

laser cutters

available for sale in every outfitter’s shop in

were

Mimmi-

sompo, but he had chosen the antique instead. Aiming a
cutter and pulling the trigger did not convey the same
sense of satisfaction that swinging the heavy blade did.
A cutter worked neatly and soundlessly. With the machete you could smell your progress as you chopped your

way through green and purple stems and

striated leaves.

Flinx in Flux

The destruction did not

17

him because he knew
how temporary it was. Within a week the trail he was
cutting would be gone as new growth swamped it, devouring the sunlight
Tall trees rose all

one

that

was

all

trouble

admitted to the jungle floor.
around him. He was fascinated by

it

buttressing roots and

little

trunk.

It

was

festooned with epiphytes ablaze with bright crimson
flowers. Swarms of tiny blue-black insects crowded
around blossoms shaped like miniature trumpets. Fourwinged relatives of Terran lepidoptera pushed and shoved
for their turn at the nectar.

Less decorative creatures tried to bite through his
boots, which sank three centimeters and more into the
gray mud through which he was traipsing. They smelled
blood. The high-frequency repeller clipped to his belt
kept most of the winged vampires away. His long-sleeved
shirt and his pants were impregnated with powerful antipheromones, as was his wide-brimmed hat. So far his
sound and stink had maintained him unpunctured.
Though he did not know it, his appearance was little
different from that of jungle explorers from ancient times.
Such men would have killed for the chemistry and electronics that kept the worst Alaspin could offer at a safe
distance. The thranx, bless ’em, didn’t need elaborate
protection. Few bugs could bite through their chitons.
Nor did they need the refrigeration unit that lined his
pants, keeping him cool by recycling his own sweat. Not
necessary, but a luxurious antidote to misery.

Also expensive, but money was something Flinx did
not worry about. While not dominatingly wealthy, he had

made himself

A

multiple

financially independent.

humming

filled his ears.

He had

felt their

presence long before he heard them. Pip uncoiled from
his shoulders and took to the air. There they were again,
in the trees off to his right.

Each was larger than the most massive hummingbird.
They darted toward him in formation and danced around
his head. He smiled fondly at them, then turned and con-

Alan Dean Foster

18

toward the lake he had found on the aerial map.
had struck him as an appropriate place to make final

tiniied
It

farewells.

was more lovely than the picture, he thought
as he broke through the last of the undergrowth and stood
there on the steeply banked shore. It was still quite early.
A fog was rising from the mirror-smooth surface of the
lake, softening the outlines of the trees and lianas that
lined the far shore. They were dream-shapes limned in

The

reality

gold, glowing cutouts rising as if in offering to the mist-

shrouded sun.
The broad expanse inspired his fellow travelers. They
rocketed out over the water, swirling gaily around Pip.
She was the star to which they anchored their constellation.

Until today.

The time was

knew because he could

near, and he

knew

it.

He

mind. Pip was
an empathic telepath, able to both transmit and receive
emotions to and from her master. The half dozen offspring that flew dizzying circles around her now were
feel

it

in his pet’s

equally talented.

They had been conceived during a

home

visit to this, their

world, and to this place Flinx had returned them

was a term not literally applisnakes. He had felt it was the right thing

for weaning, though that

cable to flying

though how much of that feeling had originated
with him and how much of it had been imparted by Pip
he could not have said. Now he knew he had done right.
He had enjoyed the yearlings’ company, but they were
growing fast. Seven meter-long, highly poisonous empathic minidrags were more than any one person could
be expected to cope with, so he had returned the prodito do,

gals.

They were snakes in name alone, because that was
what they most nearly resembled. Even the xenotaxonomists called them miniature dragons, though they were
actually more closely related to the extinct Terran dinosaurs, particularly the coelurosaurs.

He

could sense their

Flinx in Flux

19

confusion as he stood there on the bank, the machete
dangling from his right fist.

Waves of maternal repulsion were spreading outward
from Pip like ripples in a disturbed pond. They washed
over her offspring, battering them, driving them away.
Gradually instinct took over where understanding was
lacking. As they flew wider and wider circles around her,
Flinx could feel the bonds between mother and offspring

weakening. They did not break but became steadily less
intense. It was at once beautiful and painful to watch,
and it filled him with a righteous peace.
He no longer wondered if he had done the right thing
in bringing them here. The dance of the minidrags continued, their incredibly agile shapes darting and spinning, iridescent scales catching the rising sun. Eventually

they broke away one at a time, like children taking turns

end of crack-the-whip,

at the

the far side of the lake.

the world that had given

Now
them

to vanish into the trees

on

they had truly returned to
birth. Flinx inhaled deeply.

“Well and done,” he said aloud, knowing that the
words would not be understood but that Pip would perfectly comprehend what he was feeling. “That’s that, old
girl. Time you and I got back. It’s warming up out.”
Pip came shooting back to him, stopping instantly to
hover a meter before his face. The long pointed tongue
flashed at his nose and eyelids before she pivoted to settle
comfortably on his neck and shoulders.

He allowed

himself a final look at the lake, its surface
still as glass. Then he turned to retrace the route he had
chopped through the jungle. If Pip was sorry to see her
offspring go, she gave no sign of it. If he sensed anything
in her,

Of

it

was a

vast contentment.

course, he had no

feeling

way of

what she was feeling or

telling if
if

it

he was actually

was no more than

a

own

emotions. His peculiar sensibilities
were as much of a mystery to him as ever, though each
passing year seemed to bring him a little closer to coming
reflection of his

to grips with them.

It

was

like trying to strangle fog.

One

Alan Dean Foster

20
instant the talent

was

and real as steel, and the
and there would be nothing

as solid

next he would try to use

it

there, nothing at all.

He worked hard
himself.

trying to understand the mystery of

As he trudged through

the

mud, he

tried to avoid

brushing against the surrounding vegetation. In the jungle every leaf seemed to shelter something toothy or
toxic. He was beginning to respect his talents instead of
fearing and hating them. If only they were more predictable! Hard to build a fence when something kept taking
away your hammer the instant before it struck each nail.
So far his abilities had served to cause him trouble more
than anything else. Unfortunately, he would have to learn
to live with them. He could no more disown them than
he could engage in self-mutilation.
Pip stirred against him even as the surge of emotion
roared through him. He stopped and turned as he heard
the

humming.

A

single adolescent minidrag hovered noisily before

him. When he had turned on it, the yearling had backed
wind, retreating until it was two meters away. There it
remained, staring back intently.
Flinx knew he was not the first human being to establish a tight emotional bond with an Alaspinian minidrag.
There were tales of other prospectors who had done so.
He had met one such individual himself little more than
a year ago. That man’s minidrag, Balthazaar, had mated
with Pip. But he had never heard of anyone bonding with
more than one flying snake. One human, one minidrag.
That was the rule. The yearling had to go.
“Go on! Beat it, scram!’’ He jumped toward it, waving his arms and machete. The little creature retreated
another meter. “Fly away, get lost! Your home’s not with
me and your mother anymore. This is good-bye time.”
He rushed the minidrag. It darted back two meters and
stopped, hovering half behind the protective bulk of a
tree with blue bark.
Turning decisively, he resumed his march. He had

Flinx in Flux

21

covered another twenty meters when he heard the humming again. As he spun in exasperation, the yearling
quickly landed on a convenient branch, folding its pleated
wings tightly against its narrow body and curling its tail
around the wood.
“What’s the matter with you?” He glanced down at
Pip, who was staring silently at her recalcitrant offspring.

“You’ve got a kid who doesn’t want to leave the nest.
What are you going to do about it?”
Flinx was constantly amazed at the complexity of
thoughts that could be conveyed by emotions. Pip understood not a word he had said, but the feeling was clear
enough. She uncoiled herself, spread her wings, and shot
toward the adolescent.

The

yearling nearly

fell

out of the tree trying to avoid

her attack. Flinx watched as the two minidrags went
around trunks and through branches, panicking the concealed native

life

and scattering

it

in all directions.

Finally Pip returned, breathing hard, and settled back

on

and waited.
A minute passed, two, before he heard the expected hum.
The yearling hovered in the crook of two great branches,
obviously exhausted and equally obviously unwilling to
be driven away. Feeling Pip stir on his shoulder, he put
a hand on her neck to calm her down.
“Easy.” She felt without understanding. Her breathhis shoulder. This time he simply stood

ing slowed. “It’s

Her

all

right.”

offspring picked up the

toward him.

He watched

while

same
it

and started
coiled itself around his
feeling

left wrist.

“No, you

can’t stay.

Understand?” He raised

his

hand

and snapped it outward, tossing the flying snake into the
air. As soon as he let it fall, the minidrag was back clinging to his arm, a brightly colored bracelet with flashing

red eyes.

He
its

flung

it

away

several times.

grip on his wrist or lower arm.

supposed

to

do with you?”

Each time

“What

If a flying

it

resumed

the devil

am

I

snake could cringe,

Alan Dean Foster

22
this yearling

was doing exactly

that.

It

buried

its

head

beneath one wing.
Cute, damn it, he thought. All of Pip’s offspring had
been cute, dainty little leathery sculptures. Each of them
carried enough neurotoxin in its poison sacs to kill a
dozen grown men in as many minutes. Not so cute.
The minidrag’s emanations were weak and indistinct,
like its mother’s. Affection, confusion, loneliness, fear,
puzzlement, all mixed up together. Since the flying
snake’s intelligence level was far below that of a human
being, he could never be sure exactly what it was feeling.
This one was very small, even for a year-old minidrag.
Pip was clearly hesitating, trying to divide her attention
between her master and her offspring. He wondered how
she would react if he became violent with the adolescent.
If he directed sufficient anger at it, he had no doubt she
would somehow manage to drive it away, even if forced
to injure

it

in the process.

was, it had probably been the last hatchling, so it was correspondingly reluctant to be weaned.
But he had no intention of staying on Alaspin one day
longer than absolutely necessary, certainly not to accommodate the feelings of a reluctant adolescent minidrag.
There was nothing on this world he wanted to do, nothing he needed to see. All he wanted was to be on his
way, wherever that was. He did not need an extra lifeform cluttering up his ship. He sighed aloud. He had
been doing that a lot lately, he realized.
“Isn’t much to you, is there?’’ A tiny, brilliantly colored triangular-shaped head peered out at him from beneath a concealing wing. “It doesn’t work this way. One
minidrag, one human. You can’t have a three-way em-

Small as

it

pathic relationship.’’

The minidrag did not answer.

Perhaps he was not sufficiently mature. Certainly he
was the runt of the litter. Flinx raised his left arm so they
were eye to eye.
“I suppose if you’re going to hang around, you’re going to have to have a name. What’s smaller than a Pip? A

Flinx in Flux

23

nubbin? No, you’re a throwaway, so I guess we’ll have
to call you Scrap.”
Not flattering, he supposed, but appropriate. The small
loop of muscle tightened around his arm, though whether
in reaction to being named or merely to secure its perch,
Flinx had no way of knowing. He would not take up
much space, Flinx told himself. Pip could keep her eye
on him on board the Teacher, which was stuffed with
scraps of another kind. It would feel quite at home.
The big minidrag had relaxed against his neck now
that .her master’s animosity toward her offspring had vanished. She paid no attention to the yearling. Obviously
she felt she had done her best to discharge her maternal
duties. If her master no longer rejected the adolescent,
she did not feel compelled to, either.
He thought no more about his new companion as he
retraced his steps. Alaspin was not a benign world. It
was home to an impressive assortment of carnivores and
poisonous lifeforms that did not discriminate in their eating habits between local and offworld prey. As Flinx had
learned on his previous visit, this was no place to take
chances, no country in which to relax and sightsee. So
he did not think about either Pip or Scrap as he watched
where he was putting his feet, trying to step in the muddy
depressions he had made when cutting his trail to the
lake. Leaves and vines teased his face, and he winced
instinctively at each contact.
Although there were jungles more hostile that those of
Alaspin, this one was threatening enough for him. He
had never had a desire to join the Scouts, those half-mad
men and women and thranx who were first to set down
on a new world. Not even Pip could protect him against
parasites and tiny bloodsuckers. He held tight to his antique machete. At least, he thought, the ancients had had
enough sense to make them of titanium. Anything else
would be too heavy to wield efficiently.
Another thirty meters brought him into the small clearing where his crawler waited. This was as far as he had

Alan Dean Foster

24

bash with it. The machine traveled smoothly
over water and through most jungle, but dense thick trees
defeated it. Thus he had been forced to leave it here and
travel the rest of the way to the lake on foot.
It looked like an oversize chrome canoe on wheels,
roofed in plexalloy and articulated in the middle. The
highly polished sides reflected much of the burning sunlight, not critical here beneath the trees but vitally important for cooling purposes when out on lake or river.

been able

to

Armored

grill work

shielded the underside,

protecting

was not much wider than the driver’s seat, which enabled it to pass between those trees it
was incapable of knocking over. What it really was, was
sensitive machinery.

It

a giant, mobile heat exchanger, able to convey

its

pas-

sengers in relative comfort across Alaspin’s humid, hot
countryside.

Flinx had rented

it

in

Mimmisompo, paying

with a

credcard whose rating, while not astronomical, had lifted
the eyebrows of the merchant doing the leasing.
The crawler traveled on double treads, one fore and

could carry three passengers seated single
file behind the driver. There were no other passengers
except Pip, and he really did not need such a large vehicle, but it was the smallest he could find on short notice. So he had shrugged and overpaid. It made even
the other aft.

It

on the river than it did on land. An aircar
would have been faster, but there were none for rent in
Mimmisompo. The prospectors and scientists kept them
busy ferrying friends and supplies. Flinx had come with
money but no pull. In a small frontier city the latter was
often the more important medium of exchange. So he had
been forced to settle for the crawler.
No matter. He was only a few days out of town and
on his way back. Having established a trail on his way
in, it would take him a quarter of the time to return to
the river, carefully dodging the leafy emergents the
crawler had been unable to push over. Once back on the
river, he would be traveling downstream instead of fightbetter time

Flinx in Flux

25

He was

looking forward to spending one
more night in a hotel instead of the crawler’s cramped
ing the current.

quarters.

Mimmisompo

on the edge of an immense sandy
beach, high and dry in the clear season and sopping in
the wet.

The

sat

shuttleport lay farther inland.

It

occupied

of land in the region, immune
to seasonal flooding. Not the sort of place one would

one of the few high

bits

choose for a relaxing vacation, but he was anxious to
return to it now.
At the top of the ladder built into the side of the crawler
he paused to run a magnetic field key over the lock, and
heard it click open in response. A blast of cool air struck
him as he climbed inside, settled into his seat, and
nudged a switch to close the door behind him. Probably
no need to lock the vehicle out here in the middle of
nowhere, but he had learned early on that the middle of
nowhere was a country often frequented by unsavory
types, and while the odds of anyone stumbling across the
crawler were small, he felt more comfortable when they
were entirely in his favor. The sight of an expensive vehicle sitting open and unguarded might be too tempting
for even an honest prospector to ignore.
The mental flavor of the five departed young minidrags
no longer lingered in his mind, but the crawler’s cabin
was still pungent with their odor. It was musky but not
unpleasant. The recycler would soon have it cleared out.
Curved metal ribs supported the otherwise transparent
plexalloy walls and domed roof. After a quick survey of
his immediate surroundings he began switching on instruments. Yellow standby lights gave way to green readies.

Like any modem piece of machinery, the crawler took
only a moment to run a self-check and declare itself
healthy. That done, Flinx turned up the recycler a notch
and dug out a towel to wipe his face. You had to be careful
when changing environments. While the air-conditioning
unit he wore had kept his body comfortable, his face had

Alan Dean Foster

26

been exposed to the air. Perspiration poured from his
forehead and cheeks, ran down his neck under his shirt
collar. The combination of sweat and air-conditioning
could bring on a cold faster than anything else known to
man.
It was a matter of choice. He could have worn a helmet
and insulated himself completely from the local climate,
but somehow that seemed the wrong thing to do at the
minidrags’ leave-taking. So he had left the helmet in
the crawler and had tolerated the heat and humidity for the
short hike through the jungle.

Putting the soaked towel aside, he

downed

a long swig

of chilled fruit juice from the driver’s feedline before
starting the engine.

The

electric drive

hummed

smoothly
around an

beneath him. Pip slid off his shoulder to coil
equipment rack next to the seat behind him. If she felt
sad or melancholy at the loss of her five offspring, she
gave no sign of it.
Scrap was less willing to find a seat. Despite Flinx’s
persistent efforts to dislodge it, the young minidrag insisted on clinging to his wrist. Finally Flinx gave up and
put the crawler in motion. The adolescent was not heavy,
and before long he would get bored and move off by
himself.

The path he had bulldozed

from the river was easy
to follow. Fast-sprouting jungle plants were already fighting for their share of the newly esposed route to the sky.
He turned a tight curve, bending the crawler in the middle, to work his way around a tree three meters thick.
The vehicle articulated vertically when he followed that
maneuver by driving down and through a dry streambed.
Now that he had accomplished what he had come to
Alaspin for, he was forced to contemplate what he was
going to do next. Life was no longer simple. Once it had
been, back on Moth, when all he had had to worry about
was keeping dry and getting enough to eat and maybe
swiping a few luxuries now and then to help out Mother
Mastiff when business was slow. The past four years had
in

Flinx in Flux

27

complicated his life incredibly. He had seen and experienced more than most men saw and experienced in a
lifetime, let alone adolescent boys.
Not that he was a boy anymore, he reminded himself.
He had grown physically as well as mentally. Nearly nine
centimeters, in fact. Decisions were no longer easy to
make, choices no longer straightforward. Being nineteen
carried with it a lot of responsibility, for him more than
for most. Not to mention the emotional baggage that automatically went with it without right of refusal.
The only problem with seeing a lot, he mused as he
guided the crawler through the Ingre jungle, was that he
was not happy with most of what he had seen. In general,
both man and thranx had been a disappointment to him.
Too many individuals were ready and willing to sell out
their principles and friends for the right price. Even basically good people like the merchant Maxim Malaika
were essentially looking out for their own best interests.

Mother Mastiff was no different, but at least she did not
have a hypocritical bone in her body. She delighted in
being a greedy, money-grabbing lowlife. He reveled in
her honesty. She was the best human being she could be,
given the sad circumstances of her life.
And what was to become of him? A universe of possibilities lay open to him. Too many, perhaps. He had
not the slightest idea which to reach for.
Nor were weighty questions of philosophy and morality all that obsessed him right now. There was also, for
example, the increasingly fascinating and complex matter of the opposite sex. As he had spent most of the past
four years just surviving, women remained largely an intriguing mystery to him.
There had been some. The beautiful and compassionate Lauren Walder, many years ago back on his home
world of Moth. Atha Moon, Maxim Malaika ’s personal
pilot. A few others, younger and less memorable, who
had flashed like brief blue flames through his life, leaving
memories that burned as well as confused him. He found

Alan Dean Foster

28

himself wondering if Lauren would remember him, if she
was still working happily at her obscure fishing lodge or
if she had moved away, perhaps offplanet. If she would
still

think of

He

him

as a “city boy.”

straightened in his seat.

He had been little more
that. Maybe he was still

than a child then, and shy at
something of a boy, but he was no longer nearly as shy.
Nor did he look half so boyish. That troubled him. Any

change troubled him because he could never be certain
if it was the result of natural growth processes or his
unnatural origin.

Take the matter of his height. He had learned that it
was normal for most young men to attain their full growth
by age seventeen or eighteen. Yet he had reached his full
adolescent height by the time he was fifteen and then
stopped cold. Now he had suddenly and inexplicably
grown another nine centimeters in twelve months and
showed no sign of slowing. He had gone abruptly from
slightly below average male height to slightly above it.
Height changed one’s perspective on life as well as the

way others perceived one.
The drawback was that it became harder to remain inconspicuous. It made him feel less of a boy and more of
a man, though when a boy became a man, wasn’t he
supposed to be certain about things? Flinx found he was
more confused now than he had been at sixteen, and not
only about women.
anyone had a right to feel confused, it was Philip
Lynx, ne Flinx. His was not a normal mind in a normal
body. Better to be confused all the time than frightened.
He managed to keep the fear in the background, out of
the way, locked in the dark cul-de-sacs of his mind. It
did not occur to him that it was his fear and confusion
that prevented him from making further contact with
members of the opposite sex. He knew only that he was
If

wary.

Bran Tse-Mallory or Truzenzuzex were around
advise him. He missed them deeply, wondered where

If only

to

Flinx in Flux

29

they were and what they might he up to, what mysteries
they might be probing with their singularly penetrating

minds. For all he knew, he realized with a cold
they might be dead.

chili,

No, impossible. Those two were immortal. Monuments both of them, spirit and intelligence molded in
material everlasting, both parts combining to form a
much greater whole. They had their own lives to live, t „
told himself for the thousandth time, their

own

destinies

They could not be expected to spare the time
one odd young man, no matter how interesting

to fulfill.
to tutor

he might be.
Having always managed on his own as a boy, he could
certainly do so as an adult. He would damn well have to
find out things for himself instead of expecting another
to do it for him. Why shouldn’t he manage? He could do
certain things that so far as he

knew no one

else could

do.

They designed me well, he thought bitterly. My prenatal physicians. The rogue men and women who had
employed his DNA for their plaything. What had they
really hoped to achieve with him and his fellow fetal
experimentees? Would they be proud of him today or
disappointed, as they had apparently been in all the others? Or would they simply be curious, utterly distant and
uninvolved? It could be no more than a matter for speculation, since all of them were dead or mindwiped.
Well, their subject was preparing to build a life of his
own, independent and unobserved. Already he had crisscrossed a

fair

portion of the

Commonwealth

trying to

locate his natural parents, only to discover that his

was dead and his
mists and rumors

father’s identity a

mystery

mother

lost in the

were his heritage.
That desire to know had driven him for several years.
Now he was beyond that. If he was ever to learn the truth
of his genealogy, he would have to pry it opt of some
computer storage chip hidden somewhere beneath human
ken. Time to put history behind him and look to his futhat

Alan Dean Foster

30
ture,

which would probably prove as complicated as

his

past.

he considered himself fortunate. While his unpredictable talents had often placed him in trouble, they
had also helped to extricate him from it. He’d had the
chance to meet some unique individuals: Bran TseMallory and Truzenzuzex, Lauren Walder, and others not
Still,

nearly so pleasant.

And

then there were the Ujurrians.

He found himself wondering how

their tunnel digging

was progressing. The A Ann, too, of course, scheming
and plotting against humanxkind, always searching for a
weakness, probing for an opening, watching and waiting
to expand whenever the Commonwealth seemed weak or
indecisive.

His thoughts were rambling, but he could not help
himself. The crawler largely drove itself, and now that
he had done what he had come to do, he was relaxed and
at ease. He could easily see himself becoming a reclusive
mystic, the old hermit of the trade vectors, cruising back
and forth through the Commonwealth and even skirting
its outermost boundaries in the wonderful ship the Ujurrians had fashioned for him. The Teacher. That was what
they called him. A paradox, since the more he learned,
the more ignorant he felt.
Truzenzuzex would have called that a sign of increasing maturity. He was a student, not a teacher, intensely
interested in everything around him: people and places,

and individuals. He had been exposed to bits
and pieces of great mysteries. Abalamahalamatandra,
who had been not a survivor of some ancient race but
instead a biomechanical key for triggering a terrible
device. The Krang, the ultimate weapon of the longvanished Tar-Aiym, whose strange mechomental perturbations still echoed through his brain after all these years.
So many things seen, so many places yet to go. So much
to try to comprehend.
Intelligence was a terrible burden.
civilizations

He

halted abruptly, the crawler

coming

to a stop as

he

Flinx in Flux

31

released the accelerator. Pip’s head rose sharply from the

where she lay curled about herself, and Scrap’s miniature wings fluttered nervously as Flinx clasped both
hands to his head. The headaches were growing worse.
He had always had them, but this past year they had become a constant companion, averaging several or more a
month.
One more reason for abjuring permanent relationships.
It was entirely possible, he had considered in the darker
moments, that he was one more eventual dead-end experiment, and he had no desire to drag anyone else down
with him. He had simply managed to last a little longer
than the rest of their spectacular failures. What was truly
frightening was that in the medical texts the difference
between headache and stroke was little more than a matseat

ter

of degree.

The

painful lights began to fade from the inside of his

took a long, shuddering breath, then sat up
straight. Something was happening to him. Something
was changing inside his head, and he had no more control over it than a spaceport control tower had over a
runaway shuttle. More changes. Piss on his progenitors,
the sons of bitches who had arrogated unto themselves
the right to toy with the unborn.
There was nothing to be done about it. He could
hardly walk into a major medical facility and calmly request a full-scale examination on the strength of being
the bastard product of an illegal and universally abhorred
society of renegade eugenicists. On the other hand, he
told himself, feeling better as the pain in his head went
away, it might simply be that he was prone to headaches.
He managed a grin. It would be amusing if all his fears
and worries were groundless, and the only thing he was
suffering from was the normal trauma of moving from
adolescence into adulthood. It would also be wonderful.
It would also be unlikely.
The headaches were usually accompanied by a severe
emotional twitch from another person, but there was no
retinas. Fie

Alan Dean Foster

32

one else in the vicinity. Maybe a real headache, then. He
would not mind the pain if that was the case. Sometimes
even pain could be reassuring.
The fact that he could still suffer wrenching emotional
dislocation here in the middle of the jungle was further
proof of the erratic nature of his abilities, not that he
needed additional confirmation. The fact that he had

come

to grips with his peculiarities

intellectually did

nothing to assuage their effects on him. They were a constant reminder of his abnormality, of the fact that whatever else he did, he would never be able to lead anything

resembling a normal life.
If only he could learn to channel, to control his talents,
to turn them on and off like water from a faucet. “If
only,” he mumbled angrily to himself, “I were normal.
But I’m neither normal nor in control of what I am.”
A light weight landed on his right shoulder. A glance
revealed the scaly yet somehow understanding face of

He smiled.
“What am I going

Scrap.

do with you? You aren’t going to
find any bonders out there, anyone to share with. You’ll
be living in an emotional void, existing on overflow from
Pip and me, all receive and no amplify.’’
What did minidrags do in the wild? he wondered.
Could they feed empathically off each other? Certainly
to

they could not act as a telepathic lens the

him.

He wondered sometimes what

way Pip did

for

the flying snakes de-

rived from their select relationships with certain

humans

besides physical companionship.

what I need, he thought, though not unkindly.
Another oddball in the fold. Yet what better company for
Just

a self-declared outcast than another self-anointed outcast
like himself?

He was

feeling

much

better.

What he would do was take his marvelous ship and
explore the Commonwealth for as long as time and health
allowed. Legends would grow up around him, the wanderer with the flying snake who touched briefly at this

world and then

that,

only to

move on

quietly, leaving

Flinx in Flux

33

behind neither name nor place of origin nor knowledge
of purpose. The Hermit of the Commonwealth. That had
a solid ring to it. Stoic and aesthetic. There was only one
problem with the noble life he had set out for himself.

was

way to meet girls.
Whoever messed with my brain, he thought glumly,
and stirred up my genetic code the way a bartender would
stir ice with a swizzle stick, left my hormones unIt

a terrible

touched. Determination of purpose and a burgeoning sex
drive, he decided, did not go well together. It was a prob-

had been at the core of many of man’s troubles
since the beginning of time.
With time and patience and study maybe he could one
day locate a sympathetic surgeon skilled enough to rid

lem

that

him of

his headaches, if not his inheritance.

Maybe he

could find a way to exert some control over his life.
He had seen and done enough of the extraordinary. All he
wanted for himself from now on was peace and quiet and
a chance to learn.
Even as he was concluding the thought, he felt the
familiar, damnable prickling in his mind. No headache
this time, merely a mental tickle. But in its own way,
because he could not shut it out, it was equally unsettling. It was a sensation easy to identify because he had
encountered it too many times previously. Somewhere,

someone was

in trouble.

Pip and Scrap

Scrap darting in front of his
face to batter at the plexalloy like a berserk bumblebee.
The minidrag blocked his view.
“Beat it, get out of the way!” He swept the flying
snake aside with the back of a hand, not pausing to think
that were it so inclined, the yearling minidrag could have
killed him in an instant.
Leaning forward, he tried to see between the trees.
Cooled air circulating between the double layer of plexalloy kept condensation from forming on the inside.
Nothing ahead but green jungle, and moments later, not
even that.
felt

it

also,

Alan Dean Foster

34

There was the beach fronting the river. A hundred meters of clean, packed gray sand. In the rainy season it
disappeared. Now it lay as exposed as the finest bathing
beach on New Riviera.
No one on Alaspin would think of relaxing on such a
beach, however. There were thousands of similar retreats
lining the banks of dozens of major rivers, and a hundred
could be bought for a pittance the bloodsuckers and the
insects would drain a body like a sponge set out for their
amusement if anyone tried to sunbathe on any jungle
beach without complete body protection.
The beach was spotless; empty. There was no cover
except what a man could bring with him. The crawler
chewed up sand as Flinx retraced the tracks he had laid
down earlier. His thoughts had eased considerably, and
he was already planning the hop from Mimmisompo back
to Alaspinport, where his shuttle waited to carry him
back to the Teacher high in synchronous orbit.
Pip’s wings ruffled his hair from behind. The flying
snake was up and anxious.

—

,

“Now

what?”
Then he was wrenching viciously on the crawler’s control bar, the front treads spitting

turned

it

sharply.

sand to the

left

as he

Chapter Three

The

was

figure lying in front of the crawler

less as the

huge pieces of driftwood the

river cast

during the rainy season. Scrap continued to
iously against the front
to idle. Pip rose

window

from her

as motion-

bump

up

anx-

as Flinx set the engine

seat to settle

on

his shoul-

der.

He cracked

the

dome,

letting the hot,

humid

air swirl

around him for a moment before climbing down to the
beach. A narrow track such as a turtle might make returning to the sea had been gouged in the sand. It led
from the river’s edge to the prone figure’s feet, showing
the route the refugee had taken from water to dry land.
His eyes flicked over the slow-moving stream. There was
no sign of a boat, nor did he expect to see one.
Reaching the body, he rolled it over on to its back and
unexpectedly found himself recalling the line “ Diese ist
kein Mann ” from the ancient Wagnerian tridee. She was
no Brunhilde, however, and he was certainly no Siegfried: Beneath the dirt, scratches, bruises, and millimite
35

Alan Dean Foster

36

bug

bites

lay

the battered

shell

of a very attractive

woman.
She was still alive. If she had not been, his mind would
not have reacted as it had. Her demise might have saved
him a headache, but for the moment at least he did not
mind having endured the brief pain. Her pulse was weak
but not dangerously

so— clearly

she was in the last stages

The trail leading back to the
cated she had made it this far on hands and
of exhaustion.

river indibelly.

She

only looked dead.
What he could not fathom were the shorts and shortsleeved shirt. Nice attire for a sealed hotel, but poten-

on Alaspin. Her arms and legs
were striped with millimite bug trails, and deep red
splotches showed where drill beetles had been mining.
They were bad enough, but he could understand them.
The bruises were more cryptic. They did not look like
the kind a drifting log would make, and there were no
rapids anywhere along this stretch of river.
Her blond hair was cut short on top, sides, and front
save for a single tail that trailed six centimeters from
behind her right ear and ended in a soggy knot. A star
had been shaved above each ear. He did not recognize
the style, but then, style was not something he usually
concerned himself with.
He felt her clothing. Thin, lightweight. Cool and uttially fatal

anywhere

else

Alaspin ’s rapacious insect life. You
wore either jungle drill or two sets of something else.
How the hell had she ended up here like this?
A dumb tourist determined to see the backcountry on
her own, most likely. Tried to walk or float out when her
vehicle broke down instead of staying with it and
waiting for help. An infrequent bit of stupidity, but not
unheard of. Birding or snake watching or taking tridee
terly useless against

chips.

Then he reminded himself she might have come upriver in an enclosed boat. If it had sunk she would have
had no choice but to swim or walk. That scenario made

Flinx in Flux

some

The water would

sense.

cy beacon signal.

37

mute any emergenMaybe she was more unlucky than
also

dumb.

He had no

trouble picking her up and carrying her

back to the crawler. Getting her inside was another matter. She was not that heavy, but he had to rig a lift with
some rope and haul her up hand over hand. If not for the
added muscle he had put on this past year, he could
not have done it. Pip kept clear, watching, while Scrap
darted anxiously around the limp body, no doubt curious
as to why a living human being should be devoid of emotion.

The four passenger
beds for two

riders.

seats could

He

put her in

be folded flat, making
the back of the crawler,

then punched up the location of the first-aid

As would be expected

kit.

for a rental vehicle, the instruc-

on the self-injecting ampoules in the kit were simple and self-explanatory. Some looked pretty old, but
none had reached their official expiration dates. The bites
were easy enough to treat. Salve for the millimite scars,
iofluorodene to kill the eggs the drill bugs had laid in her
tions

muscles.

He

pumped her full of general antiseptic
None of the ampoules lit up during injec-

also

and fungicide.
tion, so she was not

he was dumping
into her system. He applied intravenous antibiotic and a
spray over the bruises and cuts, then sat back and surveyed his handiwork. The crawler’s air-conditioning had
replaced the hot air with a fresh soothing coolness.
The bruises on her face and body troubled him, but
there was nothing he could do for her appearance. The
crawler’s medkit was designed to keep people alive, not
repair them cosmetically. Well, it would not bother her
as long as she was unconscious. The best thing would be
to get her to the hospital at Alaspinport.
She had a slight fever and was badly dehydrated despite the fact that she had obviously spent some time in
the river. Either she had been afraid to drink the perfectly
potable water or she had been unable to. He had no idea
allergic to the stuff

Alan Dean Foster

38

when she had

last eaten,

but her stomach and intestines

anything but full.
After waiting an hour for the medication to settle in
and take hold, he gave her two ampoules of multipurpose
felt

and vitamins in a sodium solution. The injected
broth would give her strength and allow her system to
nutrients

begin some serious repair work.
An hour later his efforts were rewarded. She turned
her head to her right and moved one arm several centimeters. Her neuromuscular system was functioning, then.
The portable emergency scanner had not revealed any
internal injuries, the light staying in the healthy pink
range as he had run the pickup over her body. It had
beeped a couple of times when he had passed it over the
severest bruises. If it had gone over into the red or purple, that

would have been an indication of broken bones

or worse.

Giving her a
seat.

Back

in

last

glance, he returned to the driver’s

Mimmisompo someone would be worrying

about her, be
search society.

it

relative,

He would

companion, or reout and turn her over to

traveling
find

them.

She

really

was

quite pretty, he thought as he put the

crawler in drive. The longer he studied her injuries, the

more convinced he became that they were not the result
of an accident. Her attire was proof enough that she was
no backcountry veteran. He could see her offering a ride
to some traveler in distress, only to end up mugged,
beaten, and left for dead in the middle of the river. An
unpleasant picture with the smell of truth about it. If she
had met with foul play of some kind, it would explain
everything.

Except why even a thief would want to beat her half
to death. A pro would have simply knocked her out,
tossed her overboard, and taken her goods, leaving it to
the river and the jungle to clean up after him. Not that
he was any judge of criminal ethics. His own criminal
ethics, when he had been engaged in petty thievery as a

Flinx in Flux

39

youngster, had been radically different from most.

He

Her bruises were not distribrandom. They suggested professional work of an

studied her in the rearview.

uted

at

unsavory nature.

He

grunted.

What

did he

know about

been anything from a simple slip on a
quarrel. He was hypothesizing on air.

The crawler

it? It

could have

railing to a lovers’

buoyancy compensators humming to life as the treads expanded to function
as paddles. He had opted for the durability and longevity
slid into the river, the

of the crawler, but as he studied his damaged passenger,
he found himself wishing he had rented a skimmer despite the delay it would have entailed.
It took three days of traveling with the current before
the river bent to reveal the floating docks of Mimmisompo. Not once had his passenger opened her eyes,
though she had moaned in her sleep. It did not make him
uncomfortable to listen to her disjointed mumbling, because he was concentrating on her emotional subconscious. As expected, it was an incoherent jumble,
alternating between pleasure and pain depending largely
on how recently he had dosed her. The ampoules were
keeping her alive, though, and her body was slowing repairing

itself.

When

he docked in Mimmisompo, he turned in the
crawler and called for a robocab. It delivered them to the
modest hotel where he had stayed on arrival two weeks
ago. The manager coded his room without questions. He
was glued to the tridee and did not even look up when
Flinx returned with the limp woman in his arms. In Mimmisompo plenty of people came and went from their

rooms
The

in that state.
lift

carried

them

to the third

and top floor of the

hotel. Flinx passed the charged bar across the center of

the door, then waited while

it

read the code and clicked

open. Pip and Scrap entered first, Flinx following.
kicked the door shut behind him.

Marveling

at

He

her litheness, he placed her gently on one

Alan Dean Foster

40

of the two beds. After checking her vital signs, he treated
himself to his first shower in days. When he reentered
the bedroom, it was to find her sleeping as soundly as
she had in the crawler.

This morning he had used the last of the crawler’s
emergency supplies. Tomorrow he would find her friends
or, failing that, a physician. She lay still on the bed,
barely illuminated by the moonlight pouring through the
single large window on her left. Above her headboard
the electronic bug repeller glowed emerald, ready to dissuade any intruder that managed to make it past the hotel’s

exterior defenses.

Flinx checked his

own

before tossing his towel aside

and sliding gratefully beneath clean, cool sheets. The
room was Spartan but spacious, dry, and insect-free.
Outside the capital city of Alaspinport you could not ex-

more than that.
She was breathing easily, and he rolled over to stare
her. Pip assumed her familiar position at his feet while

pect
at

Scrap settled close by.
If others were searching frantically for her, they would
have to wait until he had had a decent night’s sleep, he
reflected. He had earned it. Another day would make no
difference to her or her colleagues, assuming she had any
in Mimmisompo. He did not worry about other unlikely
possibilities. Not with Pip resting alertly at his feet.
At least, he thought lazily as he drifted off to sleep,
this was one time he had managed to do a good deed
without involving himself deeply in someone else’s problems.
V

Morning proved

was not going to be that easy.
Somehow it never was. She was still resting peacefully
when he awoke, rose soundlessly, and prepared to go
it

out.

As he
rection.

dressed, he could not help glancing in her di-

She was lying on her

side,

and the sheets had

draped themselves provocatively over her body. In the
light she was not merely attractive, she was beautiful.

Flinx in Flux

He

41

kept telling himself as he studied the rise and

of
her chest that he was only checking the regularity of her
breathing. It was impossible for him to lie to himself,
however. Pip’s reactions always truthfully mirrored what
fall

he was feeling.

He

on the way out.
She was not hurting, he was sure of that. Not with all
the antibios, specifics, and endorphine analogs he had
left

pumped

hurriedly, sealing his jumpsuit

into her. If anything, she ought to be floating

half a meter above the bed.

A

last

pass with the scanner

was accomplished without a beep. She was healing
idly, as

much

a credit to her

own

rap-

constitution as to his

amateur treatment of her injuries.
Tough little lady, he mused. All the more reason to try
to find out how she had come to be beaten up and dumped
in the middle of the Ingre.
This was only his second visit to Mimmisompo, and
he did not know the town that well, but he had learned
long ago that information was often available in such
places in inverse proportion to the actual population.

Furthermore,

community

it

was not necessary

to find the

to

scour the entire

answers he needed. There were

always logical places to make inquiries. The official information booths were at the bottom of any such list.

Because of her wholly inadequate attire, Flinx went on
the assumption that she was a recent arrival to the Ingre
region. No half-experienced prospector or scientist would
have been caught dead in the kind of clothing she had
been wearing when he had found her, not even if traveling in a vehicle as secure as the crawler.

knew when you might have

You never

go outside. At the minimum she should have been wearing boots, a long-sleeved
shirt, long-legged pants, repellers, and cooling threads.
Her assailants had known their business. You could not
walk out of the Ingre. By the time a body could be located, the local fauna would have made identification difto

determination of cause of death impossible.
What kept nagging at him was the apparent profes-

ficult,

Alan Dean Foster

42

sionalism with which the beating had been administered.
Her bruises had been evenly dispersed across her body,

suggesting that whoever had handed them out had taken
care to prolong her consciousness for as long as possible.

smacked of sadism, questioning, or both. He worried
about it all the way to Quayside.
The entertainment center was not crowded. It was too
early. There were drivers and cargo lifters, alluvial minIt

and one independent rarewood logger whom Flinx
recognized by the specialized trimming equipment dangling from his belt. Half a dozen men, nearly as many
ers,

women.
There were also two thranx, looking a
than their

human

human

lot

more

at

ease

compatriots. Each was chatting with a

instead of with each other.

It

was rumored

that

company of human beings to
Flinx knew that was talked up by thranx

the thranx preferred the
their

own

kind.

Even now, hundreds of years after the
Amalgamation, there were still humans whose insectophobia required attention and treatment.
He did not look at them twice. Man and thranx had
been so close for so long that they were no longer thought
psychologists.

More

people in shiny suits.
The people in the entertainment center showed little
interest in the games and other diversions Quayside offered. Two men were idly toying with a quick-draw
shooting game near the back. No one else paid any attention to the horrific and extraordinarily lifelike monsters
that leapt from behind rocks or jumped from vines or
erupted from the ground to attack the two competitors.
The illusions had to be shot in the right spot the correct
number of times for a score to register. Their simulated
death throes were exuberantly noisy and dramatic. It was
the nature of the game.
The fact that each holoed creature actually existed, either on Alaspin or on another world, added to the game’s
attraction, though Flinx was not sure a teacher would
have thought of it as educational. He never indulged in
of as aliens.

like short

43

Flinx in Flux

Once he had played one
companion. It had left him cold.

the electronic entertainments.

out of deference to a

Though he was
challenge to

it.

astonishingly proficient, there was no

He

credited his skill to

good

reflexes

and

never thought there was any more to it than that.
At the conclusion of the game some joker had repositioned the halo projector so that a large, carnivorous reptile had dropped down on Flinx from the direction of
the ceiling. The result was just what the practical joker
had been hoping for. Flinx had been startled and frightened.
Unfortunately, that had caused Pip to react defensively. Her highly caustic venom had burned right through
the holo projector’s lens, at considerable cost to the establishment’s owner. With Pip hovering nearby, the
chastened pranksters had paid the full cost of the damage.

crowded table. The man
seated facing him boasted a handlebar mustache that tapered to waxed, glistening points. They quivered like the
needles on a praxiloscope when he laughed. His name
was Jebcoat, and he hailed from Hivehom, a human born
and raised on the thranx capital world. He was no stranger
to heat and humidity. As near as Flinx had been able to
tell from their initial brief contact weeks ago, when he
had first arrived in Mimmisompo, Jebcoat had done a
little of everything. If you asked him a question there
was a fifty-fifty chance you would get an answer. The
odds on truth were lower.
Flinx did not recognize his female friends. Jebcoat saw
him approaching and broke off his conversation with the
ladies to give the young man a broad smile. One of the
women turned curiously to inspect the newcomer. She
was a shade under two meters tall and wore implants that

He angled toward

the only

gave her pupils a silvery cast.
“This kid a friend of yours?’’ she asked Jebcoat without taking her eyes off Flinx.
He stiffened momentarily until he realized she was try-

Alan Dean Foster

44

mg

provoke him. That was one way of taking the measure of a stranger on a world like Alaspin.
“He’s no kid.’’ Jebcoat chuckled softly. “I ain’t sayin’
he’s a man, either. Frankly I don’t know what he is, but
you’d best watch your word footing around ’im. He wears
to

’ ’

death for a play-pretty.
As if on cue, Pip stuck her head out from beneath

and Scrap stirred on his wrist. The woman’s eyes flicked from mature minidrag to adolescent.
Flinx sensed no fear in her, which might mean either that
she was as bold and confident as she appeared, or simply
that his damnable talents weren’t functioning at that moment.
The other woman was tall, but no giantess like her
companion. “Go easy on him, Lundameilla. He’s kinda
cute, though a bit on the skinny side.’’ She laughed, a
short jittery sound that would make anyone in the vicinity grin. “You and him going together sideways wouldn’t
fill up a decent doorway. Care to join us?
Flinx shook his head. “Just a question or two. I’ve
been out in the Ingre, and I need to find out about somebody I ran into out there.’’ The giantess’s eyebrows rose.
“Find anything while you were out there?’’ Jebcoat
eyed him speculatively.
“What I was looking for.’’ Flinx saw that his approval
rating had risen another notch. It was not considered impolite to ask questions of a stranger on Alaspin, but it
Flinx’s collar

’ ’

was considered foolish to reply straightforwardly. Sometimes it was worse than foolish.
“Found something I wasn’t looking for, too. About a
hundred centimeters, slim, female, twenty-two to -five,
pale blond with a weird haircut, and blue eyes, though
they might’ve been dyed recently. Very nice.’’

“How

nice?’’ the other

ing for the

first

time.

man

at the table

He was broad and

asked, speakburly and had

not depilated in days.

“Extremely. She was wearing shorts and a thin
one only.’’

shirt,

Flinx in Flux

45

“In the Ingre?” The giantess made a face.
“Millimite and drill bug bites everywhere.” Flinx eyed
the other man. “Also somebody had worked her over
real careful and professional-like.”
The heavyweight’s smile disappeared, and he sat back
in his chair. “Deity, what a world!” He turned to Jebcoat. “Spark any circuits?”
Jebcoat considered, the mustache temporarily stilled.
Finally he shook his head. “I don’t know a soul who’d
be caught dead outside in the shorts, much less the shirt.

How’s her condition?”
“Improving.
her.

It

was

“Damn

full

I

emptied

when

I

my

crawler’s first-aid kit into

started.”

well better have been, or you could sue the

glanced at the giantess. “Call up any memories for you, Lundy?” The tall woman shook her head.
“I don’t know anybody that pretty or that stupid.”
“What about ID?” he asked Flinx.
“Nothing. I looked.” He eyed the other man, but that
worthy was properly subdued. The situation was not
renter.”

He

amusing anymore.
“We’ll ask around. Won’t we, Blade?” The giantess’s
companion nodded agreeably.
“So will I,” said Jebcoat, “but I haven’t heard tell of
anyone missin’ local, and you know how fast that kind
of news travels hereabouts.”
“Nope, nobody missing,” the other man muttered.
“Nobody. Would’ve heard. When’d you find her?”
“Few days ago,” Flinx told him.
“Then everybody ’d know by now if she was known
around here. Must be a newcomer,” Jebcoat suggested.
“That’s the way I see it.”
“I know the agent at Alaspinport. If you like, I’ll give
’im a call, take a copy of the last couple of shuttle passenger manifests, tridee the ID. We can run ’em through
my processor.”
“That might give us something,” Flinx said gratefully.

Alan Dean Foster

46

“Not

if

she was brought in by private shuttle,” Blade

pointed out.
“Unlikely,” Jebcoat said.
“Unlikely, yeah, but not impossible. If that’s the
case—” She eyed Flinx evenly, “—there’ll be no record
of her arrival.”
“Maybe,” Flinx said softly, “that’s what the people

who

beat her up had in

The woman
“You’re

mind.”

stared back at him, then turned to Jebcoat.

right; he’s

no

kid.

You been around, boy,” she

told Flinx.

“That I have— girl.” He braced himself, but all she
did was smile approvingly.
“Come on, Lundy.” The two women rose to depart.
Lundameilla towered over every man in the room. Both
drew appreciative stares. “We’ll ask around for you, like
I said. Meantime we got to get back and check on our
dredge. Lundy and me, we got a claim up in the Samberlin district.”

As she came around

the table, she bent

quickly to whisper in Flinx’s ear.

“You ever get up that way, stop by and say hello.
Maybe we’ll show you how we operate together, Lundy
and I. You might say we could show you the long and
the short of it.”

“Leave the guy alone, Blade.” Jebcoat was grinning
hugely beneath the mustache. “Can’t you see he’s blushing?”
“I am not blushing,” Flinx insisted. “Redheads’ skin
is

naturally flush.”

“Okay, okay.”
As Lundy strolled past, Flinx felt a distinct sharp pinch
on his left buttock. The giantess left him with that and a
wink as she followed her companion out. He made a face
at Pip.

“I’m attacked and you do nothing.”
The flying snake stared back blankly. Not for the first
time Flinx found himself wondering exactly what the
minidrag’s intelligence level was.

Flinx in Flux

47

Jebcoat put both hands fiat on the table. “Let me make
one quick call.’’
He did not have to leave the table to do so. Flinx

watched him work the communicator that was built into
the table. Thousands of fine hardwoods filled the jungle
surrounding them, and someone had gone to the expense
of importing a plastic table made to look like wood. No
wonder the thranx found their human friends a constant
source of amusement.
Jebcoat chattered away at the pickup. Finally he
shrugged and let the headphone snap back in place. “I
tried the obvious: local cops, immigration records, a
couple of friends. No one matching your description has
arrived on Alaspin in the past two months, much less
been reported missing. We still have to check Alaspinport records, of course, but

“What do you

“Lemme

I

ain’t optimistic.’’

suggest?’’

get ahold of

my buddy

at the port.

Lundy

and Blade will spread it around the backcountry. But right
now, as far as the authorities are concerned, your battered acquaintance don’t exist. Since she’s in your room,
she’s your responsibility.’’
“All yours,’’ the other man said cheerfully.
“But I’m just on my way out.’’
“Offworld again?’’ Jebcoat was still trying to figure
his young friend. “For somebody your age with no visible means of support, you manage to get around pretty
easy.

’ ’

“I have an inheritance,’’ Flinx explained. Though not
the kind of inheritance you’re thinking of, he added silently. “I can’t take her with me, and I don’t want to
just abandon her in the room. She’s got no credcard,
’ ’

either.

“So?’’ Jebcoat asked. “The hotel owner would be delighted to put a claim on her.’’
“Hell,’’ the other man said, “if she’s as pretty as you
say she is. I’ll take her off your hands myself.’’
“Ain’t you forgettin’ something, Howie?’’

Alan Dean Foster

48

“What’s that?”
“You’re married.”
A cloud shadowed Howie’s

face.

“Oh, yeah.

I’d

kinda

forgot.”

Jebcoat eyed him mercilessly. “With kids.”

“Kids. Yeah,” Howie muttered disconsolately.
Jebcoat smiled back at Flinx. “Howie here’s been out
in the

Ingre too long. No, she’s yours,

my

friend.

You

can do what you want with her. Wait till she gets well,
take her with you, or just scram. But it’s your decision.
I don’t want anything to do with it.” He indicated the
resting minidrags. “I don’t have a couple of lethal empaths to keep an eye on me. Now, if you’ll excuse me,
I’ve other business to attehd to. I’ll get back to you if I
find out anything about your mystery lady. Howie and I
are discussing the price of a theoretical load of Sangretibark extract.”

was illegal to export Sangretibark. For some it worked as a powerful aphrodisiac. In
others it had unwanted side effects such as cardiac arrest. But then, it was none of his business. Jebcoat was
a friend so long as you treated him with respect. He
would make a bad enemy.
Flinx said nothing.

It

—

He

tried a couple of other contacts, with equal lack of

success.

No one knew
Once

anything about the

woman

he de-

query was met with an openly hostile
response, but only verbally. Pip’s presence prevented
anyone from dealing Flinx anything stronger than a harsh
word.
That afternoon he wandered back to the hotel, discouraged and puzzled. The woman lay where he had left
her. At the moment she was lying on her back. As he
eyed her, it occurred to him that while he had done wonders for her wounds, her appearance remained unchanged. She still wore plenty of dirt and grime.
He spent an hour cleaning her face, shoulders, arms,
and legs with a washcloth. Thin red streaks had replaced
the weals on her legs where the millimite bugs had dug,
scribed.

his

49

Flinx in Flux

bug holes were already
of her bruises were almost gone.
and the

He

drill

lay

down

closing.

for a short nap, exhausted

The worst

from the jour-

ney out of the Ingre and his efforts on her behalf. He
might have slept through the night if the screaming had
not awakened him.

Chapter Four

was up and searching. Looking every bit
as beautiful awake as she had while asleep, his guest
stood across the room. In her right hand she clutched a
small but wicked little knife. Her eyes were wild.
Pip hovered before her, little more than a couple of
meters from her face and well within attack range. Scrap
flew nervous circles around his mother. The young minidrag’s constant movement was unsettling the woman
more than Pip’s hovering.
Flinx took it all in in a second and wondered what the
hell was going on. The knife did not make any sense.
Neither did Pip’s threatening posture, unless you assumed the knife had been aimed at her master. But why
would she want to threaten him while he slept?
That was when she noticed him sitting up on the bed.
Her eyes barely flicked away from the flying snake.
“Call them off, damn you, call them off!”
Instantly he

Flinx did so with a casual thought. Pip darted back to
the bed.

50
/

Flinx in Flux

The woman’s breathing slowed, and

“How

the knife dropped.

51
the

arm holding

did you do that?’’

“All Alaspinian minidrags are emotional telepaths.

Sometimes they’ll bond with a person. Pip is mine— she’s
the adult. The adolescent’s name is Scrap.’’
“Cute,” she said tensely, “real cute.’’ Then she shuddered and lowered her head. “I don’t know how you
found me. What now? Are you going to beat me up
again? Why don’t you just kill me and get it over with?
I’ve answered all your questions.’’
Flinx ’s gaze narrowed. “I didn’t beat you up, and I
have no intention of killing you. If I held any malign
intentions toward you, d’you think I’d have fixed you

up?’’

Her head came up quickly. She studied him for a long
moment. “You aren’t one of them?’’ she asked hesitantly.

“No

I’m not, whoever ‘them’ are.’’
“Deity.” She let out a long sigh, at which point her
legs turned to rubber and she had to lean against the wall
for support.

The

knife clattered silently on the

hardwood

floor.

Flinx slid off the bed and started toward her, halting

when she

stiffened.

She

still

did not trust him, and after

what she had been through, he could hardly blame her.
“I’m not here to hurt you.” He spoke slowly, soothingly. “I’ll help if I can.”
Her eyes shifted from him to the flying snake. Slowly
she bent to recover the knife, placed it on the antique
dresser nearby, and laughed nervously.
“That doesn’t make any sense, but neither does anything else that’s happened to me in the past few weeks.
Besides, if half of what I’ve heard is true, a knife’s pretty
useless against a minidrag.”

“Not

half,” Flinx corrected her. “It’s

kept his distance.

“Would you

like to sit

true.”

all

He

down? You’ve

been unconscious for several days.”
She put a hand to her forehead. “I thought

I

was dead.

Alan Dean Foster

52

Out there.” She indicated the window that looked over
the town. ‘‘I was never so certain of anything in my life.
Now I’m not sure of anything anymore.” She blinked
and tried to smile at him. ‘‘Thank you. I will sit down.”
There was a lounge chair made of epoxied lianas. Under the epoxy, the wood flashed a rainbow of colors. It
was the only brightly colored piece of furniture in the
room. Flinx sat down on the edge of the bed while Pip
curled herself around one of the short bedposts, looking
carved decoration. Scrap settled in his lap. He
stroked the back of the small flying snake’s head ablike a

sently.

‘‘How old are you, anyway?” the woman asked him
as she slumped into the chair.
Why do they always ask that? he wondered. Not
‘‘Thank you for saving me” or ‘‘Where do you come
from?” or ‘‘What’s your business?” His reply was the
same one he had been using for years.
‘‘Old enough. Old enough not to be the one who was
lying out in the Ingre making a meal for the millimite
bugs and dying of exposure. How’d you end up like
that?”

escaped.” She inhaled deeply, as if the cool air in
the room was an unexpectedly rich dessert. ‘‘Got away.”
‘‘I didn’t think you ended up there by choice. You
‘‘I

weren’t dressed right. Alaspin’s not a forgiving place.”
‘‘Neither were the people I was with. What did you
say your name was?
’ ’

‘‘Didn’t, but
‘‘Just

it’s

Flinx?”

slightly. It

Flinx.”

When

was beautiful

he did not respond, she smiled
to see. ‘‘All right.

I

know

are limits to questions in a place like this.” She

there

was

moment she might start curscrying. He sat quietly, stroking the

trying to act tough. At any

ing

him— or

burst out

snuggled in his lap.
‘‘You said you escaped. I thought maybe your vehicle
had broken down. Who’d you escape from? I’d assume
lethal creature

whoever beat you up.”

Flinx in Flux

Her hand moved

53

instinctively to the half-healed bruises

beneath her left shoulder. “Yes. It doesn’t hurt as bad
now.’’
“I’ve been giving you first aid,’’ he explained. “I’ve
been in situations where I’ve had to take care of others
as well as myself.

My

resources were as limited as

my

knowledge, I’m afraid. You were lucky. No broken
bones, no internal injuries.’’
“That’s funny, because it feels like everything inside

me

is

busted.’’

“Whoever worked you over
What did they want?’’

didn’t

want

“Information. Answers to questions.

to kill you.

them as
little as I could, but I had to tell them something ... So
they’d stop for a while.’’ Her voice had grown small. “I
didn’t tell them everything they wanted to know. So they
kept at me. I feigned unconsciousness— it wasn’t hard,
I’d had plenty of practice. Then I got away from them.
“They had me in a place out in that jungle somewhere.
It was at night, and I made it to the river. I found a
broken log and just started drifting downstream. I had
no idea it was so far from anyplace.’’
“I found you high up on a beach. You’d dragged yourself out of the water.

I

I

told

’ ’

She nodded. “I think I remember letting go of the log.
was losing my strength, and I knew I had to get to dry

land or I’d drown.’’

“You’d be surprised how far you crawled.’’
She was looking down at her hands. “You said I’ve
been out for several days.’’ He nodded as she turned her
palms up, inspecting the scoured skin. “I guess you’ve
done a good job on me. Thanks. I can’t say that I feel
good, but I feel better.’’
“Several days’ rest is good medicine for any injury.’’
“I woke up and saw you lying on the other bed, and I
thought they’d found me. I thought you were one of
them.’’ This time she did not smile. “I had the little
knife. It fits inside the middle of my boot. That’s how I

Alan Dean Foster

54
got loose. Not

much

against one sleeping

use against a bunch of people, but

man ...

I

was going

to cut

your

throat.”

“Pip would never have allowed it.”
“So I found out.” She eyed the flying snake wrapped
around the bedpost. “When it came at me, I tried to get
out the door.

It’s

sealed both ways. That’s

when

I

started

screaming, but nobody came to see what was happening.”

“I sealed the door because I don’t like interruptions
when I’m sleeping.” Reaching behind the headboard, he
brought out a thin bracelet and touched a stud set flush
with the polished surface. The door clicked softly. “I
bring my own lock. Don’t trust the ones they rent you.
As for your screaming, this is a pretty wide-open town.

Not a place where people interfere in their neighbors’
business. Hard to tell sometimes why somebody’s
screaming.” He slipped the bracelet on his wrist. ‘‘Ever
seen a picture of a body ravaged by millimite bugs?”
She looked down at her legs, then ran her fingers along
the almost vanished welts. ‘‘These?”

He nodded.

‘‘They feed subcutaneously. They’re not

very big, but they’re voracious and persistent.

The

first

way to where the muscles are
attached to the bone. They cut through the legs first.
Then, when their prey can’t move anymore, they settle
in for a leisurely month or so of eating.”
She shuddered anew. “Here I am throwing questions
thing they do

is

eat their

you right and left, and I haven’t really thanked you.”
“Yes you did. A moment ago.”
“I did?” She blinked. “Sorry. My name. I haven’t
told you my name.” She brushed at her short blond hair.
He wondered what she would look like with a professional patina of cosmetics on that exquisitely sculpted
face. “I’m Clarity. Clarity Held.”
“Pleasure to meet you.”
She laughed, a little less uneasily this time. “Is it?
at

Flinx in Flux

You

really don’t

know

55

a thing about me.

Maybe

if

you

you wouldn’t think it such a pleasure.”
“I found an injured human being lying exposed to the
jungle. I’d have picked up anyone under those circumdid,

stances.”
“I’ll bet

you would have.

Come on,”

“how old are you, really?”
He sighed. “Nineteen, but
ten, what’s this all about?

she chided him,

been around a lot. Lisbeat you up and why were

I’ve

Who

they holding you against your will?

’ ’

Suddenly she was looking around the room, ignoring
his questions. “Is there a bathroom in this place?”
Flinx put a damper on his curiosity and nodded at the
holo of an icy fountain off to the left. “Behind there.”
“Is there a bathtub?” There was an edge in her voice.
He nodded, and she smiled gratefully. “About time
things started evening out. From hell to heaven in one
waking breath.” She rose and started toward the holo.
“Wait a minute. You haven’t answered any of my questions.”

you anything you want to know. After
all, I owe you my life.” She glanced back at the doorway. “You sure no one can get in here?”
.’’He nodded in Pip’s
“I’m sure. Even if they did
“I

will. I’ll tell

.

.

direction.

should be working on getting out of here,
on getting off this world. Because I’m sure they’re looking for me right now. But I feel like something that just
crawled out of a sludge pit. If I don’t clean myself up, I
won’t be able to stand me long enough to answer your
questions. Bath first.” She smiled to herself. “There’s

“All

right.

I

always time for a bath.”
He leaned back against his pillow. “If you say so.

Nobody’s

after

me.”

“That’s right,” she murmured thoughtfully. “Nobody
is after you. Do you think you can help me get away from
here? Away from this town? What’s the name of this
place,

anyway?”

Alan Dean Foster

56

“Mimmisompo. You

didn’t

come through here?”

was on a big skimmer, for a long time.” She
frowned. ‘‘Alaspinport, I think. They brought me down
drugged, and we got right in the skimmer. I was pretty
‘‘No.

much

I

when

me

around to
answer questions. I’ll explain everything I can, tell you
all I can remember, but later. Right now a hot bath would
be just about the most wonderful thing imaginable.”
‘‘Then go ahead and indulge. I’ll keep an eye on the
door.”
She took a step toward him, then hesitated. ‘‘Nice to
have a friend here.” A quick turn and she was through
the holo that closed off the bathroom from the rest of the
out of

it

except

they brought

apartment.

Her passage automatically turned off the image, and
she did not bother to reset it, her mind on nothing but
the bath. Moments later the sound of running water
reached him. Hands behind his head, he lay back on the
bed and contemplated the ceiling. Strange. One would
have thought she had had enough of water in the river.
The peculiar regard women held for hot water was something he did not understand.

By

and stretching ever so slightly he could
see her sitting on the edge of the diamond-shaped tub.
She was lightly sponging herself. It was hard to estimate
another’s inhibitions without first knowing her world of
origin, social status, and religious inclinations. She
looked up suddenly and saw him watching her, and she
smiled. Not invitingly but not mockingly, either. Simply
rolling over

a pleasant, relaxed smile.

Knowing

keep him from turning away in
embarrassment. Then he was angry at himself for doing
so. Pip looked up curiously while Scrap explored the pile
of blankets where Clarity had slept. The flying snake
reacted to his every emotion, not only those that were
that did not

threatening.

Held rose from the bath and begin drying herThis time it was not necessary for him to stretch to

Clarity
self.

Flinx in Flux

57

enjoy the view. This time he deliberately did not turn
away.

“That was heavenly!” Apparently the society in which
she had been raised did not recognize the nudity taboo,
a historical development on an as yet unknown world for
which he was very grateful. She sang to herself in a voice
that was only slightly off key, then put the towel aside
without a suggestion of shyness and began to remove her
clothes from the room’s autolaundry.
I have talked to the wise men of Commonwealth, Flinx
mused. I have spoken with captains of industry and of
alien warships. I have made contact when no one else
was able with an artificial intelligence thousands of years
old and kept my composure in the face of evils both
human and otherwise. So why the hell can’t I have a
sensible conversation with a single
posite sex of

my own

member

of the op-

race without bumbling and stum-

bling over every word?

He had

heard about verbal seduction but had not the
slightest idea where to begin. He wanted more than anything else to ingratiate himself so powerfully that she

would forget about his age and start thinking of him as a
man. He wanted to persuade her, to reassure her, to dazzle her with his resourcefulness and brilliance, to defuse
her fears and activate her senses.
What he said was, “Bath make you feel better?”
“Immensely, thanks.” She was drying her hair now,
blond brush, the single flanking pigtail
bobbing like a cat’s toy behind her ear. He wondered who
had performed the spectrum shift that had given her turquoise eyes. Surely that color could not be natural.
“If you plan on doing any more traveling around here,
we’ll have to find you some more appropriate clothing.”
“Don’t worry. The only environments I want to experience between here and the shuttleport are humanxmade. I’m straightlining from here to orbit, if you’ll help
me.” She nodded in the direction of the window.
“They’re out there right now, wondering how I got away.
fluffing out the

Alan Dean Foster

58

Hopefully back along the river.” Her hands paused, and
her cheerful expression abruptly darkened. A little terror
crept back into her voice.
“You said I left a long trail from the river onto the
beach where I crawled out. They could find that. They’d

know

was

I

still

alive.”

“I didn’t know you’d been kidnapped, so I saw no
reason to take the time to obliterate it. But don’t worry.
Even if they find it and interpret it correctly, the next
thing they’ll do is start searching the immediate vicinity
with a heat sensor and image processor.
“They’ll see your crawler’s tracks, too. They’ll consider that I might’ve been picked up.”
“They have to find the place first. You clean and relaxed?”
’ ’

“More or less.”
“Then how about some answers to my questions? Let’s
start with who you are and why these people find you so
intriguing.”

She started toward the window. Halfway there she
thought better of exposing herself to the outside, privacy
shield notwithstanding, and pivoted to head toward the
dresser as she spoke.
“My name you know. I’m a division chief for an expanding enterprise. These fanatics picked me because I’m
uniquely talented.”
For an instant Flinx went cold, then realized she had
to be speaking of some other kind of unique talent.
“It’s a fantastic deal for

ing out.

I

somebody my

age, just start-

supervise a dozen specialists, most of them

older than me, and

I

own

mean,
when I was

a piece of the profits.

I

was better than anybody in my field
doing my dissertation, and I’ve proved it subsequently,
but it was still an impressive offer. So naturally I jumped
I

knew

I

at it.”

to

“You have a high opinion of yourself.” He
make it sound like a criticism.
It

bothered her not

at all.

tried not

“Justified in the lab.” She

Flinx in Flux

59

was talking easily now that they were on a subject she
was comfortable with. “It’s exciting stuff. I wanted to be
out front. I could be making even more money elsewhere. Doing cosmetic work on New Riviera or Earth.
You know, I had a chance to go to Amropolous and work
with the thranx. They’re
than any human.
ence. But

I

Some

still

better at micromanipulation

of their work’s more art than sci-

don’t like heat and humidity.

“This bunch

grabbed me, they’re extremists of the
worst sort. I’d heard about them before— everybody reads
the fax but I didn’t think they were any different from
half a hundred groups with similar aims. Shows how little anybody knows. There was this young guy—’’ She
looked away from Flinx. “—he was plated. I mean irithat

—

descent, like a tridee star.’’

“Good-looking.’’

Flinx

spoke emotionlessly.

“Go

on.’’

“We

went out a few times together. Said he was with
port authority, which is why I hadn’t seen him around.
Couldn’t get through company security, so we met outside. I thought I was falling in love with him. He had
that ability, you know, to make you fall in love with him.
He asked me to take a stroll topside with him one night.
It was pretty calm upstairs, so I said sure.’’ She paused.
“You’ve got to understand that it was real exciting intellectually where I was working, but socially it was plasmodium. Just about everyone was a lot older than I, and
frankly, none of them were much to look at. Physicality
still

plays an important role in interpersonal relation-

ships,

you know.’’

me

about it, he thought. He was not happy with
the turn the conversation had taken, but he had nothing
Tell

to add.

She gave a little shrug. “Anyway, I think he drugged
me. He was one of them you see. The next time I saw
him, he didn’t look so handsome anymore. Physically
yes, but his expression was different. It matched his com,

panions’.’’

Alan Dean Foster

60

“Species?” He was thinking of the A Ann’s relentless
assaults on advanced human technology.
“All human as near as I could tell. If they were alien,
they had terrific disguises. They hauled me offworld.
When I woke up, it was hot and sticky and somewhere
out there, I guess.” She waved absently in the direction
of the Ingre. “That’s when the questions started. About
my work, how advanced it was, what the company’s plans
were for future expansion and development, and a lot of
basics like our lab layout and security setup and so on.
“I told them I couldn’t answer because everything they
were asking me was covered by the Interworld Commerce Secrets Act. They didn’t say anything. They just
turned me over to this one tall woman who started beating the crap out of me. I’m not a real brave person. So I
started telling them what they wanted to know, as little
as possible about each subject.

“I knew
thing, and

keep telling them until I’d told them everyI had a pretty good idea what would happen
to me when I’d finally answered their last question. So I
made it clear one night and ran like hell. It was pitchblack, and things kept biting me and stabbing at me, so
I went into the river and found my log and started downstream. I didn’t know where I was or where I was going.
I just wanted to get away.
“You’re lucky you made it as far as the river,” Flinx
said somberly. “Alaspin has its share of nocturnal carnivores. The insects you know about.”
She scratched reflexively at one leg. “I woke up here,
jumped to conclusions, and thought about killing you.
Now I’ve had a bath, I feel two thousand percent better
than I did the last time I was conscious, and you’re going
to help me get off this world and back to my people. I’m
sure they’re searching for me, too, but not around here.
In addition to being well liked personally, I’m irreplaceable. I’m sure there’ll be a reward for my return. I imagI’d

’ ’

ine there always

is in

“I’m not interested

a situation like this.”
in

any reward.”

Flinx in Flux

61

“No?

You’re that prosperous, at your age?” He chose
to ignore her slip.
“I have an inheritance. Enough for my needs. What

about you? What makes you so popular?”
She grinned ruefully. “I’m a gengineer. In
the best gengineer.

fact.

I’m

’ ’

His expression didn’t change. It didn’t have to for Pip
to react to his emotional surge. The flying snake leapt
from its position on the bedpost, flew once around the
startled Clarity, and then settled abruptly back on the
bed.

He

turned away, unsure

how

well he had concealed his

Not perfectly, it seemed.
“What’s wrong with your pet? What’s the matter? Did
I say something to upset you?”
“No, nothing.” Even as he spoke he sensed the transparency of the lie. “It’s just that someone very near to
me had trouble with some gengineers a long time ago.”
Hastily he donned the innocent-child smile that had
served him so well in his childhood days of thieving.
reaction.

“It’s nothing

now. Just old history.”

She was either more perceptive or more mature than
he thought, because there was genuine concern on her
face as she came toward him.
“You’re sure it’s okay? I can’t change what lam.”
“It had nothing to do with you. What occurred all took
place before you were bom.” Now he smiled again, a
crooked smile, confident she would not know the reason
behind it. “Before I was bom, in fact.”
No, neither of us was bom when the Society began
their experiments. You were already several years old
when the experiment coded “Philip Lynx” came into the
world with his DNA tossed like salad in a bowl. I can’t
tell you that, of course. I can’t tell anyone. But I do
wonder what you’d make of me if you knew what I was.
Would you have any idea if I’m a good result or a bad
one?
It would have helped had he grown up a scientist. In-

Alan Dean Foster

62

stead he had spent his childhood as a thief.
cult to tell

which would have revealed

It

was

his origin to

diffi-

him

sooner.

Her

fingers touched his shoulder.

He

stiffened, then

relaxed, and she dug in gently, massaging.

The hurt

is

deeper than you can reach, he thought, eyeing her.
“Flinx, you aren’t afraid of me, are you?”
“Afraid of you? That’s funny. I’m the one who dragged
you out of the jungle half-dead, remember?”
“Yes, and I’m as grateful as anyone who owes her life
to someone else can be for what you did for me. You will
help me leave Alaspin before they find me again, won’t
you? They’re mad but resourceful. Crazy smart. I’m not
so sure they’re smarter than you. There’s something about
you— I’m usually pretty good at slotting people, but
you’re a total blank to me. You look like a gangly, overgrown kid, but you seem to know your way around.”
Around? He smiled inwardly. Yes, you might say that
I’ve been around, little gengineer. I’ve traveled to the
Blight and the fringes of the Commonwealth. I’ve done
such things as most men only dream of, and others that
cannot be imagined. Oh, I’ve been around, all right.
He had turned away from her again. Now he felt her
pressing up against him, her front tight against his back,
her arms sliding around his waist in a graceful serpentine

movement as she nonverbally began to make it
exactly how grateful she was to him and how grate-

flanking
clear
ful

she might be.

Without really knowing why, he found himself slipping
free of her grasp and turning to face her. There was hurt
on her face and real concern in her voice. That made it
harder.

“Now

wrong?”
“I haven’t known you long enough to
way. Not consciously, anyhow.”
“You liked me better unconscious?”
“That’s not what I mean, and you know
what’s

like

you

it.”

Time

that

for

Flinx in Flux
a subject change. “If you
to report

what happened

still

to

63

feel threatened,

you

you ought

to the authorities.’’

“I told you, they have spies everywhere. That’s how
they got to me in the first place. We’d only have to talk
to one wrong person, and then they’d have me again. You
they’d probably kill, just to keep from talking.”

“That would upset you?”
“You’re damn right it would.” She was looking
straight at him. “You’re a curious savior, Flinx.” She
cocked her head to give him a coquettish sideways stare.
“I’d like to find out just how curious. Don’t you find me
attractive?

’ ’

He swallowed. As

usual he intended to be in complete

control of the situation, and as usual he was not.

“Extraordinarily attractive,” he finally

mumble.
“That

clears that up, anyway.

Oh!” Scrap

managed

to

startled her

on her shoulder. Unable to coil around her shoulder,, he settled for wrapping
his tail tightly around her thick, short blond sidetail.
“His name’s Scrap. I think he likes you.”
“How do you do?” She bent her head to eye the tiny
as the adolescent minidrag landed

instrument of death snuggling cozily against her neck.
“How do you know he likes me?”
“Because you’re still alive.”
“I see.” She pursed her lips. “You said his name was
Scrap?” At the mention of his name, the young flying
snake’s head rose slightly.

“They tend

to

bond, you know? Form close emotional

attachments with human beings they’re attracted to. Do
snakes bother you?
“I’m a gengineer. Nothing living bothers me except a
few creatures I can’t see with the naked eye.”
I wonder what you’d think of me if you knew my history, he mused. “They’re telepathic on the emotional
level. Scrap knows what you’re feeling. If he chooses to
bond with you, you’ll never have a more devoted companion or effective bodyguard. Pip and I have been to’ ’

Alan Dean Foster

64
gether

my whole

life.

I’ve never

had more than a moment

or two to regret the relationship.”

“How

long do they live?” She was stroking the back
of the flying snake’s head the way she had seen Flinx
caress Pip.

‘‘Nobody knows. They’re uncommon on Alaspin,

unknown

practically

offworld. This

is

a tough place to

much less on anything as dangerous as a minidrag.” He thought a moment. ‘‘Pip was
mature when I found her, so she must be around seven-

do studies

in the wild,

teen. That’d be old for a reptile, but the minidrags aren’t

reptiles.”

‘‘No.

I

can feel the warmth.” She smiled

friend. ‘‘Well, you’re

welcome

at

her

to stay there if that’s

new
what

you want.”
It

was. Flinx could feel

it.

After considering taking

her in his arms and kissing her firmly, he sighed and sat
down on his bed. He was an expert at such scenarios but
utterly inept at putting them into practice. His fingers
worked nervously against each other.
‘‘I

said I’d help you.

How do you want to proceed?”
to my people. I’m sure they’re

have to get back
worried sick by now. As far as
‘‘I

know, not a soul knows
what’s happened to me. They’ll be frantic.”
‘‘Because they miss you personally or because you’re
such an important part of their research machinery?”
“Both,” she assured him without batting an eye. ‘‘But
it’s bigger than just me now. From their questions, I
gather that these fanatics want to shut down our whole
project. Kidnapping me was one way to slow everything
down as well as acquire the information they wanted for
I

the rest.”

‘‘Pardon me, but you don’t look old enough to be that
important to any company.”

Her expression started to twist. Then she saw he was
teasing her. “Your point. I won’t make any more comments about your age if you’ll do the same for me.”

“Much

better.”

Flinx in Flux

65

“I have to get back quickly. My absence slows everything up. I’m kind of the insightful hub of the project.

They come

to

me

for breakthroughs, for

new ways of

looking at things. Not for everyday design work. I’m intuitive where practically everyone else is deductive.” She
spoke so matter-of-factly that he knew she was not boasting, just stating the facts.

going to

‘‘It’s all

there, if

Then

come

to a grinding halt without

hasn’t already. Just get

it

we’ll decide what to

do

me

me

to Alaspinport.

guess I’ll have to
disguise myself somehow. Besides looking for me out
here, you can be sure they’ll be swarming all over the
one shuttle area like lice, or whatever it was you called
those things that scarred my legs.”
‘‘Millimite bugs, mostly.” He stared at her thighs.
When he looked back up, he saw her grinning at him.
next.

I

‘‘Like what you see?”

He

struggled to appear blase. ‘‘Nice legs, bad bites.”
‘‘Maybe I shouldn’t try to get out on the first ship. I’ll

many

Alaspin.” She was arguing with
herself, he saw. ‘‘But if I don’t try for the next one, I
might be stuck here for weeks until another liner orbits,
and that’ll give them that much more time to close in on
me. So I suppose I’ll have to try slipping onto the first
one no matter how many people they have Watching the
port.” As if suddenly remembering she was not alone,
she glanced back at him. ‘‘I don’t suppose you have any
bet not too

call at

friends in the planetary

‘‘There

is

government?”

no planetary government. This

is

an

H Class

Eight frontier world. There’s a Commonwealth-appointed administrator and peaceforcers on call. That’s
about it. Pretty wide-open place.”
‘‘Well, it doesn’t matter,” she said firmly. ‘‘I have to
try to make it clear on the first available ship not only to
save myself but to warn my people.”
‘‘Alaspin has a deepspace beam. Paid for by the protectors, I understand. You could try contacting them that

way.”

Alan Dean Foster

66

She shook her head. “No receiver station where I come
from.”
“How about beaming a message to the nearest receiver
world and sending it along by courier?”
“I don’t know. They might be watching the message
depot here as well. And it’s easy to intercept a courier
packet. Then I wouldn’t know if they received my message or not. Don’t underestimate these people, Flinx. I
wouldn’t be surprised if they’re screening everything that
goes through Alaspinport. They knew enough to smuggle
me in. They’ll make it hard to smuggle anything out.”
“Sounds to me like you don’t have a lot of options.”
“No.” Her voice fell. “No, I guess I don’t.” She
stared at him. “You said you’d help me. I asked you for
suggestions. I’m asking you again. Maybe we could bribe
someone to let us skip departure procedures.”
“Not enough of a crowd to get lost in.” He coughed
silently into a closed fist. “There is one other possibility.
I could take you back.”
She made a face. “I don’t follow you. Are you talking
about something like me traveling along as your wife
under an assumed name? Maybe in some kind of disguise?

’ ’

mean I could literally take you back.
See, I have my own ship.”
A long silence followed. He found himself fidgeting
uncomfortably under her stare. “You have your own ship?
You mean that you come from a ship in orbit and are
“Not

exactly.

I

waiting to rejoin the rest of the crew? That’s what you

mean,

isn’t it?

An unscheduled

freighter or something

like that?”

He was shaking his
own ship, registered

head.
in

“No.

mean

have
name. I’m the owner.

my

I

that

I

my
It’s

called the Teacher A'

“You’re teasing me, making a joke. It isn’t funny,
Flinx. Not after what I’ve been through.”
“It’s no joke. The Teacher s not very big, but it’s more
'

Flinx in Flux
than spacious enough for

my

needs.

67

One more human

being won’t crowd my space.”
She gaped at him. ‘‘You aren’t kidding, are you?” She
slumped in the chair next to the still unrestored bathroom-door holo. ‘‘A nineteen-year-old b— a nineteenyear-old who owns his own ship. By himself? It’s not
sublight?”
‘‘Oh, no,” he said quickly. ‘‘It’ll go anywhere, in the
Commonwealth you want. Full KK-drive, very narrow

complement
where we want to go, and she

projection field, custom dish lining, the full

of automatics.

I

just tell

it

goes there.”

‘‘Who

are you, Flinx, that at your age you can

interstellar vessel? I’ve

own an

heard that the heads of the great

trading families have their

own

others have access to special

and

that

know

that

private crafts,

company

ships.

I

the government maintains ships for diplomatic service,

Counselors First of the United Church have
small fast vessels for their needs. Who are you to treat
equally with them? The inheritor of one of the Great
Trading Houses?”
Mother Mastiff would have found that amusing, Flinx
knew. ‘‘Hardly. I’ve never had much interest in commerce in the conventional sense.” I used to relieve the
wealthy of their excess without their knowledge, but that
hardly qualifies as trade, he thought.
‘‘Then what are you? What is it that you do?”
He considered the question carefully, wanting to give
her an answer she could believe without stretching the
truth overmuch.
“I guess you could say I’m a student doing advanced

and

that the

work.”
‘‘Studying what?”

‘‘Mostly myself and

“And what

my immediate environment.”

your ‘immediate environment’?”
“For someone whose life was just saved, you ask a lot
of questions. Wherever I happen to be at the moment, I
guess. Look,” he told her with some firmness, “I’ve
is

Alan Dean Foster

68

anywhere you want to go, to help you
world and away from these mysterious

offered to take you
get safely off this

crazies you keep talking about. Isn’t that

enough?”

‘‘More than enough.”
There was no reason for him to go on, but something
within him compelled him to answer the rest of her question. ‘‘If you’re so interested in how I came by ownership
of the Teacher,

“ Some

gift!

was a gift.”
For what even the smallest
it

stellar vessels cost, I

my

could live

in

class of inter-

comfort for the

So could you.”
‘‘Living in comfort doesn’t especially

rest

of

life.

interest

me,”

he told her honestly. ‘‘Traveling, finding things out,
meeting interesting people, that interests me a great deal.
I did a favor once for some friends, and their gift to me
in return was the Teacher .”
‘‘Whatever you say.” Clearly she did not believe a

word he had

was sensible enough not to
‘‘Your personal life’s none of my busi-

told her but

probe further.
ness.”

makes you nervous.”
He was surprised how badly he was hoping she would
accept. True, she was a gengineer, a member of a profession he had come to regard with both awe and fear.
But she was also attractive. No, he corrected himself,
that was not quite right. What she was, was extraordinarily beautiful. That was not a quality often found in
tandem with great intelligence.
Put simply, he did not want to see the last of her. Not
even if much of her story was a carefully- crafted fabrication designed solely to gain his help. If that was the
‘‘You don’t have to accept

if

it

case, she had certainly achieved her aim.

‘‘Of course

I

accept.

What

else

am

ready to go right now, this minute.
pack.

Nor do you

strike

me

I

It’s

going to do? I’m
not like

as the sort of

I

have to

man who

around a lot of excess baggage.”
Rather than probe possible double meanings, he

car-

ries

re-

69

Flinx in Flux
plied simply, “You’re right;

I

don’t. But we’re not leav-

ing just yet.’’

“Why

was obviously puzzled.
“Because after ferrying you halfway across the Ingre
jungle only to wake up and find you with a knife in your
hand and self-confessed intentions of slitting my throat,
I need one decent night’s rest in a real bed.’’
She had the grace to blush. “That won’t happen again.
I told you, I was confused.’’
“Doesn’t matter. It’s been a long couple of weeks for
me, and now I have to consider you and your troubles.
We’ll leave first thing tomorrow morning, when it’s less
hot. Remember, we should be rested. You’ve been sleepnot?’’ She

ing for days.

“Besides,

I

if

haven’t.

these people are trying to track you, de-

laying here will cause

and wider

afield.

Be

them
that

to spread their search

much

when we leave.’’
“You know best,’’ she said

wider

simpler for us to avoid

detection

“Look, I know
it’s a lot to ask considering everything you’ve done for
me already, but my stomach feels like the inside of Cascade Cavern.”
“Where’s that?”
“On the world where I’m working.”
“I’m not surprised. You’ve been surviving on intravenous and ampoules since I found you.”
“Any kind of solid food would be wonderful.”

He
since

reluctantly.

considered. “I suppose your system’s ready.
I

secs, I

I

guess

’m going to take you an unknown number of par”
can afford to spring for a couple of meals as well.

“Oh,

I’ll

see that you’re paid,”

she said quickly.

I’m returned, my company will pay you for the
trip and your trouble.”
“No need. It’s been a long time since I’ve bought sup-

“When

per for a beautiful woman.”
My God, he thought sharply.
didn’t

I!

I

actually

said that,

Alan Dean Foster

70

The softening of her expression was proof

that he

had

indeed.

Otherwise it’ll kick back on you,
and you’ll be sick for the whole journey.’’
“Don’t worry about me. I have an iron gut. I can eat
anything. Or doesn’t that square with your image of the
beautiful woman?’’ She was disappointed when he did
“Just don’t overdo

not comment.
doesn’t

tell

me what

He checked
on

“You

it.

say you’re a student, but that

still

you’re about.”

the hallway carefully, Pip riding well back

Scrap clinging with his tail to Clarity’s
sidetail. Only when he was sure it was quiet and empty
did he proceed in the direction of the small hotel dining
room.
“That’s all,” he told her. “Just a student.”
“Null and void. You’re more than that. I’m no emotional telepath like your flying snakes, but I can tell
there’s more to you than studying, Flinx. More than
learning. Don’t tell me if you don’t want to. Damn; there
I go, prying again. ” He sensed rather than saw her smile.
“You’ve got to excuse me. It’s the nature of my mind,
not to mention my work. If you’re half the student you
claim to be, you’ll understand my curiosity.”
Curiosity? Yes, he was curious. Also frustrated and
angry and frightened and exhilarated. Wasn’t that true of
any young human being?
As to what he was really about, no one, not even the
people who had played God with his mind and body prior
his shoulders,

to his birth,
I

knew

the answer to that.

am, he thought suddenly, a drum

in a

vacuum.

Chapter Five

There weren’t many people in the dining room, for
which he was grateful. For the first time in memory he
found himself enjoying a conversation that touched on
nothing of importance. It was relaxing and reassuring.
Wasting time, he found, could be fun as well as therapeutic.

He had heard
ing by others,

was the time called wakwhen one was not quite conscious yet no
of half sleep.

He had

It

never experienced it. One moment
he was sound asleep, the next he was fully awake and
alert. There was never anything like a transition stage as
there seemed to be with other people. Whether it was a
function of his peculiar mind or simply his street upbringing in the back alleys of Drallar, he had no way of
knowing. He had never spoken to anyone else about it.
So it was that he found himself staring into near darkness with only the light of one of Alaspin’s two moons
casting shadows through the room. Pip was lying close
to his face, her tongue flicking rapidly against his left eye
until it opened. Realizing that she had awakened him and
longer asleep.

71

Alan Dean Foster

72

knowing she would never do so

arbitrarily,

he was

in-

stantly alert.

He

kept his eyes half-closed as he studied the room.

A

long low outline was visible beneath the covers on the
other bed.

He could hear

Clarity’s soft breathing as she

and undisturbed. What reason, then,
for rousing him? Someone else might have risen then to
have a look around. Flinx did not. Whatever had upset
Pip would make itself known to him as well.
Only after a while did he see the shapes moving against
the far wall. He tilted his head imperceptibly until he
could see the door. At first glance it appeared closed.
Only by concentrating hard was he able to make out the
light mask that had been unrolled in front of it. Halfopen at least. Probably a noise mask behind it. The
treated Mylar foam would give the impression to any casual onlooker inside or out that the door was still tightly
slept comfortably

shut.

He made

out a pair but

knew

there might be more.

the floor, perhaps, or behind the screen.

On

One advanced

from the window. Instead of trying to avoid
the moonglow, the figure continued blithely on, taking
on the slightly mottled color of the light and shadows,
blending perfectly into floor and walls.
Chameleon suit, Flinx mused. Fits like a second skin
and adapts instantly to any background and lighting. As
a boy he had often wished for one. Not the kind of toy
children normally wish for, but them, there had been little
that was normal about his childhood.
The only things the chameleon suit could not camouflage were the slits for eyes, nose, and mouth. Three
more sets of eerily disembodied organs were advancing
along the other wall in the direction of the two beds. It
would not be necessary to ask the wearers their intentions. One did not enter a private room in the middle of
the night in a chameleon suit, breaking a lock in the
process, to hand someone winnings from a lottery.
In such a situation a number of options were available.
into the light

Flinx in Flux

73

You could sit up and demand to know what the intruders
wanted. You could pull a gun and start shooting, leaving
questions for the police. Or you could do as Flinx did:
lie quietly,

imitating normal sleep breathing, watching

out of half-closed eyes to see what the intruders planned

do next.
Three of them paused close together. They did not
converse but merely exchanged looks, having obviously
planned their moves well in advance. He dared not raise
up or move his head for a better view.
The leader took something from a pocket attached to
his right leg. It gleamed dully in the moonlight, a small
canister with a flexible cuplike scoop over one end. Gas,
to

Flinx thought automatically. Probably odorless, colorless,

and

fast-acting. Certainly not lethal. If the intruders

had intended to kill the room’s occupants, they could
easily have done so from the door.
The figure bent low and moved to the foot of Clarity’s
bed, extending the canister before it. Abruptly it halted
as something appeared between it and the sleeping
woman. Something small, superfast, and hissing.
The intruders had rehearsed certain possibilities, but
small superfast hissing creatures had evidently not been
figured into their various scenarios. The sudden appearance of a small flying snake half a meter from one’s face
would be enough to unsettle the most professional assassin.

The man let out a startled oath and stumbled backward. It was enough to stir Clarity. Rolling onto her back,
she drew a hand across her forehead and moaned softly.
Flinx saw her eyelids flutter.
One of the canister carrier’s companions spoke quickly
Now!’’
The figure holding the canister raised it and moved a
thumb over the recessed stud, which he never had time

and

intently.

to press.
ate, the

“Stun the animal and then

From

her.

the tubular ridge tucked beneath

minidrag ejected

less than half a cc of

its

pal-

venom

Alan Dean Foster

74

under high pressure. The poison

hit the intruder in the

eyes.

was the end of pretense, of stealth, of careful movements in the dark. The man flung the canister across the
room in a single convulsive movement as both hands went
to his face. Screaming in pain as the highly caustic toxin
ate at his eyes, he began ripping at his suit, tearing it
from his head. Dissolving flesh bubbled audibly in the
no longer quiet room.
Flinx dropped out of bed. Not on the far side, which
was where anyone would expect him to go, but into the
narrow cleft between his bed and Clarity’s. As he did so,
a previously unobserved intruder rose from the other side
of his bed and fired a needle beam, which penetrated
pillow, mattress, and probably the floor beneath the bed
where Flinx had been sleeping moments earlier. The
beam was bright blue in the darkness, and it crackled
It

nastily.

Realizing he had seared nothing but linen, the

gunman

started to rise for another shot at the bed’s unexpectedly

absent occupant, only to find Pip hovering shockingly
within wingbeat of his face. His eyes widened, visible

even

in the

bad

To give him

light,

and he jerked

credit, he

at the hairline instead

was

fast.

his

head

to

one

side.

The venom struck him

of in the eyes.

The man Scrap had struck

lay motionless

on the

floor,

already dead. Minidrag neurotoxin killed in less than a
minute once it entered the bloodstream, freezing the hu-

man

nervous system as easily as one would stop an appliance by touching a button. The intruder Pip had hit
had escaped this instant death. Instead, he had to deal
with the poison that was entering his head via the auditory canal. He was staggering about and screaming as he
fired wildly with the needier.

Pip and Scrap darted effortlessly about the room,
avoiding clumsy shots and creating enormous chaos.
There were more than three intruders, Flinx saw. More
than five. That was when he noticed Clarity starting to

Flinx in Flux
up.

sit

75

Her mouth opened, and she inhaled preparatory

to screaming.

Clamping

hand over her mouth, he used his
left to drag her out of the bed and down to the floor. She
fell on top of him, which under different circumstances
would have been delightful but at that moment did not
his right

him in the slightest.
“Quiet,” he whispered intensely

intrigue

as the battle raged

around them. “Just shut up and be quiet. You’re in the
safest place in the room right now.
She stared dazedly into his eyes, then nodded slowly.
He removed his hand from her face.
All around them was the noise of pounding feet,
screams, the metallic hiss of needlers and the hum of
hand beamers as the small army of kidnappers fired
madly at the swooping, spitting minidrags. More often
than not they ended up hitting one another.
It seemed to strike them simultaneously that they could
do no good here, the way an invading army suddenly
realizes it has been outflanked by the enemy it intended
to crush. A silken rip sounded as one man plunged headfirst through the light mask and out into the hall. Brighter
light from the hallway fixtures flooded into the room. He
was followed by his companions. There were too many
for Flinx to count in the confusion. They must have been
infiltrating the room for thirty minutes or more before
’ ’

Pip

woke him.

Some continued

howl as they

cope with the
effects of minidrag toxin while they retreated. Other
shouts were beginning to be heard, confused and angry
voices. Doors opened onto other rooms, and tenants
peered out to see what had disturbed their sleep. As they
caught sight of the chameleon suits and the weapons,
to

tried to

they retreated in haste.

in

“Pip?” Flinx straightened cautiously. “Pip, get back
here! That’s enough.”
It was several minutes before the big flying snake re-

turned to the room, having pursued the

last

of the

in-

Alan Dean Foster

76

truders to the bottom of the

of stairs. If Flinx
had not called her back, she would have emptied her
store of poison and might well have killed every last one
of their assailants. Flinx did not want that. He planned
flight,

not mass murder.

first flight

And

in better light there

was

always the chance one of the attackers might get off an
accurate shot.

Scrap hovered behind her, straying aloft while his
mother landed at the foot of Flinx ’s bed. She did not fold
her wings and relax, Flinx noted, a suggestion of more
trouble to come.

Only then did he notice how tightly Clarity was clinging to him. “It’s them,’’ she mumbled, the fear sharpedged in her voice.
“Of course it was them. Unless there’s someone else
who wants you badly enough to kill.” He looked toward
the still open door. “There were a lot of them. More
would’ve expected.”
She turned her face toward him. She was only centimeters away. “I told you how badly they want me.” He
could feel her trembling against him. No false bravado
now. She was scared out of her wits.
“It’s okay.” He wanted to be clever and fearless and
nonchalant but only ended up being himself. “They’re
than

I

gone.”

“The snakes,”
glanced

at

she murmured.

Pip and her

still

“The minidrags.” She

hovering offspring. Scrap kept

pivoting in midair, spoiling for

more

fight,

searching for

fresh enemies.

She stood, and he rose with her. Half a dozen bodies
littered the floor. Several lay facedown. Others did not.
The latter were not nice to look upon. Flying snake
venom and nitric acid had similar effects on human flesh.
No wonder people who were familiar with the minidrag’s
abilities hurried to cross the street when they saw Flinx
coming.
“Pip woke me,” he told her. “She sensed the threat.
There was no need for me to move first. If I had, some-

Flinx in Flux

77

one would’ve shot me. I always try to avoid that sort of
thing because minidrags don’t have half-reactions. You
can’t tell Pip just to wound somebody. There’s no such
thing as a limited flying snake strike.”

They stepped over

the

body of a very

large

man who

had fallen at the base of both beds. Clarity’s eyes rose
from the body to the doorway.
“I wonder if they’ll come back?”

“Not immediately. Would you?”
She shook her head, sharply. Scrap darted toward her,
and she moved to duck. Flinx hastened to reassure her.
‘‘Relax.

no way of

I

think you’ve

made

a friend, though there’s

he acted to protect me, his mother,
or you. Remember that he can tell what you’re feeling,
so he knows you mean me no harm. As long as that’s
true, there’s no reason for you to be afraid of him.”
‘‘You told me,” she said, straightening. ‘‘You told me,
but I still couldn’t imagine how lethal they are.”
‘‘Many people know that they’re deadly. What they
don’t realize is how fast and agile they are or how rapidly
their toxin acts on the human body. Short of militaryclass armor or an atmosphere suit, there’s no protection
against

telling if

them.”

He

could feel as well as see the tension in her when
Scrap decided to settle anew on her shoulder. Though
the young minidrag relaxed, he kept his wings unfurled

and ready for instant flight.
‘‘They must still be out there or Pip would be falling
asleep after exerting herself like that. Must be trying to
formulate some new strategy.”
Clarity turned nervously to the window. ‘‘Surely they
won’t try to rush the room.”
“Not now they won’t. Pip and Scrap aside, too many
guests saw them fleeing. But if they want you as badly
as they seem to, they might not act rationally.

“When

they

you. Probably
really

first

me

broke

in,

the intention

was

to gas

as well, as a safety measure. If they

want you and they have access

to a decent

volume

Alan Dean Foster

78
of the

stuff, there’s

nothing to keep them from gassing

the whole hotel, particularly

if it’s

strictly

morphic

in

nature.”

“The police?”
He grinned slightly. ‘‘Mimmisompo’s

a small,

open

manager lives in, he might,
contacting the cops. The hotel automatics

frontier town. If the hotel
just might, try

will talk to police automatics. In either event, the police

was

re-

hopes that

all

will take their time getting here. If the shooting

ported, they’ll take a lot

more time

in the

the shooters will be dead by the time they arrive.”

He was

already at the dresser, throwing his few be-

longings into the simple carryall pack. “That means

have to move

we

your friends intend trying
for you again, they’ll want to do so before any police
happen to wake up and take an interest in the night’s
goings-on.”
She took a hesitant step toward the door. ‘‘How can
we leave if they’re still out there?”
‘‘We have to leave because we can’t stay here. They
came in when the door was locked. They won’t stop because a few people happened to see them leaving.” He
took her by the hand. ‘‘They might be on their way back
up already. We don’t want to hang around and find out.”
She let him pull her along. ‘‘Where are you going?”

He

fast,

because

if

did not reply.

Pip rose from Flinx’s shoulder to scan both ends of the
hall, whizzing in seconds from one end to the other and

back again

to her master. Night-lights

glowed from

their

recesses, giving everything an eery olive-hued cast.

framing a large older man
with a protruding paunch. His whole head had been
shaved down to the ears. Hair trailed a dozen centimeters
over them, surrounding his head. The effect in the dim

Only one door stood

ajar,

was as if someone had yanked a fringed cap down
below his eyes.
‘‘Hey, what’s happening? What’s going on?” He
light

Flinx in Flux

79

leaned out into the hall as they approached. “Party’s too
loud for me. I’m gonna look for another hotel.’’

“Us,

too,’’ Flinx told

him, his eyes working the cor-

ridor.

Pip spread her wings and

who looked

zoomed

ahead. The big man,

he did not fear anything in this or any
other world, caught sight of the oncoming minidrag and
let out a shocked oath. He ducked back into his room,
and Flinx heard the emergency latch click shut electronlike

ically.

“Everyone here knows what a minidrag can do.” Flinx
started

down

the fire stairs.

“As

long as Pip stays in front

of us, no one else will.”

She was going to need a huge meal, he knew. Hovering
and flying so much burned a tremendous amount of energy. It seemed impossible they could maintain flight for
so long, but as little was known about the flying snakes’
internal makeup as was known about the rest of their
nature.

They descended carefully, Flinx graterul that the hotel
was only three stories high. No one challenged them in
the stairwell, where the night-lights were even dimmer
than those lining the hallways.

There were two doors at the bottom, one to either side
of the lower landing. One probably led back into the hotel,
to the kitchen or warehousing area. The other led
Into a service alley that ran between commercial structures, which they entered after Flinx had disarmed the
fire alarm on the door. A narrow, charged rail ran down
the center of the alley, providing power and lift for ro.

.

.

botic delivery vehicles. Flinx cautioned Clarity to avoid

down

damp

would
not kill, but it could badly shock a full-grown man.
“Where are we going? To get a vehicle, right? We’re
going to get transportation and head for Alaspinport. Will
there be a rental agency open this late?”
“In a town like Mimmisompo you can get anything
you want at any hour, if you have enough money. But
the rail as they hurried

the

corridor.

It

Alan Dean Foster

80

we

aren’t

going to

rent.

Rentals

can be noted,

and

traced.”

He

anxiously scanned the route ahead. Not for the

first

he wondered if he should be carrying a
weapon. The only problem with a gun was that it was a
provocation as much as a defense. Besides, Pip would

time

in his life

deal

much more

effectively with

any serious

threat.

reactions were a hundred times faster than his.

As

Her

a child

he had found himself in situations where possession of a
weapon would have been more of a hindrance than a
help, so he had learned to get along without them. That
did not keep him from occasionally wishing for the comforting weight of one at his belt or in a shoulder holster.
Scrap rode high on Clarity’s shoulder, a good indication that the danger, while not ended, was not immediate. He could not count on her pursuers delaying for very
long, he knew. They might be in the bedroom already,
might have discovered their quarry missing. The next
thing they would do would be to thoroughly search the
hotel and its immediate environs, checking other rooms
to see if Flinx and Clarity had sought refuge with another
guest. Certainly the front entrance would be covered from
the start.

would take them a while to figure out that the alarm
on the back stairs had been disconnected long enough to
let someone out into the service alley. Despite his caution, he knew they were leaving all kinds of trails behind
them. Body scent heightened by fear, pheromones, heat
signatures— all could be isolated and followed if one had
the right kind of equipment. It could not be helped.
Whether their pursuers were equipped with such sophisticated tracking devices depended on whether they had
anticipated possible failure. It did not seem likely, but
he could not count on convenient oversights to shield
It

them.

“This way.” He all but wrenched her arm loose pulling her around a sharp corner. Now that Alaspin’s second

Flinx in Flux

moon had joined
was better

its

companion

for trying to find a

81

in the night sky, the light

new

route through the city.

Already they were passing residences, the service alley
far behind as they kept to back streets. Lights made owls’
eyes of oval and round windows while the echo of tridee
and music drifted out to the otherwise empty streets.
There were no bugs to worry about. Industrial electronic
repellers kept even the persistent millimite bugs a hundred meters from the nearest structure. Unfortunately,
Mimmisompo was not wealthy enough to afford climate
control, so it was still hot and humid. Sweat trickled
from both refugees as they ran.
“Where are we going?” Clarity gasped. “I don’t know
how much longer I can keep this up.” She was breathing
with difficulty in the midnight heat.
“You’ll keep it up as long as necessary, because I’m
not going to carry you.”
They had left the private homes behind and found
themselves surrounded by air pressure domes and fabric
warehousing. “I’m looking for the right transportation.”
She frowned as she searched the vicinity. “Here? I
don’t see any cars.”
“I’m not looking for an aircar or slinkem,” he told
her tersely. “That’s the first type of vehicle they’d watch
for. I want something difficult to trace.” He paused.
“This’ll do.”
didn’t look like

much

of a fence, only a succession
of posts set in the ground five meters apart. Each was six
meters high and pulsed with faint yellow light.
“That’s a photic barrier,” she said. “You can’t climb
nothing to climb, you can’t walk
it because there’s
through it, and you can’t tip over any of the posts. Do
It

anything to disrupt the alignment and you’ll probably set
off a dozen distinct alarms.”
Once again he ignored her as he studied the half dozen
machines parked beneath a rain shield on the far side of
the service yard. All were battered and heavily used and

unlikely to draw attention to themselves.

It

was exactly

Alan Dean Foster

82

what he wanted for himself and his companion. He settled on a large lumbering skimmer whose back end concubes for storing
sisted
of compartmentalized
prepackaged cargo. It could have been anything from a
hazardous-waste dumper to a dairy delivery vehicle.
Clarity paid no attention to him. She was scanning the
dark buildings they had skirted, looking for silent shapes
afoot in the night. She didn’t turn around until she heard
the barely audible soft clicking.

From

a back pocket Flinx had extracted something the

and shape of a pack of plastic cards. Taking a couple
of steps away from the wall, he drew back his arm and
flipped the object in a sweeping underhand motion. Insize

stead of sailing in

all

directions across the

the plastic strips snapped together to

damp

street,

form a straight

line

meters in length. Using his hands, he bent it in two
places to create a rigid U shape taller and considerably
wider than his body.
Clarity eyed it dubiously. “What’s that for? It’s not tall
or strong enough to use as a ladder.
“It’s not a ladder. It’s a portable gate.’’ Pressing one
hand against each side of the U’s interior, he lifted the
entire frame. Holding it around him like a levitating
headdress, he walked right through the photic wall. The
glowing sensors didn’t flicker as he intercepted their
beams. No alarms flared to life. Pip rode through on his
five

’ ’

shoulder.

Now

he turned on the other side and repositioned the
gate for her. “Come on. Unless you’d rather stand out in
the street.’’

Unable

to concoct a reason for hesitating, she did as he

instructed, bending to slip under his

arm

as he held the

gate for her.
Safely inside the barrier, he gave the gate a magician’s
twist and she gaped as it collapsed back into his hand.

He

slipped the packet back into his pocket.

“Doppler deck,’’ he explained. “Bends light around
you. It can’t make you invisible, but under the right con-

Flinx in Flux
ditions

you can fake

83

Bent the sensors
didn’t interrupt them. Just made

it

pretty well.

around both of us. We
them avoid us.”
“Fascinating.” She followed him as he strode rapidly
across the lightly paved yard. “Expensive?”
He nodded. “It’s not the sort of toy you’d find at a
special sale. It’s a precision instrument designed to look
like junk, which is costly. When I was younger, I used
something like it that was a lot cruder. Sometimes it did
what it was supposed to. A lot of the time it didn’t. That
was inconvenient at best, embarrassing at worst. I determined that if I could ever aflbrd it, I’d have the best
analog equipment made. So I had this built for me.”
“Is that because you have to frequently override private security procedures?”
“Not really. I just like to have good tools handy.”
“You said you used something like it when you were
younger. What did you do as a child that required the
use of something like that?”
“I was a thief,” he told her simply. “It was the only
way I could survive.”
“Are you still a thief?”
“No. Now I pay for everything I need, sooner or
’ ’

later.

“More sooner

or later?”

“Depends on my mood.”
They hurried past the line of

vehicles until he halted

before the bulky cargo skimmer. Another pocket yielded
a folded leatherine wallet that

when opened

revealed a

host of tiny tools. Each was as perfect and beautiful as a

jewel. In point of fact, the thranx
wallet and

its

who had

fashioned the

contents for him was renowned as a jew-

Such projects as Flinx ’s wallet were a hobby for
him, a hobby that Flinx knew was more lucrative than

eler.

the thranx ’s admitted profession.

Choosing one particular instrument, he commenced
working on the trisealed secure lock that held the skimmer’s door closed. Though still fearful of immediate at-

Alan Dean Foster

84
tack, Clarity

was so absorbed

in

watching him work that

she no longer stared past the photic barrier

at the street

beyond.

“You must’ve been

a

good thief.”

“I was always considered advanced for my age. I don’t
think I’ve improved since, but I have better tools to work
with now.”

The door did not even

He climbed up and

click

when he popped

it

open.

behind the drive controls.
The ignition was unlocked. It was easier to secure the
doors than the engine and power plant. Under his skilled
touch the readouts came to life. He glanced approvingly
out at Clarity and nodded. Scrap released her hair to
flutter into the cab, taking up a resting position on the
back of the passenger’s seat.
Elsewhere skimmers had open cabs, but not on Alaspin. Here all were enclosed, air-conditioned, and bugresistant. Which would be especially nice as they were
going to be traveling at night, he knew.
Clarity grabbed a handle and pulled herself up beside
him. She closed her door and turned to regard him in
amazement. “You know, I’m beginning to believe you
actually have a chance of getting us offworld. You sure
you’re only—” She caught herself. “Sorry. I promised
not to mention that again, didn’t I?”
“You did.”
The skimmer made more of a racket on low lift than
he had hoped it would, but since the service yard he had
penetrated was presumed secure, there was no need for
a human guard to be kept on duty. The security monitor
would report anything unusual to a central facility as well
slid in

as to the district police.

Since there was no dome or solid roof, he assumed the
presence of a short-range security blanket, close cousin
to the photic wall he had already sidestepped. That

would be necessary to prevent any would-be thieves or
vandals from simply flying in over the wall. He also expected vehicles inside the wall to be appropriately

Flinx in Flux

85

equipped with the means for negating it. A couple of
minutes’ work with the skimmer’s onboard ’pute produced the requisite broadcast code. He punched it in and
waited patiently for it to notify the company’s central
security facility.

Hopefully no one would read the evening’s report until
morning. By then the absence of the big skimmer would
probably have been noted visually. It would take time to
determine that no night deliveries or pickups had been
scheduled, more time to make certain the skimmer had
not been borrowed by an authorized driver or executive.
By the time Alaspinport authorities could be informed of
its presumed theft and provided with a description, its
nocturnal riders would have abandoned it none the worse
for wear except for run-down batteries. For the use of
which, he unnecessarily mentioned to Clarity, he intended to pay.
They had one bad moment as the skimmer lifted eighty
meters above the yard and turned left out of the city. Out
in the commercial district, away from the bars and simulated strip joints and stimclubs, few lights showed below— until a smaller, much faster skimmer shot by hard
aport. Clarity yelped and tried to duck between the seats
while Scrap rose and darted in all directions at once,
getting in Flinx ’s way and causing minor havoc with his
steering.

Flinx had a brief, appalling glimpse of the other ve-

veered sharply to the left without banking.
Laughing, probably drunk young faces given ghostly life
by the skimmer’s internal lights leered at him for an instant and were gone.
“Kids.” He looked down and to his right. “Get up.
Your friends haven’t found us. It was just kids out joyhicle as

it

Not much else to do in a place like Mimmisompo. Even scientists and prospectors have kids.”
They were out over raw jungle now, heading for the
immense savanna that bordered both sides of the Aranoupa River. Following the river southwest would take
riding.

Alan Dean Foster

86

them to the granite outcropping occupied by Alaspinport,
a crooked finger of land extending out into the sea.
She rose slowly, fright fading from her face like a temporary tan. She looked small, vulnerable, and afraid.
“I’m sorry. It was just so unexpected. Everything was
going so well. You were handling everything so
smoothly.”
“I’m still handling things smoothly.” His attention
wandered from the night sky to the readout that showed
their position relative to Mimmisompo and Alaspinport.
Their transportation might be a well-used antique, but
the internal electronics were reassuringly up-to-date.
Sitting back in her seat, she rubbed at her eyes with
the backs of both hands, then looked over at him. “You’re
sure it was just a bunch of kids?”
He nodded. “Seventeen, eighteen. Mimmisompo’s not
a bad place for someone without education or training to
try for a fortune.”

“Like you, maybe? Except you
Feeling

it

aren’t a kid.”

appropriate under the circumstances, he tried

and discovered that he could not. “I was born
was never a kid. No, that’s not quite it; I was born

to smile
old.
,

I

tired.”

“I don’t believe you. I think you just like to pretend
that you’re slow and tired to keep others from trying to
find out more about you.”
“Can’t you just accept the fact that I’m a quiet loner
who likes his peace and quiet and privacy?”

“No,

I

can’t.”

“Why

not?”
“Because I think

I

know you

better than that already,

my

presumption. You are also the strangest young man I’ve ever met in my life. I guess you’ll be
upset if I add that I find you particularly attractive, too.”
“No. You can tell me that all you want.” He was afraid
she would do just that, but she did not. Apparently his
reply was all she had wanted to hear.
if

you’ll excuse

It

was the

last

question, for a while, anyway. She nes-

Flinx in Flux

87

back into her seat and gazed silently out at the empty
Alaspinian night. Meanwhile he worried about the absence of a decent scanner. The skimmer was equipped
with standard delivery system electronics, which meant
you could always tell where you were but had no idea
where anyone else was. It would help when they reached
Alaspinport and he sought to abandon the vehicle in a
safe place, but it was useless for trying to find out if you
were being paralleled, followed, or otherwise tracked.

tied

Pip could detect hostile intent, but only over a short
distance. The minidrag was sound asleep, exhausted by
her earlier exertions in his defense. Even Scrap rested, a

gleaming scaly bracelet

by the glow of the skimmer’s

lit

instrumentation.

He

preferred to assume their departure had gone un-

detected than to think of Clarity’s assailants trailing them
just out of sight.

By now

they must be

combing

the alleys

The likelihood of their
discovering the missing cargo skimmer and connecting it
to their quarry was small. He reminded himself that he
and buildings around the

hotel.

had no idea how extensive or advanced their tracking
equipment might be.
He would have preferred company in the sky. The lone
cargo skimmer would stand out on any plotting screen.
Few people chose to travel across the treetops at night.
There he went, borrowing trouble again. Tiring himself out mentally dealing with a nonexistent threat. Better
to conserve himself for real danger.

A

glance showed his companion

out the window. “Try to

and staring
get some sleep. The sun’ll be
still

alert

up soon.”
“I’ll sleep

The

when I’m

off Alaspin

and

in space-plus.

had a rude awakening.”
She indicated the instruments. “Can’t this hulk go any
last

’

time

I

tried to sleep,

I

’

faster?

picked it because I thought
it would be the most inconspicuous on a screen and the
most likely to be parked on full charge. I could have cho“It’s not built for speed.

I

Alan Dean Foster

88

more maneuverable, and quicker.
have run out of power in the middle of the

sen something smaller,

We

could also

savanna. You don’t want to try walking out of the Aran-

oupa savanna. The surface has a nasty habit of turning
to sludge underfoot, and its full of unpleasant things that
don’t react kindly to having their habitat disturbed. Better

we

get to Alaspinport slowly but surely.

“Besides, anyone hunting you would first go after an
obvious passenger craft, not a clunker like this.’’

“You’ve worked it out very carefully. And I thought
you just grabbed the first machine you thought you could
break into.’’

“I could have broken into any of them. And I’m sure
I’ve still overlooked something important.”
“You know,” she said admiringly, “I think I’ll be
better off

if I

just shut

up and

let

you take care of

me

instead of asking stupid questions.”

“That’s the

first

thing you’ve said since

I

met you

that

your name.”
She shook her head but could not repress a smile.
“Awfully young to be so sarcastic.” She turned back to
the window and the dark view outside.
The skimmer was moving right at a hundred and fifty

justifies

kph, clearing the tops of the
fifty

tallest

grasses by a good

meters. Occasionally Flinx would angle

left

or right

simply to vary their course and confuse any plotting computer that might be tracking them. Significant variations

would waste too much power. He wanted

keep enough
of a charge in the skimmer’s cells to approach Alaspinport in a wide curve, from the ocean side instead of from
the savanna. That would further confuse anyone trying
to tail them.
“How much longer?”
He checked the dash cartographic readout. “Straight
line from Mimmisompo to Alaspinport is about fourteen
hundred kilometers. We’ll be there in time for lunch.
You don’t mind if we skip eating, do you? Not that I
to

Flinx in Flux

wouldn’t mind something, but
in a

I

89

don’t want to waste time

restaurant.”

“I’m hungry

He

sighed.

right

“Have

now.”
a look around. This

is

a working

machine. I don’t see a protein synthesizer, but I’ll bet
there’s an internal still for condensing drinking water out
of the air. There might be flavorings or concentrates
somewhere. A heavy-duty cloud banger like this might
come equipped with emergency rations in case the driver
is

forced

down somewhere.”

have a look.”
It took her half an hour to produce fruit-flavored ration
bars and juice concentrates to add to the water the skim“I’ll

mer drew from

the sky.

The

pedestrian meal.

Human

fuel.

Once back on
repast.

It

result

was a

nutritious

if

the Teacher he could offer her a real

had elaborate synthesizing

facilities.

A

candle-

dinner simulated by electronics. Repair robots rapidly reprogrammed to serve as butlers and waiters. He
grinned to himself. He could make a real production out
light

impress her with his resources and skills. And did
he want to impress her? He tried not to glance furtively
in her direction.
She had offered to help drive, and he had turned her
down. The long flight relaxed him. He was much more
comfortable with electronics than with people.
Sure, why not impress her? Maybe on board the
Teacher back in familiar surroundings, he would be able
to relax in her presence. Get to know her and find out if
she was half as brilliant as she thought she was. Certainly
whoever was chasing her had a high opinion of her abil-

of

it,

,

ities.

She was not the only one torn with curiosity, he reflected as he smoothly guided the skimmer into a slow
turn westward.

Chapter Six

Since no ship rose to intercept them or question their
presence, he felt reasonably safe in approaching Alaspin

on a narrower path than he had originally planned, coming in from the north instead of the east. When he was
fifty kilometers out, he swerved sharply onto a straight
heading for the shuttleport, saving a half hour’s

flight

time.

They passed over the broad northern bay with its deserted white sand beaches, shadowing half a dozen lowflying sea skimmers that were working the shellfish beds
off the inner reef. Alaspin ’s extensive, shallow

oceans

were ideal breeding grounds for shellfish, both native
and introduced varieties, but the industry was just getting
started. Most of what was gathered was for local consumption. Not that he cared about making money, it was
just that all his life he had been around people for whom
commerce was the raison d’etre, and he could not avoid
picking up a little of their way of thinking. Mother Mastiff, for example, preferred to talk about different ways
of making money above all else.

90

Flinx in Flux

He had

91

acquired, however, greater concerns than

Money was,

more
than a means for securing freedom, and freedom was the
precursor to learning. And learning? What was learning
building a fortune.

for?

He had

after all, nothing

not quite decided that one yet.

Hell, I’m only nineteen.

Think about Clarity Held

stead, he told himself. Better

and— he clamped down

still,

in-

think about her legs

on that line of thought.
yet. For now, concentrate

ruthlessly

Not yet. Don’t think about that
on making it safely back to the Teacher.
Alaspinport’s underside was single-story gritty, bubbling with temporary storage domes whose sole purpose
was to separate goods within from fauna and climate
without. The few tall structures tended to cluster along
the high ridge of land that formed a bluff overlooking the
ocean at the end of the port peninsula.

The

shuttleport itself occupied a section of cleared Sa-

vanna south of the main city. Though it slowed them
down, Flinx inserted the skimmer in the automatic traffic
guide pattern above town. It offered anonymity and convenience. Clarity was delighted to be back among
crowds, sensing false safety in civilization.
Instead of requesting formal landing permission at the
port, he set

down among

a cluster of other commercial

vehicles near a recharging station.
short walk to a public tram that

port

let

From

there

them

it

was

a

off inside the

itself.

There were several private shuttles parked off in their
own area. Since no commercial ships hung in orbit that
day, the only traffic was atmospheric, aircraft traveling
between Crapinia and Mooscoop, frontier towns farther
from Alaspinport than even Mimmisompo. The absence
of a commercial shuttle lowered Clarity’s spirits.
“If they’re here, and you can bet they’re all over the
port, all they have t# do is close in on anything prepping
for launch.’’

“Why

should they?

What

business

is

it

of theirs

if

a

Alan Dean Foster

92

corporation or family shuttle makes ready to depart?
There’s no reason to assume you’d be traveling on one.”
“But they’ll see me. They’ll be watching all the departure lounges, and they’ll see

He

me.”

mute his exasperation. “First of all, while
I don’t know what kind of contacts these people have on
Alaspin, no one’s allowed in the private shuttle departure
tried to

lounge without proper clearance.”
“Then they’ll be watching from just outside.”
He considered. “Then we’ll just have to get you
through without being seen.”
“How? Disguise?”
“No. I think there’s a simpler and more effective way.”
Overhead luminescent broadband displays directed
them to the part of the port he was looking for, where a
small man sat in a small office behind a flat LCD screen.
He looked up expectantly as they entered.
“Can I be of service?”
Flinx pushed toward the narrow barrier that separated
work from waiting area. “I want to use the facilities.”
The man’s welcoming smile faded. “I’m sorry. I’ll be
happy to do any work you require, but we’re not a selfservice concern. Insurance regulations and all that, you

know.”
Flinx extracted a thin plastic card from his pants, the

lock on the card reading his thumbprint and heat signature and obediently detaching it from the securestrip that
kept

it

fastened to the inside of the pocket.

It

was an

ordinary-looking bright blue card.
“Run this through your show and tell.”
The man hesitated, then shrugged and complied. Clarity noted that he never did look up from the screen once
the card had been decoded.
“Fix me a price,” Flinx finally told him when the man
failed to respond.

“What?”
“I said,

fix

me

“Price. Sure.”

a price for the use of your equipment.”

He nodded

rapidly, started to rise, then

93

Flinx in Flux

slumped. “I told you that we’re not self-service.

I

just

...”

can’t possibly

Without asking permission, Flinx came around the
barrier and ran his fingers over the screen’s secureboard.
The man looked up at him.
‘‘You can’t

By way of

mean

that.”

screen run. The matransaction. The man let

reply Flinx pressed

chine beeped as

it

recorded the

out a long breath.

‘‘What now? What do you want me to do?”
‘‘Go have something to eat, or go to the bathroom, or
go call your wife.”
“I’m not married,” the clerk mumbled dazedly.
‘‘Then go call a friend.”
‘‘Yeah. Right.”
He left the office quickly. Flinx locked the door behind
him.
‘‘What did you do?” Clarity asked, watching him
closely.

‘‘Rented the

facilities.

Come

with

me.”

She followed. ‘‘What kind of place is this?” Piles of
crates and boxes filled platforms and shelves in the long
chamber behind the office.
‘‘You’ll see. Stand here.” He positioned her on a circular platform.

‘‘What are you going to do?” She eyed the platform
and the nearby machinery warily. ‘‘Build me a disguise?”

“Not

LCD

exactly.”

He

sat

down

opposite another large

screen and keyboard, studying

“What

if

they find us here?”

it

thoughtfully.

He had been examining

the screen and board for five minutes, and she

was

start-

ing to fidget.

“They won’t
still.”

find us here,” he said absently.

His fingers rose to the keys.

She looked down, startled. “Hey, what—”
“I said, don’t move.”

“Hold

Alan Dean Foster

94

She froze, puzzled but trusting. She had no choice but
to trust him.
It

was

a very elegant box.

Normally

it

was used

transporting live, exotic tropical vegetation.

for

The two-

was tinted green and brown to match
its usual contents and came lightly scented. It occurred
to Flinx that he had neglected to ask if she was claustrophobic, but it was too late now.
The packaging equipment wove the custom container
out of a special fibrous material produced on Alaspin.
The strong celluloid base would allow the free flow of
meter-tall cylinder

air

while simultaneously shielding the container’s con-

tents

from radiation, which meant

it

would also

foil

any

casually applied detection scanners. Internal noise would

be muted. As befitted the transportation of expensive
tropical vegetation, it was heavily padded on the inside.
It moved on its own built-in, yttrilithium battery-powered repulsion kit. Gyroscopic programming kept it perfectly upright to protect the delicate petals of the plant

As a final touch he had stenciled on the exterior,
PRODUCT OF ALASPIN— SENSITIVE FLORA— DO NOT OPEN,
SCREEN, OR HANDLE.
“I hope that’s comfortable,” he said aloud when he
inside.

had finished. There was no answer, of course. She
couldn’t hear him, nor he, her. The air inside the cylinder
would be a little on the warm side, but while temporarily
uncomfortable, she was in no danger of suffocation.

He

kept a surreptitious eye out for suspicious types as
he convoyed his personal baggage through port Security.

No one

him

lounge, and no one confronted him as he guided the cylinder through the boardintercepted

in the

ing corridor toward his shuttle.

Then he was loading

the

cargo bay, a touch on the throwaway repulsor’s control sending it rising by itself into the belly of
little craft’s

the ship.

‘‘Almost clear,” he said aloud, though she
not hear him.

He

still

could

instructed the shuttle’s computer verbally, giving

95

Flinxjn Flux

and docking instructions, then settled back
into the pilot’s seat and waited. Upon receiving departure
clearance from port authority, the shuttle taxied itself
simple

lift-off

A moment

was roaring down the
runway, gathering speed, its wheels folding up into the
delta wings and nose as they cleared the first marsh grass.
Thin purple blossoms vibrated in the wake of its passing.
Clarity had worried needlessly. Whoever had kidnapped her might be resourceful, but they were not ominto position.

He

later

it

Using interior handholds as gravity
left him, he pulled himself back toward the cargo hold.
It was time to unpackage his passenger.
nipotent.

rose.

The woman standing over him was very

tall

and ex-

much too beautiful for the vapid-faced
young man who had come in with her. An oddly matched

tremely pretty,

couple, but very polite. Almost deferential.

he had a woman with him? A young
woman?’’ The towering blonde wore the uniform of a
port authority guard.
“Yes.’’ This excited both of them tremendously,
though they took obvious pains to hide it. He still could
not decide which one was in charge. “Why? Is there a
problem?’’ The size of the bribe he had received from
his earlier visitor was weighing heavily on his mind.

“You

said

“No, no problem,’’

the

young man said

softly.

‘We

want to ask the young lady a couple of questions.’’
“Excuse me.’’ A matronly woman in a bright pink and

just

yellow dress came through the door, a plant basket slung
under one arm. “I have some fresh-cured maniga root
’’
I’d like shipped today to Tasc
The tall blonde stepped in front of her. “Sorry. This

—

office is closed.’’

behind the narrow counter blinked.
“Closed? No, we’re open here until six.”
“It’s closed,” the blonde reiterated without looking
back at him.
“But he just said ...” the matron began.

The

clerk

Alan Dean Foster

96

The

woman

reached down, put a hand in the center
of the older woman’s chest, and shoved. The matron
stumbled backward, barely keeping her balance, and
tall

gaped.
“Well, if you’re closed, you’re closed!’’ She spun and
hurried out of the office.
“Hey, wait a minute!” the clerk shouted, rising from
his chair. “Official port business is one thing, but—”
“It won’t take long.” The young man moved nearer
as his tall female companion gently shut and locked the
door. “And it will go much faster if you cooperate.”

“Of

cooperate,” the clerk told him irritably, “but that’s no reason to close us down.”
“Questions are understood much better when they’re
not interrupted in the asking,” the blonde said.
What a lovely speaking voice, the clerk thought, staring at her. Everything about her was gorgeous— except
her attitude. And the port guards were noted for their
course

I’ll

politeness.

“Maybe,” he

said suddenly, “I’d better

and check with some people before
questions.” He reached
neath his terminal.

The blonde reached

down
it

in

for the

two

I

make

a call

answer any more

com

strides

unit slung be-

and locked her

around his wrist. “Maybe,” she said softly,
“you’d better not.”
He tried to break her grip, but it was as if his wrist
had been lassoed with wire. He forced himself to calm
down. All these people wanted was some information,
and who was he to deny them? There was the back door,
but as she released his wrist he had the idea that making
a run for it would not be a good idea. Why ruin his day
and maybe more than that to shield some stranger’s privacy?
“All right.” He sat carefully back in his chair. “Go
ahead and ask your questions.”
“Thanks,” the young man said. His left eyelid was
jumping noticeably. “The people we’re after are trying
fingers

97

Flinx in Flux
to ruin

an entire world. You wouldn’t want that to hap-

pen, would you?”
“Of course not.

What

right-thinking citizen wants that

for any world?

The twitching went away, though
pletely. “See?” He looked back up

it

did not stop com-

at the

overpowering

blonde. “I told you it would be okay.”
‘‘I still think we should do it the other way, but—”
She shrugged, ‘‘—get on with it.”
The clerk found that he was trembling slightly inside,

even though he had made the right decision.

Chapter Seven

Although she relaxed completely for the first time since
he had met her once the shuttle cleared ionosphere, Flinx
did not. He had been around too much and seen too
much to know that mere vacuum offered no assurances
of safety. He watched and listened intently, but nothing
came near them. Traffic around Alaspin was nonexistent.
The com unit was silent. They were alone.
Clarity Held had been impressed by his description of
the Teacher. She was overwhelmed when the long, sleek
mass of the starship hove into view beyond the shuttle’s
viewports.

When

she finally set foot inside after trans-

ferring through the personnel lock, the only reaction re-

maining

to her

was awe.

They were in the area that on a commercial vessel
would have been designated a commons but that Flinx
domestically called his den. In the center stood a raised
pond filled with tropical fish from several worlds. It was

surrounded by bushes and well-tended plants. The ceiling was dressed in a type of vine that grew extremely
well in artificial light and did not shed.

98

Flinx in Flux
Flinx was very fond of green.

99

The world on which he

had been raised was thick with evergreen forest. Pip’s
home world was all jungle and savanna. He had seen
enough of both desert and ice to care for neither.
Artificial gravity made it all possible, even the bubbling fountain in the center of the pool that spouted both

normal and light water. Heavy water behaved normally
on board, but light water could be stained different colors. It was a blend of glycerine and gases encased in
incredibly thin polymer membranes. It burst into the air
in the form of multihued bubbles that were sucked up to
vanish into a cone concealed by the ceiling vines. The
cone condensed and recycled the bubbles through the water

below.

rough-hewn wood layered with
thickly stuffed cushions that responded musically to whoever sat on them, adjusting their melodies to the movements and emotions of the sitters. Purple and deep blue
forms chased each other seemingly at random around the
circular walls, like so many bugs at a racetrack. The randomness of the chase was part of the art. The den was a
remarkable mix of angular geometric shapes and glowing
lights, of green growing things and sparkling water, of
nature and science.
Clarity wandered around the room inspecting flora and
art. Each element of the decor stood out bright as a child’s
eyes, as carefully crafted and arranged as if by a professional. Flinx had simply thrown it all together.
When she was finished, she found her breath again.
“You actually do own all this?’’
“People tend to give me things.’’ Flinx smiled in embarrassment. “I don’t know why. A few I’ve picked up
on my travels.’’ He gestured. “The fountain and the
plants are there because I enjoy looking at both. There
are robots, but I prefer working with growing things my-

The

self. I

He

furniture

seem

was

real,

to have a

way with

plants.’’

her he thought his success with plants
had something to do with his empathic telepathy, nor did
did not

tell

Alan Dean Foster

100

he mention the theories that stated that plants were capable of emotion and feeling. She already thought of him
as weird, even if he had saved her life.
Maybe I should’ve been a farmer, he thought. Not that
there was much room for farmers on Moth. If he had
asked for help, the kind of plants Mother Mastiff would
probably have encouraged him to grow would have been
illegal.

“We

ought to leave,’’ she said abruptly, as if remembering what they were doing on his ship.
“We’re already on our way.’’
“Where?’’ She looked around in surprise, but there
were no ports in the common room.
“Outsystem, away from Alaspin orbit.’’ He checked
his wrist chronometer. “It’s an easy command to give.

The

ship takes verbal direction.

to enter

it

via keyboard. If

Much

easier than trying

you hear a third voice speak-

ing, cool, feminine-neutral, that’s the Teacher.

It’s

not

capable of reasoning, so don’t try arguing with it. I prefer
it that way. I wanted something that would respond immediately to my wishes and not debate possibilities with

me.
“Unlike me?’’ She walked over to the rock rimwall
that enclosed the pool and sat down on the edge, trailing
one hand in the water. A flash of crimson steel drifted
over on turquoise wings to inspect her fingers. She
reached lazily in its direction, and it darted away with a
flick

of trifinned

tail.

“People give you things. Like this ship, you said.’’
“I have a number of interesting friends. They built it
for me, actually.’’ He shook his head with the remembrance of it. “I still don’t know how they did it. Somehow it didn’t strike me as the kind of thing they’d be good
at, but then, they didn’t seem good at anything. Surprising friends.’’

“Oh, how

lovely!’’

She rose and stepped away from

“What’s this?’’
She ran her hand over what looked

the pool.

like a

dozen Mob-

Flinx in Flux
ius strips orbiting a

common

center.

101

Where

they met and

intersected they appeared to vanish into nothingness.

When she touched one, a deep bass
common room. Touching another

rumbling

filled the

generated a crude

was nothing holding the arrangement
place a meter and a half above the deck.
whistling. There

in

“Some

kind of gravity projection?”
“I don’t know.” He shrugged. “I acquired it without
instructions or explanation, I’m afraid.” He nodded forward. “Put your hand in the middle, where the strips
converge.”
“Why? Will it disappear?”

He

smiled.

“No.”

“All right.”
Eyeing him challenging, she slowly moved her hand
into the intersecting space. Her fingers were slightly
parted. Instantly, her eyes shut tight and a look of pure
bliss passed over her face. Her mouth parted slightly to
reveal teeth tightly clenched. Slowly her head arched
backward, then rolled forward, taking her whole upper
body with it like a ribbon caught in a sudden breeze. He
had to run to catch her.
He half carried, half dragged her to the nearest lounge
and gently placed her on the responsive upholstery. The
back of her left hand rested against her forehead, and
beads of sweat were collecting on her skin like Burmese
pearls. She wore the expression for two minutes. Then
she blinked, wiped away the sweat, and turned to face
him.
“That wasn’t fair,” she said huskily. “I didn’t ex-

pect— anything

like that.”

“Neither did I the first time I put my hand inside. It’s
a little overwhelming.”
“A little ?” She was gazing longingly at the floating
confluence of Mobius

strips.

“I’ve never

felt

anything

my hand was only in there for a
moment. But it wasn’t just my hand, was it?” She looked
back up at him. “It was my whole body.”
like that in

my

life,

and

Alan Dean Foster

102

was your

“It

entire being, your self plugged into a

high-voltage socket without the danger. At least,
there’s

think

wondrous surge of pleasure.’’
firmly as she sat up straight on the

no danger. Just

“That,’’ she said

I

that

lounge, “ought to be illegal.’’

He

turned away from her. “It

is.’’

“I never heard of such a device. Where’s it built?’’
“On an illegal world by illegal people. There are no
restrictions on it because, insofar as I know, it’s the only
one of its kind. Nobody else knows it exists. The people
who made this ship for me—’’ He looked around the
commons room, “—made that as well. Another gift.
They wanted to make sure I felt happy all the time, so
they provided me with the means to do so.’’
“You could die from that much happiness.’’
“I know. Its designers have greater tolerances for
everything, including happiness. You have to watch the
dose. I only use it when I’m seriously depressed.’’
“And do you find yourself seriously depressed often,
Flinx?’’

“I’m afraid I do. I was always kind of moody, and it’s
worse now than when I was a child.’’
“I see. It’s none of my business and you don’t have to
tell me, but is there anyone else on this ship?’’
“Only you and I, unless you count Pip and Scrap.’’
She shrugged. “I couldn’t expect you to tell me about
your illegal suppliers.’’
“I don’t mind. They’re really fine folks. Special. I
sometimes find myself thinking that they’re the universe’s
chosen ones. They’re innocents. Utter innocents, though
I’ve taken some basic steps to remedy that. The Church
knows about them, and the government, and they’re
afraid of that kind of innocence. My friends are also
incomprehensible.
“Would I know of them?’’
“Possibly, but I doubt it.’’ Moving to a tall blue-green
fern, he pushed aside one of the thick fronds to reveal a
tiny keyboard. He let his fingers play over the keys. It
’ ’

Flinx in Flux

103

would have been easier to have entered the command
verbally, but he had a childish desire to impress her further.

To anyone unschooled

in galographics, the star clusters

between Flinx and the founwould have appeared haphazardly aligned. Only on

that materialized in midair
tain

closer inspection could a viewer

make

out the tiny bright

green letters that floated above each sun. A very small
proportion of the imaged stars were labeled with yellow
pinpoint letters instead of green.
“The Commonwealth,” he explained unnecessarily.
The A Ann Empire was not shown, though she did not
doubt he could call it up with the flick of a finger. Nor
was the Sagittarius Arm visible. The holo displayed only
Commonwealth vectors and schematics. While she
looked on, the entire complex configuration oriented itself to the position of the Teacher.
“It’s a long ways out.” He was peering deeply into
the slowly rotating holo. “Maybe within Commonwealth
boundaries, maybe not. Up near the Rosette nebula, out
toward the galactic edge. Not a big world. Not impressive.” He brushed the controls inside the fern, and she
saw a green blip brighten to emerald.
His hand moved anew, and the holo shifted drastically.
When it halted, a completely different world blazed
brighter than any other. “Alaspin.” His hand moved yet
a third time, highlighting a world on the very fringes of
the

Commonwealth.

“Existing world, different perspective. The

was

legal.

A

mask. The positions are

falsified.

first

holo

These are

and proscribed.”
She stared. The new world he had brought to brilliance
moved perceptibly, enough to throw off anyone trying to
locate it. This time it was not green but an intense red.
“I don’t have much use for a floating map,” she murmured, “but I’ve seen worlds marked green and blue and
pink and yellow, but never that color before.”
“It means the world in question is under full Church
correct,

Alan Dean Foster

104

No

Edict.

one’s supposed to

automated weapons stations

know

it’s

there.

There are

in multiple orbit stationed

six planetary diameters out to prevent unauthorized ap-

much

proaches,

less landings.”

He waved

his hand,

and

an evaporative cosmos. “If
people knew it was there and Under Edict, someone
would try to go there simply because it’s forbidden. The
result would be dead adventurers and a discomfited buthe entire holo vanished,

reaucracy.

’ ’

She looked

You

at

him

said the people

“Yes.

My

steadily.

who

“But you’ve been

there.

lived there built this ship.”

friends, the Ujurrians.” His eyes flicked

beyond her as if expecting to see something else. Perhaps
something three meters tall and furry. But he saw only
plants and fountain.
“Why is it Under Edict?”
“If I told you, I’d be in violation of the Edict itself.”
“I won’t tell. I owe you my life. I can keep your secrets.”

He

considered, then looked away and sighed.

getting to the point

where

I

“I’m
don’t care who knows what

anymore. The Ujurrians are a physically large ursinoid
race, paragons of ingenuousness by our standards. At
least they were when I met them. They are also potentially the most advanced people ever encountered.”
Clarity frowned. “That’s no reason to put them Under
Edict.”

“They
readers.

And

are natural telepaths,” Flinx told her.

Not empathic telepaths

like the flying

“Mind

snakes.”

myself, he added, but not aloud.

She whistled meaningfully. “You mean true mind-tomind communicators? Like the people in the tridee plays
and in books?”
He nodded. “The one thing we’ve always feared more
than anything else in an alien race. People who could
read our minds when we couldn’t read theirs. And not
just our minds. There was an AAnn installation on UlruUjurr.

The Ujurrians could read them

as

well.

They

Flinx in Flux

105

chased the A Ann away. I think they can even read Pip’s
mind, as much of a mind as she has.” The flying snake
looked up briefly from his shoulder before lying back

down. “And
‘‘Isn’t that

that isn’t all.”

enough?”

‘‘They learn on an exponential curve. When I met
them, it was almost level. They were living in caves.
Now it’s heading upward, and fast. By the time I left

enough from

they’d learned

the files at the

to start an impressive little city.

though

I

still

essary infrastructure together so

He smiled

station

Also to build the Teacher

haven’t figured out

other abilities.”

A Ann

how
fast.

slightly.

,

they put the nec-

They

also have

‘‘They like to

make

jokes, play games, and dig tunnels.”

‘‘Tunnels? That’s funny.”

‘‘Why

is

that

funny?”

‘‘You’ll find out soon. But they’re not hostile?”

‘‘On the contrary. They’re fluffy and rather amusinglooking and roly-poly if you can conceive of something
three meters tall massing out around eleven or twelve
hundred kilos as roly-poly. We got along real well.”
‘‘I would think so.” She was trailing her fingers in the
water again. ‘‘If they built a ship as a gift for you. How

—

many

ships do they have?”

know, the Teacher is the only ship they’ve
ever built.” That reminded him of a certain Ujurrian who
was so peculiar that even his fellow Ujurrians found him
strange. ‘‘There was a male named Maybeso who didn’t
need one, though I suppose I shouldn’t say that because
I don’t know what his range was.”
Her eyes widened. ‘‘Teleportation, too?”
‘‘I don’t know. They call it something else. I think
they can do other things as well, but I didn’t know enough
to ask the right questions. It’s been a long time, and I
need to go back.” He blinked. ‘‘You can understand why
the Church would put a world like that Under Edict. The
‘‘As far as

I

Ujurrians are a race of telepathic, possibly teleportational

innocents with limitless mental potential.

You

Alan Dean Foster

106

know how

the Outreach Bureau thinks.

they’re friendly

now

morrow. ‘Pananoia

be friendly tosurvival,’ and that sort of non-

doesn’t
is

mean

Just because

they’ll

sense.”

She nodded slowly, and he turned from her to gaze
moodily at the pond. ‘‘You don’t have to worry about
any pursuit now. The Teacher's very fast, and we’re
armed, though I’ve no idea if the armament is functional.
I’ve never had to use it.”
‘‘Unlike the people

He checked

who took me,”

she said quietly.

the readout strapped to his left wrist.

enough out

engage the drive pretty soon.
Once we’re in space-plus, nobody can touch us.”
He did not tell her that the Teacher was the only ship
in the Commonwealth capable of taking off and landing
directly from a planetary surface. Those innocent geniuses, the Ujurrians, had solved in a week a problem that
had tormented the Commonwealth’s best physicists since
the development of the KK-drive. There were still a number of secrets he intended to keep from his guest. One
would be the fiction that his ship was no different from
‘‘We’ll be far

to

similar vessels.

was Under Edict, how did you come to be on
this world and ingratiate yourself tightly enough with its
inhabitants to make them want to build you a ship?”
He was examining the ceiling. Amazingly, there were
bugs up there, establishing themselves in the vines. He
could not imagine how and when they had come on
board. They were the real dominants in this universe, he
thought. Not humans, not thranx, not the A Ann. It was
always the little ones who ruled. Insects had managed to
colonize everything but vacuum. Now they had taken the
Teacher for their own. They added to the common room’s
homey feel— except when one of them dropped off a vine
onto his head. Thus far nothing dangerous had hitched a
ride in his hair. Anyway, insects rarely bit him. Perhaps
he was not as tasty as other people.
He remembered her question and replied absently. “I
‘‘If

it

Flinx

was looking

in

Flux

someone, and

for

I

107

visited a lot of peculiar

places.”

“Can

“My

who you were

ask

I

father and

“Oh.” That was
“Did you

find

looking for?”

my mother.”
not the reply she had been expecting,

them?”

“I found out that my mother was dead. I still don’t
know what happened to my father, or even who he was.”
“Are you still searching?”

He shook

head violently, surprised at how tense he
was. ‘‘I’ve crossed a lot of void, touched many worlds
trying to come up with an answer. The searching sapped
a lot of the passion for it. Now my interests are changing.
What was critical to me a few years ago isn’t critical to
me anymore. While I’d still like to know, I don’t see the
point in devoting all my attention to finding out.”
“So you grew up an orphan?”
That made him smile, as memories of his childhood
always did. “I had an adoptive mother. Mother Mastiff.
A lying, cheating, foul-mouthed, filthy, unattractive old

whom

lady

his

I

love very

much.”

“I can see that,” she said softly.
“You know,” he told her suddenly, “all

was

to

just as

be
I

left

alone.

I

I

ever wanted

didn’t ask to be given this ship,

haven’t asked for

all

the problems I’ve had to

deal with. Deity, I’m not even twenty yet!”

“You’re a
older

men

more mature, Flinx, than most of the
known.” So deep was he in contempla-

lot

I’ve

of himself that the implications of her

tion

comment

flashed right past him.

“I’m
that
it,

just beginning to have a glimpse of the forces

move

the universe, Clarity.

anyway. Nothing

is

The

exactly as

it

sentient portion of

appears. There are

barely perceptible undercurrents swirling about our af-

and for some damned reason a lot of them seem to
be swirling around me. The more I try to run from them,
the more they wash up against me.”
fairs,

Alan Dean Foster

108

was her turn

It

“Now

to smile.

you’re talking non-

sense.’’

“I wish I were. Maybe I am. Maybe you’re right.”
After all, he thought, as messed up as his nervous system
was, his imaginings might seem as solid as reality without his being able to tell the difference.
“So you think the universe is out to get you?”
“It’s not out to get me. It just won’t leave me alone.
All I ever wanted from it were the identities of my mother
and father. While trying to find that out, a number of
people have died around me. Yes, died,” he said emphatically in response to her skeptical look. “It’s a burden I can’t off-load. Violence follows me. Look at you.
You’re a perfect example.”
“Meeting you was sheer coincidence,” she argued.

“A

lucky one on

my

you can’t think there’s
some grand cosmic scheme devoted to making your life
miserable?”
“I know it sounds insane. Sometimes I don’t know
what to believe. There are times when I think I should
just stay aboard the Teacher choose a vector at random
along the galactic plane, and rush off at top speed until
the drive gives out. At least then I’d have peace.”
She let the resulting silence linger for a long time before speaking again. “It seems to me you’re going to
have to choose between peace and answers to all your
part. Surely

,

questions.”

He

turned back to her. Gradually the tension drained
out of him. “That’s a very perceptive observation. Clar’ ’

ity.

“Hell, I’m a very perceptive kind of person. Besides
being a biological genius. Self-damnation’s no more a
solution to anything than self-pity.”

to

“What can you know of either? Still, it’s nice of you
try to make me feel better. Considering your own sit-

uation,

it’s

nice of you to think of

me

at all.”

“Yes, you’re really in sad shape, aren’t you, Flinx?
You’re independent, wealthy enough to operate your own

Flinx in Flux
private starship,

and you’re

difficult to feel sorry for

all

109

of nineteen.

It’s

pretty

someone who moans and groans

about a setup like that.”
She only analyzes what she sees, Flinx thought. She
doesn’t consider the internal variables. But it was
thoughtful of her nonetheless.
“Whether you believe it or not, I’m sick of all this. I
just want to be left to myself, to do my thinking and my
studying. The Ujurrians called this vessel the Teacher in
my honor. They should have named it the Student because that’s what I am. My primary subject is myself. I

want to know who and what I am. Maybe I already know
and I’m either too stupid or too scared to recognize it.”
At that she rose and walked over to him. Her hands
moved. “I think you’re just fine, if you’ll put aside some
of this silliness you’ve gone and burdened yourself with.”
He retreated a step, and she actually pouted.
“Where do you want to go?” he muttered uneasily.
She took a deep breath. “Ever hear of a world called
Longtunnel?” He shook his head. “Call it up on your
holo map. You think Alaspin’s a frontier world? There’s
only one outpost on Longtunnel, and it’s understaffed.
With good reason, as you’ll see for yourself when we get
there. That’s where I need to go.”
“If I take you back to where you were, won’t your
kidnappers be looking for you there?”
“I’m sure they will, but I need to tell my colleagues
what happened so they can take steps to protect themselves.” She smiled. “You’ll understand immediately
why I reacted so sharply to your reference to your Ujurrian friends being fond of tunnel digging.

I

don’t think

they’re responsible for any of the excavations

on Long-

tunnel.”

“Probably not. Though it’s hard sometimes to understand them clearly, mind-to-mind communication notwithstanding. Extreme guilelessness and extreme
sophistication are a tough combination to handle.”
They might not be so guileless now, he told himself.

Alan Dean Foster

110

Not

after he

had introduced them

to the

game of

civili-

Though knowing them as he did, they might by
now have moved on to another game entirely. He ought
to find out— once he had handed this young woman back
zation.

to the safe custody of her friends.

He murmured

into the concealed pickup, disdaining

the time-consuming use of the keyboard this time.

He

might be ignorant of Longtunnel’s location, but not the
Teacher. Stored within its memory were the whereabouts
of every known world in the Commonwealth.
Flinx jumped slightly as Clarity came up behind him.
Pip left his shoulder in favor of a decorative sculpture on
the far side of the pool. Scrap was playing with the fish
in the water, darting and striking harmlessly when they
neared the surface. A scaly, misplaced kingfisher, Flinx
mused.
Her arms slipped around him and gently drew him
against her body. He could have disengaged himself but
this time felt no compulsion to do so.
“So we’re on our way to Longtunnel?”
“On our way, yes. What are you doing?’’
“It’s better to show,’’ she whispered into his ear, “than
to tell.’’

What

she showed him was a means for shrinking parsecs. For once he was not bored during the long journey

through space-plus, nor was he forced to retire regularly
to the ship’s library for surcease.

The

library

limited to what the Ujurrians had had access to

had been

when

they

had built the ship. During his visits to other worlds Flinx
had expanded it substantially. He introduced Clarity to it
when they had time.
He did not fall in love with her, though he easily could
have. There was too much still buried inside him for that.
It was not a worrisome concern since she showed no
signs of falling in love with him. All she was doing was
making the jump from Alaspin to Longtunnel the most
enjoyable journey he had yet taken on the Teacher.
There was a great deal to be said for not traveling

Flinx in Flux

111

alone, for not shutting oneself off from the rest of hu-

manity. Particularly

someone

when humanity took

the

form of

as lively, vivacious, intelligent, and attractive

as Clarity.

Even from orbit Longtunnel looked abnormal. There
was a lone beacon on the surface. Linking with it, the
Teacher estimated average wind speed in the temperate
zone at a hundred fifty kph.
“Comparatively calm day.” Clarity was reading over
Flinx ’s shoulder. “It blows much stronger than that.”
They stood on a traditional anachronism: the ship’s
bridge. Since Flinx could address the ship’s computer
from anywhere, including the bathroom, the existence of
a bridge was nothing more than a sop to archaic design.
But it felt good to sit before a control console and inspect
the line of manual instrumentation. He understood some
of the functions, but nowhere near enough to enable him
emergency. Piloting an interstellar
vessel was so complicated that humanx pilots rarely had
anything to do and were glad of it. They were little more
than a backup for a supposedly fail-safe system.
The controls and the view through the broad sweep of
plexalloy were at least attractive, and it was a good place
to watch incomprehensible information come in. The
screens on the bridge were larger than those in the staterooms and commons.
“How windy does it get down there?” he asked.
“Three, four hundred kph. Maybe more. Nobody pays
much attention unless there’s a supply shuttle due in.”
“I’d think if you were living in it you’d notice it all
the time.”
“That’s just it. We don’t live in it. The surface of
Longtunnel ’s uninhabitable
“You live in underground structures?”
“You’ll see.” She nodded toward a readout. “Just follow the navbeacon down.”
“All right.” He did not move.
to fly the ship in an

’ ’

.

Alan Dean Foster

112

She waited a while longer. “Aren’t we going to the
shuttle?’’ she asked finally.
“Of course.’’ He rose smoothly. “Just checking a few
last things.’’

As much as he enjoyed seeing new worlds and meeting
new people, he always felt a pang of regret whenever it
came time to leave the Teacher. In a universe of insanity
it

was

his

one refuge: always compliant, always comfort-

ing.

They made a clean drop and cut a tight curve around
the northern hemisphere, homing in on the single landing
beacon. Since there were no other vessels in orbit, there
was no need to request clearance, and Clarity assured
him there were no aircraft based at the outpost.
“That means our arrival will be noted not only by your
friends and port Security but also by any local contacts
your kidnappers may have established.’’
“You could always repackage me again for delivery,’’
she said with a grin.
“True. Ribbons and bows this time.’’ He studied the
shuttle readouts. “They may have given up on you by
now, or they may be concentrating all their energies on
Alaspin.’’

“The

Her expression was somber. “I don’t think these people give up on
latter’s possible,

but not the

first.’’

anything.’’

The

little

vessel shuddered as

it

sank through angry

atmosphere. High-altitude winds buffeted them from side
to side. Despite its compensators, they found reason to
be grateful for their landing harnesses. Jetstreams warred
with one another, treating the intruder with rude indifference. Pip and Scrap wrapped themselves around the
two empty seats and held on tightly.
Lightning troubled him more than the wind. It was
thunderous, continual, and struck sideways between the
clouds as often as from cloud to surface. The shuttle was
hit twice, but the only damage was a scorched wing.
“Is it always like this?’’ The steady roar and rumble

Flinx in Flux

113

reached them even through the shuttle’s superb soundproofing.

“So

wouldn’t have their job
for anything. They have to stay near the surface and go
outside every so often to monitor their instruments.”
Locally it was midday, but when the shuttle finally
broke through the bottom layer of clouds it was as dark
as early evening. Lightning continued to flash all around.
Flinx was grateful that all they had to do was sit back
and hang on while the ship’s brain conversed at high
speed with the mind of the landing computer below. The
two machines calmly sorted out angle of approach and
descent, landing speed, wind direction and shear, and
the thousand other vital details that had to be determined
and agreed upon in order to get two fragile humans down
intact. Despite the best efforts of both mechanicals, the
little craft bucked and heaved.
There was just enough light to enable Flinx to see
through the front viewpoint. The terrain was worse than
unpromising: tall pillars of pale stone, a jagged network
of broken spires and crags, unhealthy-looking vegetation
clinging grimly to exposed rock or hiding in the few sheltered places as it tried to avoid being mugged by the
unrelenting gale. It was raining lightly.
As they dropped lower and closer to the menacing outcrops, Flinx strained for sight of a light, a building, anythe climatologists say.

thing to indicate they were

I

coming down

in the right

place.

The shuttle’s engines roared unexpectedly, slamming
him back in the pilot’s chair, the harness pressing tight
against chest and legs. As they rose and banked, he had
a brief glimpse of blue lights lined up in the darkness.

That was

no field, no hangars or blast pits or any of
the other numerous appurtenances of a regular shuttleall:

port.

“Coming around on approach.” The

shuttle’s voice

sounded tinny in the rocking, swaying cabin.
“Why again?” Flinx asked sharply.

Alan Dean Foster

114

“Too much wind. Landing Command voided our
tial

descent.

“And

“We

I

am

if there’s

circling.”

too

much wind

again this time?”

will continue to circle until

Landing

authorizes touchdown. In the event fuel

we

ini-

Command

becomes

critical,

shall return automatically to base for refueling.”

That meant they had enough for maybe two more tries,
Flinx knew. The Teacher did not carry a lot of reserve
fuel for the shuttle. He always fueled up wherever he
touched down. Now it was too late to wish for extra
tanks.

They came around

curve so tight that it threatened
to rip the wings right off the sleek delta-shaped craft.
This time the approach went much more smoothly; the
wind’s speed actually dropped below a hundred kph for
a few precious moments.
Clarity was talking to cover her nervousness. “Are
you on a familiar basis with all your computers?
“I try to be friends with as many intelligences as possible. There are plenty of humans who don’t deserve the
label. This flying bothers you, too, doesn’t it?”
“Of course it bothers me!” she replied tightly. “But
it’s the only way to get on or off Longtunnel. I’ve done
it half a dozen times, and I’m still doing it.”
“Another way of saying that the odds haven’t caught
up with you yet.”
“You know, for a charming young man you can be
very depressing at times.”
in a

’ ’

“Sorry.”

He could
below now

see the line of blue lights directly ahead and
as the shuttle pointed her nose at the

first

They were flying below the tallest peaks. The outpost and port had been situated in a deep valley surrounded by high peaks. To cut down on the wind, he told
himself. What were the surface winds like beyond the
light.

protection offered by the mountains?

When
relief.

they finally touched down, he

The

shuttle rose

once

let

out a sigh of

in the grasp of the relentless

Flinx in Flux

wind, then

set

down once and

the

computer
forward motion. They

for all as the

back-thrust the engines to cut their
felt

115

wind and heard the thunder more

the engines

clearly

when

fell to idle.

A

green light appeared on their left, blinking insistently. The shuttle turned on its landing gear to track
another beacon, one they could not see.
“A good landing.” Clarity was already loosening her
flight harness.

“Good?”

Flinx was

admit. “This

more shaken than he wanted

to

a hell of a place.”

is

“Full of possibilities, or none of us would be here.”
“What’s the air like?”
“Breathable if it doesn’t knock you off your feet. Just
keep in mind that any landing on Longtunnel is a good
landing. We might not have been able to touch down at

—

all.”

“Why

not?”
“Landslides.” She was staring out the nearest sweep
of plexalloy.

At

least

out in space you could see the stars,

he

thought. Here there was only bare rock dimly visible

through the dust and dark. A light mist was falling sideways, the wind howled, and the outside temperature was
unbearable thanks to the greenhouse effect engendered
by the dense cloud cover. He had been on less hospitable
worlds but never before on one quite so sheerly miserable.

“I’d rather live on Freeflo,” he told her.

“Yes. But nobody’s here to
and work and produce.”

The

live.

We’re here

to study

admit them was set in
stelacrete walls framing a natural opening in the side of
a sheer cliff. As if to remind him of the landslides Clarity
had mentioned, a few large boulders came tumbling down
to

barrier that rolled

smash

up

to

into the badly pitted landing strip off to their

right.

Then they were

inside, the

wind a

baleful

memory,

the

Alan Dean Foster

116

glow of artificial illumination. The barrier door rumbled down behind them,
shutting out wind, mist, and heat.
“What do you use for power here?” The amount of
light filling every corner of the hangar seemed extravashuttle bathed in the rich sterile

gant for an outpost port. He ought to have guessed.
“Wind turbines on the top of this mountain,’’ Clarity

“Heavy-duty blades and tiedowns.

We

have fusion for backup, but as I understand it they’ve never had
to bring it on line. Anyone wants a few more kilowatts
for their operation, all they have to do is struggle up
topside and set up another turbine. They’re built to handle winds like these. It’s helped make development here
replied.

practical.

for tying

You pay
it

for the turbine

and

its

to

and

into the system. After that the power’s free.

And at these wind speeds, plentiful.’’
He could see figures approaching
moved

installation

They

the shuttle.

slowly, cautiously. “Doesn’t look like they’re used

unscheduled

“For

arrivals.’’

know you may be

all I

the

first.

This

isn’t exactly

a well-known vacation world.’’

“What do

Landing Authority?’’
She laughed. “There isn’t much authority of any kind
here. You’re with me, so there’s no problem. I’m with
Coldstripe, and everyone knows us.’’ She watched as Pip
uncurled herself from a chair. “What about your pets?’’
“Pip comes with me. Scrap can come or go as he
pleases. They’re used to Moth’s climate, so they should
be able to tolerate anything in here, so long as it doesn’t
I tell

freeze.’’

“Never.”
Flinx followed her out of the shuttle as

down under

instructions

it

shut itself

from Landing Command.

A few

workers in beige overalls glanced in their direction before continuing on their way. Flinx suspected their stares
were intended for Pip and Scrap more than for the two

humans.
Clarity had been tense emerging

from the

shuttle.

Now

Flinx in Flux

117

she looked better. “Nothing out of the ordinary, looks
like. I

wonder how many knew

live in their

own

little

that

I

was missing. They

worlds here.’’

“I’d think in a place this small, news of a kidnapping

would

travel quickly.’’

“Only

allowed to roam free, unrestrained. The company would try to keep it as quiet as possible so as not
to alarm anyone else. And there’s not much interfirm socializing here. Everyone tends to keep to their work and
to themselves. Some are physically isolated, and the rest,
well, they’re the competition, aren’t they?’’
She led him across the smooth surface. Distant thunder
echoed from beyond the massive hangar gate as they
if

walked away from it.
A few quick glances sufficed to show that they were
crossing the floor of an enormous cavern that had been
modified to serve as a hangar. It was commodious enough
to hold several dozen shuttles.
“The space was here,’’ she replied in response to his
query about the cavern’s origins. “That’s one thing
Longtunnel has plenty of.’’
“What about native life, flora and fauna?’’
“Ah,’’ she said with a smile, “that’s why we’re here
in the first place. It’s incredibly diverse and adaptable. A
unique and challenging ecosystem. As you’ll find out for
yourself in a

little

while.’’

Flinx glanced back at the hangar barrier. “I didn’t see

much when we came down, and

wouldn’t think you’d
get any diversity out in that kind of weather.
“You don’t.’’ She was still smiling. “Low scrub
growth and a few hard-pressed insects and lower mammals. Nature isn’t stupid, Flinx. When Longtunnel’s disI

’ ’

was get out
of the weather. The native lifeforms have had billions of
years to do that. Don’t you think they’d do the same
themselves? If it’s storming outside, you move inside.
That’s just what Longtunnel’s inhabitants have done.’’
They entered the port receiving facilities, which were
coverers landed here, the

first

thing they did

Alan Dean Foster

118

simple and sparse. Flinx was fascinated by the amount
of bare rock visible in the ceiling, floor, and walls. We’ve
reverted here, he thought. Strung it with fiber-optic ca-

and AI terminals and contact switches, but it’s still
the ancestral cave. Only the wall paintings have changed.
Stalactites and stalagmites remained in place where they
bles

did not interfere with routine functions.

Few

glances

from Alaspin

came

their way.

that Pip

They were

far

enough

would be regarded simply as an

exotic pet by people unfamiliar with her lethal reputation.

The port was busy but
space would have given

understaffed, though the excess

an underpopulated appearance
anyway. It was an easy matter to separate the long-timers
from recent arrivals. The skin of the former was pale
it

beyond pallid.
“Everyone here takes tanning treatments,’’ Clarity ex-

“Some

plained.

are

more

diligent about

it

than others.

can only compensate so much.’’
“Then why do they stay on here?’’ Flinx knew it was
a stupid question even as he asked it.
Artificial lighting

money. Why else would anyone come
place? For money, and maybe for fame.’’
“And do they find it?’’

“For

the

“Some
ing to

do.

come

The fame, anyway— the money
in.

my

In

is

to this

just start-

case, a share of royalties on a

newly approved biopatent. I have others pending, more
than you might think for someone my age. The work I’ve
been involved in here is just starting to bear fruit.’’

“What

kind of work is that?’’
“That’s right,’’ she said teasingly, “I haven’t told you
yet, have I?’’

“Only
what

it is

that you’re an gengineer.

You haven’t

told

me

you’re engineering.’’

“You’ll see. You’ll see everything and to hell with

company

security.

I

owe you

that

much,

if that’s

what

you want. If not, I guess you’re free to leave. You’ve
done everything I asked of you and more.’’

Flinx in Flux

He remembered

119

jump from Alaspin

Longtunnel
and said dryly, “It wasn’t exactly an arduous task on my
part. I’m intrigued by what you’re doing as well as by
this place. I would like to see what you’re up to.’’
“I was hoping you’d say that,’’ she said warmly. “I’ll
get you clearance.
“Longtunnel is one big karstic formation, or so the
geologists claim. The whole place was covered by shallow ocean for billions of years.’’
Flinx nodded, studying the exposed walls. “This is all
the

to

limestone.’’

“Most, not

Limestone, gypsum, calcite— soft minerals. As the oceans receded while Longtunnel cooled,
the three continents were exposed to this wind and, more
importantly, to constant rain. It’s been chewing away at
the limestone for millennia. The results are caves like
the one we’re in now and the bigger one we just left that’s
used as a hangar.
“Exploration is still in its infancy here, but some think
Longtunnel is home to the largest, longest cavern systems
anywhere in the Commonwealth. You can’t walk through
undertown without tripping over a starry-eyed speleologist. The whole contingent’s been stumbling around in a
collective daze since the nature of the planetary surface
was first deduced. They’re always posting revised lists as
all.

they discover a

Do you

biggest this or

more wondrous

that.

like caves?’’

“Not
I

new

as a general rule, no. I’m not afraid of them, but

prefer the feel of sunshine and the smell of growing

things.’’

“You’ll find half of that here, though maybe not the
kind of smells you enjoy. The air’s always cool, but the
surface heat seeps down and moderates it. You can work
in a short-sleeved shirt. Nobody knows about the lower
levels.

The

speleologists have been so busy up here in

what we call the temperate zone that they haven’t had a
chance or the inclination to take their lights any deeper.
The water, by the way, is about as pure and refreshing

Alan Dean Foster

120

you can

anywhere, naturally filtered. There’s talk
of starting up a local brewery and exporting. If nothing
else, it would have novelty value.
“There are four underground rivers located so far.’’
They were strolling past a cafeteria. A few people were
as

find

removing food from service bays. “They expect to find
more. There’s even talk of underground oceans.”
Flinx frowned. “Surely a cavern large enough to hold
something that size would have fallen in on itself by

now.”

“Who

knows? Longtunnel

is

rewriting a

number of

long-held geological rules. Biological, too.”

Ever since they had left the hangar behind, he had been
conscious of a constant hum in the air, a soft whine like
a tenor choir murmuring the same tune over and over.
“Pumps,” she explained when he asked about the
sound. “There’s a lot of water in Longtunnel. Caverns
are still growing, still being formed. It’s always raining
topside, and the water has to go somewhere. Most of it

away naturally, but there are places we want to
move into where the water also wants to be. So we run
pumps. Like I told you, energy’s no problem down here.”

drains

“Somebody
“The port

still

has to pay for

it,

for ail this.”

and support facilities are
jointly supported by the government and the private concerns operating here under license. Everything else is
privately run.”
“Healthy. Are all the firms located in the same cavern?”
“No, they’re scattered all over the place, connected by
communications fibers. Short-range wireless doesn’t
work too well through multiple walls and solid rock, no
matter which technology you employ. Cheaper and
infrastructure

cleaner to run fibers. Internal walls are only for privacy,
since every outfit can have its own cavern. You pick out

an unclaimed space, scrape off the formations, and set
up your desks and files and beds and cooking facilities

Flinx in Flux

s

121

and lab equipment. There’s more office space on Longtunnel than a dozen worlds could ever use.”
‘‘It all seems very efficient and well run. Why would
anyone want to interfere with your operation here?
Her expression turned dark. ‘‘I’m not really sure. They
didn’t actually come out and tell me. But then, I only
respond to logic and reason.”
He almost said, ‘‘You’re too pretty to be so sarcastic,”
’ ’

but then thought better of

he did not think she
would appreciate it, and, second, he was never sure exactly what to say around attractive women. Somehow,
when he tried to talk to them, he always drew a frown
instead of a smile. He did much better when he did not
it.

First,

talk at all.

‘‘Whoops, careful.” She put a hand on

him

his

arm

to lead

to the right.

He

didn’t see

straight ahead.

the motion.

It

them

at first

took a

because he was looking

moment

for his eyes to detect

Chapter Ei^ht

There were three of them traveling parallel as they
crossed the left half of the poured plastic flooring Flinx
and Clarity were following. Each was mostly mouth a
dozen centimeters wide with a body that was broad and
like a pale yellow flounder striped with blue. Bright
pink lips outlined each wide mouth.
flat,

At

he thought they were large insects advancing
on tiny legs or cilia. As they moved closer, he saw rippling fur. Each was half a meter in length. Except for the
gaping, flattened mouths that quivered as the creatures
advanced, they had no visible external features except
first

two black pinpoints located just above and behind the
jaws. They might once have been eyes. Each of the two
dozen or so limbs they walked on was articulated in the
middle and ended in a flat, round pad., A hairless tail
several centimeters long protruded

They looked

like a trio of faceless,

from the back end.
mutated platypuses

had been given the legs of an oversized millipede.
Flinx stood gaping at them as they trundled silently past
that

like so

many miniature

reapers.

122

Flinx in Flux

123

“Floats.” Clarity gestured as she explained. “We
screen all the work and living areas. There are dangerous
predators on Longtunnel, and there may well be others
not yet encountered. The floats are useful as they are.
We’ve semidomesticated them.”
“They don’t ‘float’ very high,” he observed.
“I didn’t name them; somebody else is responsible for
that. They’re trisexual, which is why you’ll always see

them

traveling in trios.

We

let

them roam where they

please.”

“What are they doing— vacuuming the floor?*’
“No.” She laughed. “They don’t consume dirt and
what you mean. But this world is alive,
Flinx. The floors and walls, the very air in the caverns,
is full of rusts and yeasts and fungi. Half the research
scientists working here are mycologists. Most of what
they’ve classified is benign, but not all, and some is
downright dangerous. The cartographic spleologists take
masks with them on the chance they might run into
something lethal. “Between the benign and the fatal there’s a large group
of small organisms that will give you an instant cold or
otherwise interfere with your breathing or excretory systems if you inhale any of them. They spend most of their
time on the ground, but walking stirs them up. The floats
love them. So they are vacuumers, but not of dirt. They
dust, if that’s

filter

out the organics they suck up. Like baleen whales,

only on a much smaller scale. Of course they eat the
benign organisms as readily as the harmful ones, but

no loss to us.”
She was heading toward a familiar-looking shuttlecar-

that’s

system terminal, familiar except for the fact that they
were the first of their kind Flinx had ever seen without
canopies. The settlers of Longtunnel did not need to protect themselves against the weather.

complex,” she was saying.
ahead to let them know we’re

“It’s not far to Coldstripe’s

“Aren’t you going to call
coming, that you’re back?”

Alan Dean Foster

124

She grinned wickedly. “No. They’re a pretty staid
bunch. Let’s shake them up with a surprise.”
She climbed into one of the four passenger cars, and
he followed. Her fingers thumbed in the destination setting. Instantly the compact car rose half a centimeter
above its magnetic repulsion rail and began accelerating
forward.
Flinx noted the smooth walls and the narrow service

walkway

as they sped through an irregular tunnel.

The

was pleasantly bright, and except
for the solid stone walls there was nothing to indicate
they were underground. They might have been in any
transportation corridor on Earth or any of the other inlighting along the route

dustrialized worlds.

Other cars raced past above the paralleling rail, heading for the port. Some were small passenger cars like the
one they rode, others miniature trains carrying cargo.
There were branch rails leading into side tunnels, but
they continued to speed along the main line.
“Did you notice that they were heavily pigmented?”
“What?” Flinx was staring up the tunnel. It reminded
him of an amusement ride Mother Mastiff had taken him
on when he was a child. Less active, no holos, but in its

own fashion just as fascinating.
“The floats. Yellow and blue.

That’s because

many

dependent on food drifting in from
above. The wind and rain and heat make it almost impossible for anything like higher fauna to survive, but
some plants have done well and spread out. There’s nothing on the surface to feed on them. So the organic matter
they produce finds its way into cave openings and sinkholes. There’s a whole ecosystem dependent on the transition zone between inside and outside. The floats are
part of that. So they have coloration, while most of the
creatures that thrive in the deep cave system have lost all
pigment entirely. It’s quite an experience to see something like a goralact, which is a pretty good-size animal,
about the mass of a cow. But it has six legs and is almost
lifeforms here are

still

Flinx in Flux
transparent.

You can watch

125

the blood coursing through

it

diagram in a junior physiology program. Almost
everything we’ve encountered has eyes of some sort, but
they’re mostly vestigial. The best of them can distinguish
shape. The majority do well to react to bright light.
There’s even one, the photomorph, that uses it to its advantage.”
like a

“What

photomorph?” Pip fluttered her
car banked sharply around a curve, then

the hell’s a

wings as the
relaxed on his shoulder.
“You’ll see.” She was grinning

at

him.

“When one

attacks.”

He was
for

mildly alarmed. “Attacks? Should

something?” He viewed the tunnel ahead

I

be ready

in a differ-

ent light.

“Oh,

no. Photomorphs and their relatives are harmless

humans. They don’t know that, the poor things, so
they keep trying. If you let one get on you, it could be
dangerous, but they’re easy enough to avoid. They don’t
rely on speed when they attack.”
He pondered the photomorph until the car halted.
Clarity led him through a succession of caverns and passageways where the cave formations had been leveled.
He could hear other voices clearly. It was not surprising,
since sound traveled well inside a cavern. There were
brief glimpses inside large rooms separated from others
by spray-fiber walls. If one put up a mesh frame, sprayed
a color over it, and waited until it hardened, one had a
to

solid partition— the cheapest kind of construction.

She stopped outside a door set in a wall painted a garish shade of blue. The door admitted them to a room
occupied by a man not much older than Clarity. He was
tall, and black hair worked at covering his face.
“Clarity!” He brushed nervously at the hair. “Christ,
where have you been? Everyone’s been worried sick, and
the brass all have sealed mouths on the subject.”
“Never mind that now, Jase. I’ve a lot to say, and I
have to say

it

to

Vandervort

first

so she can take appro-

“

Alan Dean Foster

126

She indicated Flinx. ‘‘This is my friend.
So’s the flying snake lounging on his neck. So’s the one
on my neck— it’s under my hair, so don’t go hunting for
priate steps.”

it.”

The

tall

young man’s eyes traveled from Flinx

and back to

Clarity.

‘‘Hell, I’ve got to tell

His expression radiated delight.
everyone you’re back.” He started

to turn, then hesitated. ‘‘But

Vandervort

to Pip

you said you wanted

to tell

first.”

‘‘Just details.

You can

slip the

Jimmy and the rest.”
‘‘Good— sure. Hey, you want
aside to make a path.

to

news

to Tangerine

and

come in?” He stepped

Flinx followed Clarity into the extensive lab as Jase

dashed for the nearest wall comm to spread the news.
‘‘Sounds like you’ve been missed, like you said you
would be.”
‘‘One or two projects probably came to a complete
stop in my absence. I’m not boasting. That’s just how it
is.”

Flinx admired the state-of-the-art equipment lining ta-

and walls, the gleaming surfaces, the spotless plexalloyware. There were four technicians at work in the
chamber, two robotic, two human. All looked over at the
visitors, waved, and returned to their work.
‘‘Thranx work for Coldstripe also?”
bles

“A

couple.

It’s

pretty chilly

down

here for them. If

They do most
of the maintenance work on the turbines. The constant
humidity helps, and they enjoy underground work naturally. So they wear heat suits. Their own living areas are
roofed over and steamed up all the time inside. Good
way to get sick: Go from any cavern into Marlacyno’s
quarters. An instant twenty-degree jump.”
They walked through a subdividing door, then a second, and Flinx found himself in a room alive with hisses,
squeals, and whines, none of which were being genernot for the wind, they’d prefer

ated electronically.

it

topside.

Flinx in Flux

“Specimen

127

storage,’’ Clarity informed

him unneces-

sarily.

Flinx didn’t recognize any of the creatures cavorting

holding cages. Thin wire of varying grades kept

in the

them

restrained. All of

it

was

translucent.

“Carbfiber base.’’ Clarity touched a nearly invisible
wire. “Keeps them in but relaxed. There isn’t the feeling
of being caged. Here’s the one I wanted you to see.’’
He looked in the indicated direction and was momentarily blinded when an intense light lit his face. Stars

danced on
chuckling

his retinas as his vision cleared. Clarity
at

was

him, and he realized that she must have shut

her eyes at the critical moment.

“That’s the photomorph
you’d see
it’s

when

it

it

I

was

you about.

I

said

attacked. You’d think they’d realize

own

have much
but since they can hardly see, they probably don’t

too bright in here for their

effect,

realize

As

telling

how

diluted their

weapons

light to

are.’’

his sight returned, Flinx could see several of the

moving from the back of their cage toward the front. Each was about half a meter in length,
the same as the floats, and was covered with a fine gray
fur that formed something not unlike a long handlebar
mustache below the double nostrils. The snout was short,
blunt, and filled with sharp triangular teeth. The nostrils
sat on the tip of a four-centimeter-long trunk. Each of
the four legs ended in a clawed three-toed foot. The claws
were hooked and looked extremely sharp. The translucreatures slowly

cent bars of the cage appeared far too fragile to hold such
squat, muscular creatures in check, but he

was confident

they were stronger than they looked.

The photomorphs were advancing

in

slow motion, like

sloths.

“They’ll stop when they reach the front of the cage

and realize they can’t get
eyes at
told

all.

at us.

They have hardly any

In their case that’s an offensive adjustment.

you there were carnivores here.’’

I

Alan Dean Foster

128

“If they can’t see us,

how do

they

know

we’re here?

Smell?’’

She nodded. “Other carnivores have lines of electric
sensors along their faces and bodies so they can detect
the presence of prey by the faint pulses every body genhave sensors to detect the movement
of a prey animal, by analyzing air currents and pressures!
Look at the top of the head, where you’d expect to find
erates. Still others

ears.’’

Flinx stood on tiptoes to do so and found a double line

of slightly glassy beads.
“You might mistake them for eyes, but there are no
pupils or irises. They’re photogenerators. They build up
the light in their bodies until they let loose with that
single bright flare to stun their prey.

Remember that most

of the higher animals we’ve classified have the ability to
detect light in darkness. So the photomorph puts out an
impressive number of lumens and overwhelms the prey’s
photosensors. It’s a real brain jolt and usually stuns for
several minutes. Call it a phototoxin. While the animal
is sitting there stunned, the photomorph and his companions wander over leisurely and start making a meal of
it.’’

Flinx was duly impressed. “I’ve heard of creatures
that use light to lure their prey, but not to actually attack
it

with.’’

“You’d be shocked at the kind of offensive and defensive weaponry animals can develop in the absence of
light. The xenologists here are surprised by something

new every time

they

make another

field

expedition.

Longtunnel’s lifeforms are unique, and that’s why we’re
here. To study potentially useful varieties.’’
Flinx nodded in the direction of the caged photo-

morphs. “How might something like that be useful?’’
“Other biophotics like fireflies and deep-sea fish generate their light chemically; the photomorph employs an
electronic process that’s never been seen before. No matter how efficient we get, there’s always a market for still

Flinx in Flux

129

another way of generating light and power. Our people
don’t have a clue to what makes the photomorph tick,
but they’re working on it.”

“And you
to

don’t have a clue either?”

“Not one of my projects. I’m busy enough. It’s good
be busy down here. There’s not much else to do except

and forming casual assignations.” She led him out of the zoo. “Given a little more
food and a little less competition, just about everything
down here will breed like mad. If you can find a useful
job for something that multiplies like crazy and lives on
fungi or slime, you have a marketable bioproduct. Ever
for recreational spelunking

’ ’

hear of Verdidion Weave?
Flinx shook his head, then hesitated. “Wait a minute.
Some kind of living carpet, right?”
She nodded. “Our first real success. The one that’s

our subsequent work here. I’m at least half
responsible for its development. That was several years
ago. Since then we’ve come up with a few additional
products. Small stuff. Nothing on the order of Verdidion
Weave. But we’re close to some major breakthroughs. Or
we were, before my work was interrupted. I’ll show you
some of them when I get a chance.”
“I’d be very interested in seeing them.”
They were back in the main lab. The tall man was
waiting for them, eyes shining. “Vandervort wants to see
you immediately.”
“Damn. I wanted to break the surprise myself.”
“You were seen coming through Security. Everyone
wants to talk to you, but I imagine you’ll want to talk to
Vandervort first.”
“I don’t have much choice now, anyway, do I, Jase?”
“I expect not.” He looked concerned. “Was there
some kind of trouble? There were rumors— the company
tried to keep news of your disappearance quiet, but you
can’t keep secrets down here.”
“I’m not going to go into the details now, but if it
hadn’t been for my friend, I wouldn’t be here.”
financed

all

Alan Dean Foster

130

Jase studied the slim young
to the

gengineer,

quickly. That

was

sizing

man

standing quietly next

him up and dismissing him

fine with Flinx.

“I was in a position to offer assistance,” he explained,
“so I did.”
“Yeah, nice of you.” Jase’s gaze switched back to
Clarity.

Flinx saw that the other

man was

hopelessly in love

with Clarity Held. He wondered if Jase had any idea how
obvious he was being. From his new height and greater
maturity, Flinx was able to regard the other man with
tolerance.

“Everything went crazy when you up and vanished.”
Jase chose to ignore Flinx, having cataloged and filed
him like one of the inhabitants of the specimen zoo.
“I figured it would. Don’t worry. I’ll be back on station by tomorrow.” She reached out, and for a moment
Flinx thought she was going to take the other scientist’s
hand. But she was only gesturing at the door.
“Let’s go. It’s time we check in with Vandervort.
You’ll like her. Everyone likes her.”
“Then I’m sure I will, too.”
They walked instead of using the ARV system. As they
did so, they passed people clad in attire that screamed
Security. Most of them wore sidearms.
“Looks like someone’s taken a few precautions in the
wake of your disappearance.”

“Amee

isn’t

dumb. Any

outfit

would get suspicious

if

one of their top people suddenly vanished without leaving behind a message of resignation or notice of intent
to terminate. I didn’t go as quietly as the people who
grabbed me thought I would. I’ll bet there are missing
persons bulletins out across half the Commonwealth by

now.”
They were walking down a corridor open to the ceiling. The floor was polished limestone and travertine.
Plastic sheeting hung in several places, and he could hear
the dripping of water against the impermeable Mylar.

Flinx in Flux

She noticed the direction of his glance. “I think

131
I

men-

tioned that the majority of the cavern system explored so
far is alive.”

“What do you mean,

alive?”

“A

cavern with water running through it is still creating and adding to formations. It’s a live cave. One that’s
dried up is considered dead.”
“I see. I should’ve known that, but most of my studies

have been directed outward on the worlds I’ve visited.”
She eyed him curiously. “How many worlds have you
been to? I’ve only been on three. My home world of
Thalia Major, Thalia Minor of course, and now Longtunnel. I guess I should call it four, counting Alaspin.”
“I’ve been to more than four.” He did not want to go
into specifics. She probably would not believe him, anyway. Instead, he changed the subject, a skill he had mastered years ago. “Clearly everyone here’s on alert. Yet
you look more relaxed than I’ve ever seen you.”
“They don’t know it’s over. I was anxious right up
until we landed. But everything’s okay now, especially
since Security’s been called out. You’ve seen what landing on Longtunnel can be like. There’s only the one port
and landing strip. There are no facilities anywhere else.
All they have to do is keep the port under guard and
nobody can get in or out without having to run Security
first. You ought to relax, yourself.”
I’d like to do that, he said to himself, but I think I
forgot how about five years ago.
They turned another corner and stopped before a door
set in a yellow spray-wall. Clarity didn’t buzz or identify
herself. She simply walked in. No scanner bade them
pause; no autosec announced their arrival.

Now

was here, he understood why. There was
no need for internal security on Longtunnel. All you had
to do to prevent unauthorized entry was monitor port
facilities and watch the front door because there were no
back ones to sneak in through. It also explained how
Clarity’s abductors had been able to slip her out. Once
that he

Alan Dean Foster

132

you had only a single checkpoint to
clear to get out again. There must be individual company
security, but that was a different matter, especially if you
were trying to break out and not in.
The office they entered was spacious, and why not,
when it was simply a matter of subdividing another cavern to your liking? What made it interesting was the presence of dozens of ceiling growths. In this chamber they
had been left undisturbed. Glistening stalactites, helectites, soda straws, and gypsum twists sparkled above the
artificial lighting. Limestone and water had decorated the
office far more beautifully than any professional could

you were

inside,

have.

There was no need for climate control. The temperature was the same in the office as it had been in the hall
outside: cool and slightly damp. Off to the left, near the
back of the chamber, cave water tumbled musically from
a crack in the rock wall and was drawn away by a floor
drain.

Storage

files,

a couch, office furniture, and cojoined

desks stood out starkly against the gemlike natural formations. The woman who rose from behind one desk was
much shorter than Clarity. Her long red hair had been
pulled back and bound in a neat bun

— knife edged gold

bun in three places. Her smile of
greeting was warm and inviting, her voice was deep and
throaty, and a narcostick dangled precariously from one
comer of her mouth. It in no way impeded her speech.
Her stride and handshake were equally vigorous.
Flinx figured her to be in her midfifties and was genuinely surprised when he learned later that she was sevcrystals pierced the

enty. Late middle age. Instead of shaking

hands with

embraced the younger woman, patting her
affectionately on the back.
“Maxim and the gang down in Development have been
spinning their wheels ever since you vanished.”
That made Clarity frown. “They went into my cubiClarity, she

cle?”

Flinx in Flux

“My

dear, everyone

went

133

into your cubicle.

What

did

you expect? There was a lot of moaning and wringing of
hands when Security ventured their opinion that your departure had not been voluntary. I suppose I am due some
of the responsibility. I should have insisted on tighter
security right from the beginning. But who imagined
something like that happening? An abduction, from
Longtunnel? I am correct, am I not, in assuming it was
something like that?”
“That’s it.”
Vandervort nodded knowingly. “The signs were clear
to the forensics people. Not to the rest of us, but to them
the message
again,

I

was

clear enough. Well,

it

won’t happen

can promise you that.”

“We

saw the new Security on our way down.”
“Good.” She turned to examine Flinx, not neglecting
the minidrag relaxing on his shoulder. “Interesting pet
you have, young man. I notice that Clarity has acquired
one for herself.”
“Pip isn’t a pet. Our relationship is mutually benefi,

cial.”

“As you

of what our work here is
about, you know. Or are you aware of that already?” She
glanced back at Clarity. “How much have you told him
will. That’s part

about us?”
“Everything that isn’t classified. He saved my life.
Maybe yours as well. I couldn’t shut him out.”
“I can’t wait for the details,” the woman replied sardonically. “By the way,” she said as she extended a hand
to Flinx, “I’m Alynasmolia Vandervort. Everyone calls
me Amee. Or Momma. I’m Coldstripe’s supervisor-incharge here.”
He returned the firm grip. “I assumed something of
the kind.”
“It appears we all owe you a debt of gratitude for
returning our Clarity to us. You’re not claustrophobic by
any chance, are you? We have pills for those who display
the

symptoms.”

Alan Dean Foster

134

“I’m fine,” he told her. “If anything, it’s more spacious than I would have imagined.”
Vandervort looked pleased, resumed her seat behind
the desk, and directed her visitors to chairs. “Who was
it?” she asked Clarity.

Flinx feigned indifference while listening closely to
Clarity’s story.

The supervisor

sat

motionless and intent.

She did not touch the narcostick, but by the time Clarity
had finished, it had somehow migrated from one corner
of her mouth to the other. She leaned back in her chair
and let out a soft grunt.
“Could be any of several dozen radical groups. There
are plenty of ’em out there, but usually they confine
themselves to making speeches nobody listens to, or taking up free space between entertainment programming
on the newsfax.” She had a peculiar, jerky manner of
speech that was matched by the ceaseless movement of
her eyes from one person to the next.
“Our debt to you, young man, is real. You know that
Clarity here

is

irreplaceable.”

“I know. She told me— several times.”
Vandervort laughed at that, a hard but in no way masculine chuckle. “Oh, she’s not shy, our Clarity. With all
she’s accomplished already, she has no need for false
modesty. Whoever carried out this execrable act did their
research well. Clarity’s the one
staff

we

can’t afford to lose.

us,” she added grimly,
again.”

“I’m not worried.

down

tight,

It

member

Now

“we

of our scientific

back among
won’t lose track of you
that you’re

looks like you’ve shut everything

Amee.”

“That we have.” She

hesitated.

“Would you

feel

more

comfortable with a full-time bodyguard?”
“I already have one.” Clarity reached up to pet Scrap,
secure in his place beneath her sidetail.

Vandervort issued another of her
to

and turned
Flinx. “Clarity’s told you what we’re doing here?”
soft grunts

Flinx in Flux

135

“You’re working with malleable local lifeforms to produce commercially viable offshoots.’’
She nodded. “Genetically, Longtunnel is a mine whose
shafts have already been dug for us. We haven’t been set
up here very long. Barely begun to classify, much less
extensively select, breed, and gengineer. Even so we’ve
managed to come up with several successful products.’’
“Clarity mentioned your Verdidion Weave.’’
“That’s been our big success thus far, but not the only
one.’’ She reached behind her and opened a drawer in a
metal cabinet. Sweet smells filled the room as she withdrew something and placed it on the desk in front of her.
The shallow pan of blue metallic glass was filled with
cubes of jelly: red, yellow, and purple. They did not
shimmer when she slid the pan across the desk top.

“Have
“Oh, go

a bite.’’ Flinx studied the jelly uncertainly.
on, dear.’’ Vandervort selected a purple cube,

mouth, and chewed enthusiastically.
“Go on, Flinx.’’ Clarity helped herself to a pink-hued
square. “They’re wonderful.’’
Hardly able to sit and cower in terror while the two
women munched away, Flinx chose a bright green cube
and cautiously put it in his mouth. Anticipating a lime
or gooseberry taste, he was startled by the explosion of
flavors that shocked his taste buds. The cube’s density

popped

it

in her

was tougher than gelatin, closer
to rubber in consistency. Yet once he broke it down, it
dissolved readily in his mouth. The multiple flavors lingered powerfully long after he had swallowed the last
was another

surprise.

It

bite.

He helped

himself to another green cube, then a purple

was as different and exciting the
third time as it had been with the first two. It occurred
to him as he was chewing the fourth cube that he might
be consuming some extremely valuable products, though
one.

The

flavor burst

Vandervort hadn’t withdrawn the tray. On the contrary,
she appeared to delight in his enjoyment.
“Remarkable stuff, isn’t it, young man? When people

Alan Dean Foster

136

have exhausted their purchasing power on electronic
gadgets and labor-saving devices and art, there isn’t much
left to dally over except food. A new taste sensation is
worth more than the most powerful new personal computing device. Whether intended for mind or stomach,
entertainment is always more valuable than anything the
gengineers can invent.”
‘‘What is it?” a sated Flinx asked, licking his fingers.
‘‘Almost as nutritious as it is tasty, for one thing.”
Clarity was wearing her prideful smile again. ‘‘It tastes
like it’s packed with sugars, but it’s a sham. In reality it’s
almost solid protein.”
Vandervort took obvious delight in identifying it for
him. ‘‘It’s a pseudoplasmodium slug.”
Flinx stopped licking his fingers. Vandervort ’s smile
grew wider. ‘‘A slime mold, young man.”
Flavors began to fade rapidly. ‘‘I don’t follow you.”
‘‘A pseudoplasmodium is an amoebeic aggregate.
Strange lifeform, slime molds. When grouped together
they behave as a single entity, but if you take them apart,
shake them around in water or something, they break
down into individual clusters quite capable of sustaining
life.” She gestured at the half-empty tray. ‘‘We don’t
know what we’re going to call it yet. I don’t deal with
advertising and publicity.”
‘‘I’m sure they’ll call

it

something like Flavor Cubes,”

Clarity said.
‘‘Yes, dear.

‘Flavor

Cubes from the

mines of
appeal to the poptaste

Longtunnel.’ Or some such drivel to
ular taste.” Vandervort sounded almost bitter. ‘‘They
certainly will not market it as slime mold.”
‘‘I

take

it

the stuff

is

reasonable to produce,” Flinx

murmured.

“More

than reasonable.
caying other organic matter.

It’s

a saprobe.

Some

It

lives

are parasites.

by de-

These—”

She indicated the tray again, ‘‘—are easily managed.
The organism thrives on garbage and waste. How’s that
for a practical food resource?

A

new food

that tastes

Flinx in Flux

137

good, is visually appealing, and is good for you. And all
it needs for growth is a little dampness and garbage.”
‘‘It grows naturally here?” Flinx asked.
‘‘No, dear, but something very like it does. We intensified the colors, the rate of growth, and greatly manipulated the natural flavors. We’ll be ready to commence
production on a limited basis in a couple of months. Not
right here: This will always be a research facility. A pair
of large virgin caverns are being developed off to the
west. It’ll be sold as a luxury item at first, like the Verdidion Weave. We’ll expand gradually into the mass market.”

What’s in a name? he mused as he gazed at the tray of
slime mold. The Commonwealth was rife with foodstuffs
no one would touch if he or she had an inkling of their
origins. That was what advertising existed for: to make
the impractical and unappetizing irresistible. If Vandervort had allowed it, he would gladly have emptied the
entire tray.

mentioned someone named Maxim. Is he a
gengineer, too?”
‘‘No. Max is our head mycologist. Not everything
we’re working with down here is fungi, though. Longtunnel’s subterranean world is alive with astonishing life‘‘Clarity

You wouldn’t think

forms.

to

thriving in darkness. Plenty of

find

so

mammals

much

variety

or close rela-

tions.”

seen the floats and the photomorphs.”
Vandervort nodded approvingly. ‘‘There are a few
‘‘I’ve

creatures the taxonomists haven’t figured out
sify.

how

to clas-

Distant relations of deep-sea dwellers on Earth and

Cachalot. Their ancestors lived next to sulfurous vents.
The sulfides were metabolized by bacteria that lived in
the creature’s gills, or by special organs; microbes broke

down

the sulfide

ergy to

make

compounds and used

the resultant en-

carboyhdrates, proteins, and liquids.

‘‘When the oceans here on Longtunnel receded, exposing the limestone and creating the caverns, these

Alan Dean Foster

138

ocean dwellers didn’t die out. Instead they became airbreathing land creatures, and food for others. Many of
them occupy the same ecological niche underground that
chlorophyllous plants do topside. We expected to find a
simple food chain here, and instead we stumbled into
something wondrous and complex. To top it all, the entire ecosystem is particularly amenable to gengineering.” She leaned back in her chair and regarded her
guests speculatively.
*

‘I ’ll

see to arranging

you, young

some

sort of suitable

reward for

man.”

“That won’t be necessary.”
“It really isn’t,” Clarity told her supervisor. ‘‘He’s not

He

own

ship.”
Vandervort’s expression was unreadable. Flinx noted
that her eyebrows had been neatly and recently plucked,
short of resources.

has his

then dyed to match the rest of her hair.

you say? I am impressed. But we must
give you something for returning our Clarity to us, young
man. I suppose we could carpet a room or two on your
vessel. You would be astonished to learn what our first
rolls of Verdidion Weave sell for on places like Earth and
New Riviera. It would be a suitable gift.”
‘‘Thanks, but I like the floors on my ship just the way
‘‘His

own

ship,

they are. If you’re going to insist, though,

mind having

a few trays of that.”

He nodded

I

wouldn’t

at the lus-

trous pseudoplasmodium.

Vandervort chuckled, picked up the tray, and returned
it to the refrigeration unit concealed in the cabinet behind
her desk. ‘‘As I mentioned, we’re not at the production
stage yet. But I’ll talk to the lab and see what can be
done. Feeding you doesn’t seem like much of a reward,
but if that’s what interests you, we have a couple of other
new ingestible bioproducts on the shelves that might
tickle your taste buds. Clarity can show them to you.
She’s already breached most of our security regulations,

anyway.”
‘‘He saved

my

life!” Clarity

reminded her supervisor.

Flinx in Flux

“Take

139

was only teasing.” She smiled
ingratiatingly at Flinx. She was very good at what she
did, he knew. The “harmless kindly aunt” act was excellent. The feelings he felt emanating from her suggested someone a good deal more calculating and
it

easy, dear.

professional.

As

I

a connoisseur of emotions, he always

applauded a skilled performance. She took his smile for
indifference.

“You

aren’t interested in our

anyway. Are you, young

little

industrial secrets,

man?”

“I’m a student, but not of those. Anything secret stays
with me. I’m interested in knowledge for its own sake.
Not for sale.”
“What a quaint notion. Well, if you’re good enough
for our Clarity, you’re good enough for me.” She smiled
and extracted the narcostick, which despite appearances
was not permanently affixed to her lower lip.
“I leave it to Clarity to exercise proper judgment. Under her supervision you may have the run of our facility.
It’s the least we can do. Just promise me you’re not wearing any concealed recording devices.

How

long do you

plan to stay with us?”

“I don’t know how long I’m going to stay, and I’m not
wearing anything except what you can see,” he replied,
knowing full well he probably had been scanned for concealed instrumentation as soon as he’d emerged from the
shuttle.

“Very

She was smiling
an entirely different kind of smile as she glanced back at
Clarity. “Do you think we can find suitable lodgings for
our young man, my dear?”
“I think so,” Clarity managed to reply with a straight
well, then. Enjoy your visit.”

face.

was a gesture of dismissal. “Just remember, young man, that she has an unbreakable long-term contract here, and now that we have
her back, I have no intention of letting her leave, volVandervort rose as she spoke.

untarily or otherwise.”

It

140

Alan Dean Foster

“I’ve no intention of interrupting

my work

here,

Amee.”

am

aware of other
not
incentives to travel besides wealth and fame, and I’m
be.”
so old that I don’t remember how powerful they can

“I’m glad

to hear that,

my

dear.

I

Chapter Nine

The following day she formally checked
colleagues and fellow workers.
story, Flinx

When

grateful to

they heard her

was battered by a barrage of

slaps and congratulatory handshakes.

him

for

in with her

friendly back-

Everyone was

what he had done. He bore

their grat-

itude patiently.

He

tried to involve himself in their conversations, but

the technical terms were outside his range of experience

and

A

study, though Clarity

was obviously

in

her element.

and perpetually nervous young man
introduced himself as Maxim. He was not much older
than Flinx. His lab was overflowing with an extraordinary array of chlorophyll-less growths. A few were quite
mobile. Maxim clearly enjoyed the role of teacher and
short, swarthy,

tour guide.

“We

whether the fungi derived from
the algae or the protozoans, but there are genotypes on
this world that blow most of our traditional theories all
still

aren’t sure

to hell.”

Flinx listened enthusiastically, as he did to every

141

new

Alan Dean Foster

142

piece of information that

came

Nor was

his way.

the tour

only of labs and libraries. There was time and the means
to relax as well. Individual food service, undated entertainment on disk and chip, even occasional live perfor-

mances

that

facilities.

made

the rounds of the various

make

Everything, Flinx thought, to

company

life

under-

ground as pleasant and endurable as possible.
“Small compensation,’’ Clarity said, “when you
alize

we never

re-

get to see the sun or the sky. Coldstripe

does its best, though. We’re the biggest research outfit
on Longtunnel. The others are small and just getting
started. Most of them are just doing pure research. We’re
the only ones who’ve gone as far as developing a salable
product. The House of Sometra is trying, but they have

no

real production facilities as yet.

join Verdidion

Weave on

Once

the Flavor

Cubes

the market, everyone will stop

asking where Longtunnel is. The plan is to export directly through Thalia Major. But I don’t imagine you’re
very interested in the economics of it.’’

“I’m interested in everything,’’ he told her quietly.
It was fascinating to watch her in the lab. When working, she underwent a complete transformation. The
smiles disappeared, laughter became muted, and she was
all seriousness and attention to business when trying to
analyze the genetic structure of some

new fungus

or sul-

fide eater.

She rarely worked with the actual lifeform. That was
left to the surgeons and manipulators. Her career and
work were bounded by the limits of a twenty-by-twenty
infinite-screenfront

Hydroden Custom Designer, with

several billion megabytes of online storage in a super-

coduct Markite Cylinder Tap. Without touching a living
cell, she could take entire complex organisms apart and
reassemble them on demand, could run an entire evolutionary schematic in a few hours. Only after a possible
recombinant had been simulated and overchecked would
it finally be tried in vivo.
It

was mesmerizing and disquieting

to

watch— because

Flinx in Flux

143

was too easy for him to empathize with the lowly
creatures whose genetic codes were being played with
like a child’s blocks, even if they were lifeforms as simple as fungi and slime molds. Because it was all too easy
for him to imagine a cluster of faceless strangers bent
over similar devices, moving molecules of DNA around
with electronic probes, inserting proteins and removing
genes. Because it was all too easy to envision the end
product of their dispassionate and emotionless work as
it

himself.
Clarity disquieted

someone who had

him

in

recently

another fashion entirely. For

vowed not

to involve himself

any further in the problems of a frivolous and uncaring
humanity, he was powerfully attracted to the young gengineer. She had already willingly demonstrated how attracted she was to him.
He delighted in observing her with her colleagues.
When working, she was no longer the frightened, exhausted woman he had hauled out of the Ingre jungle—
she added a decade in maturity and self-confidence.
Their relationship had begun to settle. It was not as if
she had turned cool toward him. If anything, she was
more relaxed in his company than ever before. But with
the return of her self-assurance had come a slight and
welcome distancing. If he pressed the issue, he did not
doubt that she would respond readily. That was plain to
see in her eyes, unmistakable in her voice. It was simply
that she was no longer dependent on him for her continued survival. Better this way, he told himself.
Unfortunately, her increased confidence and self-assurance
in their relationship were marked by a steady decline in
his own. While he was the intellectual equal or superior
of any of her male acquaintances, in matters of social
interaction he had less experience than the average nine-

teen-year-old.

Well, he had always been a loner, probably always

would be. He tagged along as she made the rounds and

Alan Dean Foster

144

performed her work, content with the moments in between when they could talk of other things.
Clarity was deeply involved with something called a
Sued mold. It looked like a cross between a mushroom
and a jelly. The mold itself was useless, but its mature
spores smelled like fresh-mown clover. More important,
when properly applied, the powder had the ability to mask
human body odor completely. The effect lasted only a
few hours.
If Clarity and her colleagues could reengineer the mold
to produce spores whose odor-killing ability would last
for at least twenty hours, or two or three days, they would
have a new cosmetic product that could readily compete
in Commonwealth markets. Tests showed the spores were
harmless and had no side effects, being a natural product,
whereas many deodorants contained metals that were potentially dangerous when absorbed by the human body.
Clarity had tried it on herself, with no ill effects.
She turned away from the designer. “Not very glamBringing all the resources of modem gengineering to bear on the problem of body odor. Amee
say sometimes the products that make the most profit are
the ones that address the simplest problems.
“Derek and Hing are working on another slime mold
that exists in semiliquid form. It can metabolize toxic
chemicals and turn them into useful fertilizer. If its natural metabolic rate can be speeded up and it can be raised
cheaply enough and in sufficient quantity, we can spread
it over half the restricted dumps in the Commonwealth.
orous,

is it?

Imagine being able to literally transform poison into
peaches. Sludge and stinks— that’s what we’re about down
here.’’
‘

‘

Very money-oriented

’ ’
.

“Does that upset you?’’
He turned away. “I don’t know.

I

just have a lingering

problem with altering the natural order of things purely
for profit.’’

“Now

you sound

like

my

kidnappers,’’ she said, chid-

Flinx in Flux
ing

him

145

gently. “Flinx, every business since the begin-

ning of time has altered the natural order of things for
profit. We just begin at the source. There’s no pollution
here because we’re working within Longtunnel’s established ecosystem.

We

aren’t setting

up smelly

factories

or dumping toxins down pristine tunnels. On the contrary, we’re working on products like the kind you’ve
seen that are designed to reduce and clean up pollution
here. If

A

whole new industry is starting up
our plans pan out, this formerly useless world is

on other worlds.

going to become the source of a host of new purifying
products. We’re working with one ecosystem to improve
dozens of others.
“Until Vandervort and her backers decided to take a
chance on Longtunnel, this world was nothing but a thin
file in Commonwealth galographics. Now that we’re actually established here, we’re discovering dozens of new
and exciting possibilities every day.’’
“And who benefits ultimately?”
She blinked. “You mean besides the people who buy
our products?
“That’s right. Which big firm is going to be pulling
money out of this world’s DNA?”
“No big firm.” She eyed him in surprise. “I thought
you knew. Coldstripe is an independent self-contained
setup. Amee has backers and runs the whole operation
here. Maxim and Derek and myself and the others— we
are Coldstripe. Each of us owns a piece of the company.
Do you really think they could hire people of that quality
’ ’

to

come and

live in a place like this for just a salary?

We’re here because we have a chance to make our fortune. We’re all dependent on each other’s work. That’s
why I was missed so much.”
She put a hand on the shoulder opposite Pip, and he
felt it burn into him. She had beautiful hands, with long
graceful fingers and neatly trimmed nails. He did not try
to shrug it away.
“You warned Ms. Vandervort about your abductors?”

Alan Dean Foster

146

“She’s taken steps. We were prepared to cope with
industrial espionage, but ecofanatics don’t play by any
rules but their

own. They talked

to

me

a lot

when

they

weren’t asking questions. Trying to brainwash me, I
guess. Their program, insofar as it could be called that,

was

to preserve the purity of all worlds ‘untouched’

Commonwealth. Whatever that means.”
“To some people,” Flinx murmured, “purity

by

the

end

is

an

in itself.”

“A

dead end,” she said sharply. “Whether prodded
by reasons of commerce or simply a desire to know, science always advances. If it stands still, then civilization
dies. There’s no such thing as ecological purity on any
world. Something’s always on top, socially and via the
food chain. Oh, it’s not all one-sided. I’d be the first to
agree with that. There are always the unscrupulous, who’d
exterminate an entire species for a few million credits.
We’re not like that here. Coldstripe is Church-certified.
We’re not interested in damaging the natural order, only
in using it. But we’re an easy target because we’re new
and small.

“Keep

in

mind we’re not

interfering with sentient or

even semisentient creatures here on Longtunnel. We’re
dealing with fungi and slime molds and very basic organisms. We have a chance to use them to benefit all
mankind. Developed under proper supervision, the lifeforms of Longtunnel have much to offer civilization, and
I’m not just saying that because I have a chance to make
a great deal of money while doing so. We’re not just
involved with the decorative arts. Coldstripe is much
more than Verdidion Weave.” Her expression wrinkled.
“I guess some people can’t see that. They’d rather
leave a world untouched, ravaged by an impossible climate, forever dark and unused. It’s the old story about
the tree falling in the forest. If there’s no one around to
hear it, does it make a sound? I say that if no one’s here
to study and learn from Longtunnel’s beauty, then that
beauty doesn’t exist. The people who kidnapped me want

Flinx in Flux

147

beauty left locked up and unseen. I can’t understand an attitude like that. Our work hurts no one and
nothing. Those organisms we modify thrive in their altered states.” She sighed sadly.
“The goal of these fanatics is to stop all research in
our fields. They want to bring gengineering and its related disciplines to a dead halt. There are half a dozen
branches of science they’d ban if they could. As for the
all that

ecological ‘purity’ they want to preserve, do they propose to ban evolution, too?

“If they can stop Coldstripe, they can stop development here. The private research groups will pull out fast.
Universities don’t want their people involved in a shooting match.”
‘

’ ’

‘What about requesting peaceforcer protection?
She laughed, not at him but at the idea. ‘‘Longtunnel’s
so small that the outpost here doesn’t even rate official

recognition yet. There’s just not enough people or devel-

opment

We’re trying. We’re expanding as fast as we can, even trying to
bring other, nondirectly competitive firms in so we can
attract some attention. Until that happens we’re on our
to warrant that kind of expenditure.

own.”
can see why they’re so anxious to put a stop to your
work here.”
She nodded. ‘‘If they can shut Coldstripe down and
‘‘I

The
in because there isn’t enough
justify intervention. The fa-

drive us out, then the other outfits here will follow.

Commonwealth won’t

step

property and personnel to

up the whole place. No one will try to
reestablish. Eventually it’ll all be forgotten.” She spread
her hands in a gesture of helplessness.
‘‘All this potential will be lost. No more Verdidion
Weave. No Flavor Cubes, no toxin-eating fungi, nothing.
The floats will drift back to the wild, only their population will fall off in this area because they’ll no longer
have easy, protected access to food.” There was sadness
and passion in her voice.
natics will seal

Alan Dean Foster

148

“Only

a tiny portion of the caverns have

been explored

and charted. It takes so much time. This is the first world
we’ve tried to settle where aerial surveys and mapping
satellites are useless, because the only part of the planet
we’re interested in is buried. Like a treasure chest. Even
Cachalot could be mapped from orbit. You can’t do that
with caverns. Some of the techniques the cartographers
are having to use are thousands of years old. Longtunnel
is Aladdin’s cave, Flinx, overflowing with biogold instead of coins.

need studying.
away from us.

The jewels here are alive and mobile and
We can’t let a bunch of madmen take that

We

won’t.”
“They got to you once before. They may try again.”
“We’ll be ready for them this time,” she said confidently. “You heard Amee. Security is in place. They
won’t slip past port authority this time. Everyone coming
in is to be triple-screened. Luggage is being hand
searched. Now that the word’s out about what happened
to me, everyone’s checking on everyone else. If the fanatics do have an operative working here, he or she won’t
be able to go to the bathroom without being observed.
They’re going to have to keep a low profile, or they’ll be
noticed and brought in for questioning.” Her gaze rose
to

meet

his.

“I just want to be sure you understand what it is we’re
trying to do here, Flinx. You sounded unsure, or at least
questioning. It’s not just a matter of making money; every
week, every month we make a major discovery that adds
to the general store of human knowledge. Not just in
ecology or geology but in a whole range of sciences.
Longtunnel is unique. There’s nothing else like it any-

where in the Commonwealth.
“Take the airway sensors. Nobody’s ever seen anything like them.

The taxonomists

to decide if they

explain them.
ing in ways

enough

to

It’s

need to create a whole new class to
tremendously exciting. Lifeforms liv-

we never suspected
fight

are going crazy trying

to

keep

this

existed. That’s reason

installation

functioning.

Flinx in Flux

149

We’re adding daily to humanx knowledge and humanx
comfort. The thranx who are working here, they think
they may have a line on a sulfide eater that can be gengineered to rebuild broken exoskeleton. You can’t regenerate chiton, but this stuff secretes

You

plant the

wound,

wait,

and

it

it

as a by-product.

grows together

like

new.

“Do

you realize what

know how

means to a thranx? You
of damaged exoskeleton. It’s

that

afraid they are

about the severest kind of external injury they can suffer.
They haven’t cracked the problem yet, but we’re trying
to help. We’d split the profits from such a discovery. It
would be a major medical advance in the treatment of
thranx trauma and would save many lives. Isn’t that worth
fighting for?’’

He

“I wouldn’t know.’’
studied the wall. “I’m a
great ethical issues.

own

sense of ethics,

I

turned away from her and

young to be debating the
have enough trouble sorting out my

let

little

alone humanxkind’s.’’

She was obviously disappointed. “Then you don’t
agree that what we’re doing here is worth the slight alterations to the ecosystem?’’

“Certainly they’re worth
it’s

not for

me

it

to Coldstripe. All the

rest—

to say.’’

“But we’re not tampering with the ecology,’’ she
in exasperation.

Weave

“The

fungi that

said

became Verdidion

We’re only growing
the gengineered variety we developed. There’s no impact
on the subterranean environment whatsoever.’’
He turned so sharply that it startled her. “I’m only
here because of you. I have no right to an opinion on the
matter either way.’’ He took a step toward her, halted
abruptly, and eyed the floor. “Also, it’s about time I was
on my way.’’
“Leaving?’’ She looked puzzled. “You just got here.
You said you were a student. I thought you were enjoying
your tour of the facilities, meeting the other workers and
learning about their projects. If that’s boring you, why
still

exist in a ‘natural’ state.

Alan Dean Foster

150

not study Longtunnel itself?

Check out an

outfit

and go

spelunking.”
He glanced back at her. “What do you care? Why are
you interested in what I do?”
“Because you saved my life, of course, and in doing
so probably saved the whole installation. Because I like
you.” She frowned at her own words. “That’s odd. I
usually prefer older men. But there’s definitely something
about you, Flinx. I’m talking about more than what we
shared on the journey here.”
“What?” He spoke more sharply than he had intended, but as always he suspected perception where there

was only guilelessness.
“You’re just— different.” She moved close to him. Pip
fluttered her wings but remained on his shoulder as she
slipped both arms around him from behind, not trying to
pin his arms to his sides, just holding him. The contact
made him shiver.
“I guess I’m not making myself clear,” she whispered. “I’m better at making myself Understood on the
Hydroden. What I’m saying, Flinx, is that I more than
just like you. I want you to stay here. Not to study. To
be with me. We haven’t had much time to talk about that,
about us. I’ve been so busy since I got back. All I’ve
talked about is Longtunnel and its importance and my
work. It’s time to talk about you and me.”
“There’s nothing to talk about.” He wanted to sound
utterly calm, cool, uninvolved, but the proximity of her

body made that impossible.
She sensed it, hugged him

and pressed herself
against him. “Isn’t there? You’ve become special to me.
I

like to think I’ve

ours

is

become

a

tighter,

little

special to you.

a relationship that, if nurtured, could

I

think

grow

into

something really spe—

“ Stop it!”
The violence of his reaction shocked her
.”
him go. “I thought.
.

“You

into letting

.

‘thought.’ There’s nothing to think about, Clar-

Flinx in Flux
ity.

151

You don’t understand. You don’t understand anything

about

me.”

Alarmed by her master’s emotional

outburst, Pip took

unseen enemy. In this instance
the enemy was not visible because it was Flinx himself.
to the air in search of an

Clarity’s confession of almost-love shattered the

emo-

balance Flinx had carefully nurtured the past
weeks. It had nothing to do with the fact that she was so
obviously attracted to him. He had dealt with that previously. It was because he was so deeply drawn to her,
mentally as well as physically. She was intelligent and
tional

beautiful and older, but she did not talk

was the

down

to him.

It

time in his life he had experienced that kind
of all-enveloping emotional surge in a woman. More than
anyone else could know, he knew it was genuine. So he
coped the only way he knew how to cope with what he
perceived to be an intrusion by pushing back, pushing
away, and trying to maintain objectivity. It was frightening to discover that he could not be half as cold as he
wanted to be. The reality of love was infinitely more
difficult to deal with than the philosophical concept.
“What’s wrong, Flinx? Tell me.”
“You don’t really know me. You only know what I’ve
let you see.”
“Then let me see everything so I can understand,”
she implored him. “Let me have that chance. I could get
to know you well enough for us to be happy together.
“We could never be happy together,” he said decisively. “I can never be happy with anyone.”
Hurt joined confusion in her voice. “You’re not making any sense.”
There was nothing to do but plunge on ahead. The
small craft that tossed and flung him down the rapids of
his life never seemed to put into shore.
‘You’re a gengineer and a good one. Surely you’ve
heard of the Meliorare Society.
“The—” She hesitated. Clearly that was not what she
had expected him to say. But she recovered quickly.
first

—

’ ’

’ ’

Alan Dean Foster

152

“Outlaws of the worst kind. Renegade eugenicists. They
did genetic alteration of unborn human beings without
consent or approval.”
“That’s right.” Suddenly Flinx was very tired. “Their
intentions were honorable, but their methodology blasphemous. They violated every law covering gene splicing
and cosmetic DNA surgery that exists. I understand a

few new ones were added

to the

code specifically

cope

to

with their offenses.”

“What about them? As I recall, the last of them was
hunted down and hospitalized or mindwiped a long time
_

ago.

9 9

“Not

so very long ago.

records suggest.

The

last

Not as long ago as the
of them were active up

official

until a

few years back.” He eyed her strangely. “As a legitimate
gengineer I expect you disapprove of what they did far
more than would the average citizen.”
“Of course I do. The details of their work were never
made public. The government kept it as quiet as possible, but being in the field I had access during my studies
to bits and pieces of information that fell through the
cracks in security. I know what the Meliorares did, or
tried to do. They were replicating the barbarities of the
twentieth-century b.a. on a much larger scale.
“Now they’re history. The Meliorares were criminals
with scientific training.
it

None

of their work will ever

into the legitimate gengineering journals.

make

The govern-

ment ordered all of it sealed.”
“True. The only problem they couldn’t solve was

that

while they could lock up all Meliorare research, they
couldn’t account for the results of all their experiments.

Oh, they caught up with most of them, cured those they
could, put those who were damaged beyond hope of a
normal life out of their misery. But they didn’t find
everyone. At least one of the Meliorare ’s experimental
subjects reached adulthood without giving himself away
or manifesting any serious illness. There may have been
others. Nobody knows. Not even the Church.”

Flinx in Flux

153

“I wasn’t aware of that. The final report on the matter,
which is standard reading in gengineering histories, says
that the last of the Society members was rounded up and
dealt with years ago, and that all their work had been
accounted for.”

“Not

“They didn’t get
everyone.” His eyes were fastened on hers. “They didn’t
get me.”
all

of it,” Flinx corrected her.

Pip had finally settled

down on

a nearby railing. Scrap

had moved away from Clarity to be close to his mother.
He was confused and frightened by Flinx ’s outburst and
allowed Pip to shelter him beneath one wing.
Clarity stared at the young man who had suddenly
moved away from her. Finally she smiled— but it was a
crooked, uncertain smile.
“What kind of talk is that? ‘They didn’t get me.’ You
aren’t old enough to have been a member of the Society,
not even in its final days.”
It was his turn to smile humorlessly. ‘T told you you
didn’t understand anything. I wasn’t a member of the
Society. I’m one of the experiments. Funny, isn’t it? I
look normal.”
‘‘You are normal,” she replied with conviction.
‘‘You’re more normal than anyone I’ve ever met. Shy,
yes, but that’s just another sign of normality.”
“I’m not shy; I’m careful. I wear shadows to hide myself, I keep to the darkness and try not to leave even

memories behind.”
“You’ve certainly

failed in

my

case. Flinx,

you can’t

be serious about this. There’s no way you could know in
any case.”
“1 was on Moth when the last Society members fought
the authorities and both groups blew themselves to hell.
They were fighting over me. But I didn’t get blown up. I
got away.” He did not tell her how he had escaped, because he still had no idea how he had done so, and it
troubled him to think about it.
Her eyes were searching. No doubt seeking the bulging

Alan Dean Foster

154

forehead, the extra fingers, any physical manifestation of

was alluding

he thought
sardonically. She would not find anything. The changes
that had been wrought in his system had been made while
he was still in the womb. Only he thought they were
the possible mutations he

to,

visible.

“I wasn’t bom, Clarity. I was built. Constructed, conHe tapped the side of his
ceived in a design computer.
head. “What’s up here is a perversion of nature. I’m just
a working hypothesis. The people who thought me up
are dead or wiped, so there’s no one left who knows what
’

’

they were trying to

make

of me.

“Naturally I’m as illegal as the Society members. Guilt
by birth instead of association. If the authorities find out

what I am, they’ll take me into custody and start poking
and probing. If they determine that I’m harmless and certifiably normal, they may let me go free. If they find
otherwise

“You

...”

can’t be sure of this,

Flinx.

No

matter what

you’ve seen, or learned, or been told, there’s no

way

to

be sure.’’
But he saw that besides shocking her, his confession
had made her uncertain. Her attitude toward him was still
hopeful, still affectionate, but more considered now. The
unrestrained emotions had faded beneath the weight of
the questions he had planted in her mind. It was shaming
to spy on her feelings like that, but he could not have
stopped himself had he wanted to. No longer was she
certain of the man standing across from her. The simplistic lens she had been seeing him through had been
permanently shattered. With it had gone something he
feared might be lost to him forever.
Not that any choice had been left to him. It was important for her to back off, to realize what a freak she
was dealing with. Because he knew he had been on the
verge of falling hopelessly and dangerously in love with
her, and he was not yet in a position to permit that. He
might never be.

Flinx in Flux

155

know what to make of what you’ve just
told me. I don’t know how I can believe any of it, even
though you obviously do. All I know for certain is that
you’re good and kind and caring. That much I don’t have
“Flinx,

I

don’t

submit to inquiry. I’ve observed it, experienced it. I
don’t think any of that was ...” She hesitated before
hazarding the word. “.
programmed into you before
you were bom. Those characteristics are functions of your
personality, and they’re what attracted me to you.”
She meant every word of it, he knew. It was an honest,
straightforward outpouring of affection. It made him
tremble inside.
“Everyone has problems,” she went on. “If any of
what you say is true, then who’s better equipped to understand them and sympathize with your troubles than

to

.

.

me?”
“You have no idea what
“I don’t know myself. As

I
I

might do,” he warned her.
get older, I can feel myself

changing, and I’m not referring to the passing of adolescence. It’s deeper than that. It’s physical— here.” He
touched the side of his head again.

“Changing how?”
“I don’t know.

I

can’t say;

it’s

impossible to

There’s just the feeling that something major

tell.

happening to me. Something I can’t control. Once I thought I
knew what it was all about, that it was something I could
study and learn to master. Now I’m not sure. I have this
feeling that

was.

Maybe

it’s

much more

a lot

The mutation

is

than

I

is

originally thought

it

more than what my designers intended.
mutating, and whence it goes, nobody

knows.

“As you

get older, you’re supposed to start finding

answers to your questions.

more

questions.

It’s

I

only seem to

come up

with

maddening sometimes.” Seeing

the

look that came over her face, he hastened to reassure her.
“I don’t mean maddening in the sense of going insane,
but maddening as in frustrating and puzzling.”
She managed a small, wan smile. “I have moments

Alan Dean Foster

156

like that myself, Flinx.

to

be together.

me

feel for

the

I

think

way

I

want for us
we’re together and you come to

Everyone does.
if

feel

I

just

about you, there’s nothing

we

have access to sealed records. My security clearance is very high. Coldstripe may be small,
but our contacts are excellent.”
He was shaking his head. ‘‘You’ll never get into the
Church records concerning the Society. There’s a moral
imperative lock on them. I know, I’ve tried. You can
work your way through the government copies with bribes
can’t

cope with.

I

and coercion, but you can’t do that within the Church.”
‘‘We’ll manage. Anything’s possible when you’re in
love.”
‘‘Are you so sure you’re in love?”

‘‘You don’t give a centimeter, do you?”

Are you?”
“I’m not sure, now. I thought I was, but— is anyone
ever really sure?” Her smile expanded. “See, you aren’t
the only one who can be badly upset by something happening inside them. What I don’t understand is why you
keep pushing me away when all I want is to help and
comprehend. Why won’t you let me help you?”
“Because I am dangerous. Isn’t that obvious?”
“No, it isn’t. Just because some misguided people tinkered with your genes before you were bom, if any of
that is true, doesn’t make you a threat. When I look at
you, all I see is a young man unsure of himself and his
future who went out of his way to help me when I was
in trouble, and who could just as easily have ignored me
and gone on his merry way. A young man who risked his
life to save that of a stranger. A man who' is kind and
gentle and intelligent, if a bit cynical at times. Why
‘‘I

can’t afford to.

should

I

see a threat in that?”

“Because you don’t know what I might do. Because I
don’t know what I might do.” He was almost pleading
with her now, wanting to keep the distance he had opened
between them but not wanting to frighten her.
“The Meliorares wanted to improve humanity, as I

Flinx in Flux

your mind
ing to worry about.”

recall

it.

If

reflects

your ethics, then I’ve noth-

“Clarity, you’re just not seeing

“You

said

I

couldn’t.

Help

157

me

it,

are

you?”

to understand, Flinx.”

She took a step toward him, then stopped. She wanted
desperately to hold him, to embrace and comfort him and
tell him that no matter what was wrong, it was all going
to turn out all right. Yet at the

put aside his warning that

it

same time she could not

might be better for her

if

she

did not.

Both were tom between what their hearts wanted and
what their minds ordered, though for differing reasons.
They might have settled everything then and there, might
have changed their lives one way or the other, except that
their conversation was not allowed to continue.

Chapter Ten

The explosion seemed to echo endlessly down the tunnels and corridors. The chemical fluorescents attached to
the ceilings and walls did not flicker and go out since

each was independent of its neighbor.
A second explosion followed close behind the first. It
came from the entrance to Coldstripe’s cavern, up past
the laboratories and living spaces.

“Accident,” Clarity shouted.
Flinx was shaking his head. “I don’t think so.” He
recognized the report of a shaped demolition charge but
did not want to alarm her until he was absolutely certain.

At the same time he damned himself for an overconfident fool. There were sidearms on board the Teacher.
He had left them there, confident that he had time to
deliver Clarity to her colleagues and then

move

on.

He

had expected persistence on the part of her kidnappers,
but not speed. And her tour of the installation had subsequently engendered in him a false sense of security,

now

rudely shattered.

No

installation

was impregnable.

Tse-Mallory would have been disappointed
158

in

him. That

Flinx in Flux
old

man had

159

young friend’s skull
and strategy as he had of humanities and

tried his best to stuff his

as full of tactics

science.

“Our

founded on law and reason,’’ he
had once told Flinx, “but never forget that the forces of
darkness are always roaming its fringes, testing its
strength, always probing for a way in. Nor am I speaking
solely of the A Ann. I fear them less than I fear internal
corruption and a breakdown of morality, those for whom
ethics is merely an inconvenient concept. You must always be on guard against them. They’ll slip up on a civilization like a bad cold, and before you know it, the
body politic is comatose with pneumonia. It can strike
civilization

is

individuals as easily as institutions.

“That’s

why we have

the United Church, to provide

moral leadership and succor to those who need it. Perfect
it’s not, and the padres know it.’’
I need a gun right now, Flinx told himself as he and
Clarity raced hand in hand up the corridor, not moral
suasion.

Confused shouts and panicky
plosions’ dying echoes.

“Your

yells

mixed with

friends have

the ex-

come back

above the noise.
“Impossible! There’s no way they could get past port

for you!’’ he shouted

Security.’’

Pip buzzed her master’s head, constantly sweeping the
corridor ahead with her eyes. “What if they came in

someplace

asked her.
“There is no place else,’’ she insisted. “The best VTL
shuttlecraft would have a fifty-fifty chance at best of setting down off the landing strip in one piece. The odds
for a successful lift-off would go down. As for the outpost itself, there’s only the single entrance, and you saw
the barrier door we taxied under. It would take a direct
hit from a warship to penetrate that. Everyone comes in
else?’’ he

that way.’’

“Since I’ve been here,

all

I’ve heard about are the

extensive caverns of Longtunnel. If they could get

down

Alan Dean Foster

160

possible they could find or enlarge another
entrance? There must be other openings to the surface
besides the one that’s utilized for the formal port of enintact, isn’t

it

try.”

guess that would be possible. Anyone trying it would have to come in with full spelunking
gear: ropes, lights, everything. There are some horrendous pits and sheer drops, but it’s conceivable they could

“I suppose. Yes,

do

I

were determined enough.”
“Or fanatic enough.” As they rounded a corner a third
that, if they

explosion, smaller than the others,
tunnel. Flinx

came

boomed down

the

to a halt just in time.

The next charge went off ahead and slightly to their
right, close enough for them to feel the heat and see the
flash. The ceiling had been cleanly shorn or they might
have been skewered by falling stalactites. The force of
the blast was still powerful enough to dislodge rock from
the roof and knock both of them to the ground.
‘‘You all right?” As Flinx helped Clarity to her feet,
he caught a brief glimpse of a tall blond woman in a
chameleon suit running into a room up ahead whose door
had been blown away. Several smaller people, similarly
clad, followed her inside. Several of them looked too old
to be engaged in such business, but then, fanaticism
knows no age.
They had used the suits to help them infiltrate the facility; now that they had been discovered, they had
thrown back the hoods in order to see and hear more
freely.

Two

bodies lay in the corridor. One was moaning and
rolling on the floor, clutching his tom left arm. Clarity
started toward them, and Flinx had to grab her from behind.

“That’s Sarah! She’s hurt.”
“We can’t do anything here. They’re right in front of
us. If they get you back, I won’t be able to help you
again.

Someone

He dragged

else will take care of her.”

her with him as he retreated. In addition

Flinx in Flux

161

being bigger than her, he was much stronger than his
slight frame suggested. The legacy of hanging from his
fingers to avoid the attentions of the police and of leaping
from wall to window, he told himself.
A fresh explosion erupted in the room the attackers
had assaulted. Yellow flame burst upward and spread out

to

across the ceiling.

God,”

‘‘Oh,
surgery!

It

equipment

Clarity

moaned. ‘‘That was our micro-

takes years to get delivery of
that

was

some of

the

in there.”

‘‘You’d better start worrying about the equipment be-

tween your hair and your boots. That takes even longer
to replace,” he warned her tightly.
The cavern was alive with the sound of small arms fire:
the crackle of needlers, the soft hiss of lasers. Shots easily

pierced spray-plastic walls. The corridor was begin-

ning to

fill

with smoke as flammable materials reacted to

the kiss of heat-generating weaponry.

They could hear the flames that ate at the cool cave
air. Other rooms and laboratory facilities were being put
to the figurative torch. The attackers were methodical in
their destruction. However they had come in, Flinx surmised that they had first moved to seal off Coldstripe
from the rest of the outpost. Then they had begun working their way backward, destroying everything they encountered as they advanced.
‘‘Why?” Clarity was crying as Flinx half walked, half
carried her down the tunnel. ‘‘Why, why?”
‘‘Kidnapping you wasn’t enough,” he muttered, his
eyes checking each door and passage before racing onward. ‘‘Your escape forced them to move openly. You as

much

as told

me

‘‘Not like this!

wanted to shut you down.”
Not killing and burning.”

that they

‘‘They’re probably looking at

it

as

some kind of twisted

cleanup operation. I don’t think they’re really keen to
murder. It’s the facility here they want to destroy. That
doesn’t mean they’re going to stop and reason with anyone who thinks differently or gets in their way.”

Alan Dean Foster

162

She looked up suddenly. “Do you think they know I’m
back here?’’
“Maybe. Obviously their information’s better than
anybody thought.”
It was becoming hard to see through the thickening
smoke. Just then someone stepped out of the murk on
his right. The sight was so unprepossessing that for an
instant Flinx was not sure how to react.
The man was short and electively bald, with heavy
white sideburns framing his jowly face and a potbelly
protruding from his midsection. His suit was too big for
his body and hung in wrinkles around his chest and
thighs, which distorted its camouflaging ability. A
breather clung to his face like

some seagoing arachnid,

presence proof that the attackers expected to have to
deal with smoke and bad air.
its

He had

stepped out of a service corridor awash in acrid
smoke. Though he looked less than dangerous, there was
a madness burning in his eyes that belied his appearance,
and there was nothing laughable about the high-powered
needier he was gripping in both hands. The instant he
caught sight of Flinx and Clarity, he began bringing it
around to bear. He spoke in a high, maniacal voice that
was anything but humorous.

“Over! All over for you now, damn you! You’re done
here; you’re finished. We’re putting an end to this blas-

phemy

forever. This

is

only the

first

step, only the be-

ginning.” The gun was still moving. “Death to all
destroyers of the environment!”
Flinx shoved Clarity hard and threw himself the other
way. His arm jumped involuntarily as the near miss from
the needier grazed his shoulder. He landed and rolled
fast, then came up to see the muzzle of the gun swing
toward him.
The second shot was never fired. The man ripped his
lungs screaming as Pip’s venom caught him square in the
eyes. Probably he never saw the flying snake. Pip had
been so involved in keeping herself positioned between

Flinx in Flux

163

her master and the greater threat far up the corridor that
she had been late in getting back to deal with this unex-

pected one.

The

man

backward, flung his weapon aside,
and began clawing at his disintegrating face. Steam rose
from his skin as venom ate into the flesh. Though he did
not know it, he was already dead. By the time Flinx had
helped Clarity back to her feet, their assailant lay motionless on his back.
Clarity was bleeding from shallow scratches on her
arms and legs where she had struck the ground. Making
sure she could stand by herself, Flinx went to remove the
dead man’s breather, not forgetting to pick up the needier
he had thrown aside in his agony. A couple of power cells
for the gun fit neatly in two empty pockets. A quick
search of the man’s suit and inner clothing turned up
nothing that could be used to identify him or the organization to which he belonged.
Flinx was checking out the handgun as he rejoined
little

Clarity.

fell

“Whoever

they are, they’re very thorough.

identification whatsoever.
to

them or

Nothing

No

to lead the authorities

to their base of operations.’’

When

she con-

tinued to stare blankly past him, he raised a hand as
to strike her. “Clarity!

Wake

if

up!’’

She instinctively raised both arms to protect herself. It
was enough to shake her out of the daze into which she
had lapsed.
“Sorry.

A

I’m— I’m

okay.’’

laser hissed into the ceiling behind them, boring a

hole through

movement

damp

limestone. In one smooth swooping

Flinx brought the heavy needier around and

No body

appeared out of the swirling smoke, but
his return fire was not answered, either.
“They aren’t trained for this,’’ he mumbled, as much
for his own reassurance as for Clarity’s. “They’re not
soldiers. They’re relying on determination and surprise,
both of which they’ve brought in quantity. It’s not a real
military operation. If they were professionals, we’d be
fired.

Alan Dean Foster

164

dead or captured by now.” He tried to see through the
roiling smoke. “Some of the security people must be
putting up a fight.”
The upper reaches of Coldstripe’s cavern were filled
with smoke and flame. In such conditions it would be
difficult for both attackers and defenders to tell friend
from foe. The local ventilation system was still functioning or they would have already suffocated, but if vital
fans or ducts were destroyed, the air could turn unbreathable rapidly. He tried not to think about the possible airborne toxins that might have been released into the
enclosed atmosphere when the invaders had blown up the

company labs.
The fanatics had come equipped with

breathers. Cold-

people might not be similarly prepared. Having
effectively eliminated the research station as a viable entity, he found himself wondering, would the invaders be
content to stop there? Victory could be a powerful narcotic. They might well attempt a takeover of the entire
stripe’s

colony.

Even now they might have a small army of fellow fanatics waiting in orbit, anxious to follow their shock
troops

down

via cargo shuttle. If they could take control

of the port, they could hold everyone hostage.

Demands

could be drawn up and presented to the government. The
newsfax attention would be extraordinary.
“Is there another way around to the port and hangar
’ ’

facilities?

Her eyes were watering from the smoke. She hacked
and coughed out a reply. “No. Each concern has its own
complex. The only way back to the port is the way I
brought you— brought you in. Some of the university
people share space to save money, but every private outfit

own

cavern with its own access.
That’s to ensure company security. If they break out into
like Coldstripe has

the

main port

area.

its

...”

“That’s what’s been bothering me. At least now we
know there’s more than one way out to the surface. They

Flinx in Flux

way

165

one natural passage
in, there might be another leading from here to the port.”
“Then it hasn’t been mapped,” she insisted as they
stumbled along, racing the smoke. “Not even a crawl

didn’t blast their

in. If there’s

space.”
His eyes required constant attention. It seemed strange
that ordinary smoke could sting so badly. Burning Mylar
and spray-walls might have released irritating chemicals
into the air.

“We’ve got

to

have a light

we can

carry with us.”

He

longingly eyed the chemtubes that showed the path, but
they were bolted down tight.

“Somehow we

have to get clear of this complex. I
don’t think they’re going to take the time to look for you
specifically. At least not right away. Too many bodies
around. First they’re going to secure what they’ve taken
and make plans for holding on to it. They they’ll decide
on follow-up measures.”
“It doesn’t matter, it doesn’t matter anymore.” She
was sobbing, and not from the effects of the smoke.
“They’re destroying everything! All the work we’ve done,
all our specimens, the records
all ruined!”
“Did you think they’d be selective in their destruction?” he said. It came out sounding harsher than he had
intended. “Discrimination requires a system of values.
Much simpler to condemn it all and engage in wholesale
destruction than to waste time trying to decide if something might be beneficial. They’re operating on their own
private moral code, not civilization’s. You saw the expression on that man’s face.” He gestured behind them,
in the direction of the dead man who had tried to shoot
them.
“There’s something much more exciting about taking
part in physical action instead of a debate. Instant gratification. Right now they must be thinking they won the
world. All they hold is a little piece of this one, but you’d
never convince them of that. Not now, not at this mo-

—

ment.”

Alan Dean Foster

166

swung up against her ear. “How come you
know so much about mass psychology?”
“I had teachers who knew all about it. Pick up your
Her

sidetail

feet.”

She ran more easily now, letting him lead her deeper
and deeper into Coldstripe’s storage sector. In a little
while they found themselves surrounded by cached supplies. The light tubes here were weak and in need of
replacement. They were smaller and more manageable
than the big ones up in research but still larger than he
was looking for.
He questioned Clarity without much hope of learning
anything useful. She was a gengineer, not a quartermaster. They started inspecting individual crates, reading the
stamped labels while wishing for a code scanner.
They found plenty of concentrates and stuffed their
pockets. Near the back of the big chamber they encountered several small side caves that had been sealed off to

A

number of the containers
behind the restrictive barriers were marked as radioactive. Most were simply expensive. The barriers protecting them were not complex. They were designed to keep
out only casual thieves. None had been erected with foilprevent unauthorized access.

ing professionals in mind.

Flinx fumbled for the tools he had used to such good
effect

me

on Alaspin. Ironic how circumstances keep forcing

out of retirement, he thought.

Clarity watched

him defeat

pop the gate
in less than a minute. “You must have been very good
at your trade when you were working at it.”
“I was. Then I started growing, so I gave it up permanently. Tough for a tall thief to remain inconspicuthe locks and

ous.” He dragged the gate aside.
The high-priced electronics and scientific instruments
did not interest him. What he wanted was the compact,
high-intensity chemtubes that illuminated the storage cave
itself. Each was half a meter long. It was not hard to pry
a couple of the brightly glowing cylinders from their

Flinx in Flux

mountings.

He

167

passed one to Clarity and kept the other

for himself.

He

choose the brightest pair. They were designed to operate for a long time without attention or
maintenance and required no batteries, no power packs,
no charged chips. As long as the tube’s integrity remained inviolate, they should have illumination for as
long as they were likely to need it.
“What about water?’’ He felt better now that they had
food and light. “It’s liable to be a while before the sittried to

uation here

“You

is

resolved.’’

don’t need to carry water on Longtunnel.

mind that there are whole
She eyed him uncertainly. “What are

caverns are awash in
rivers

down

here.’’

Keep

The

it.

in

you planning, Flinx?’’
“We’re going to wait. We’ll find a deep, dark, quiet
spot where nobody’s shooting at anybody else and wait.
In a couple of days we’ll come back and see what’s going
on. If the port is still holding out, we’ll try to work our
way back there. After the initial fighting comes the negotiating.

Maybe

will satisfy them.

the destruction of Coldstripe’s facilities

Maybe

they’ll bargain for safe,

unop-

posed passage offplanet and leave. Maybe.
“If they manage to take over the entire port, we’ll
have to find some way to make it to my shuttle.’’ He was
staring past her. “Do you know your way around the
unoccupied caverns?”
“No. There was never any reason to go any farther
than the farthest lab. Spelunking was a hobby for some
of

my

friends but never for

“Damn.

me.”

Well, never mind. We’ll manage.”

They reentered the main warehousing

section, keeping

low and staying behind concealing crates and packages
as she led him toward the back of the chamber. Eventually they halted in front of a spray-wall. It was a theoretical partition more than a realistic one, cardboard thin:
a bright blue boundary.

He

felt

it

with his fingers.

It

was

flexible to the touch.

Alan Dean Foster

168

“What’s back here?” Without waiting for a reply he
flicked the wafer-thin latch holding a spray-door shut.

It

opened inward, and he shoved the tube he was carrying
into the darkness beyond. There was no other light on
the far side of the partition, no adamantine overheads or
biotubes lining the floor. The ground was rough and pebbly.

“Nothing,” she
Longtunnel.”

“How common

told him. “Just

are those dangerous

mentioned? Are they

morph?”
“You wouldn’t
got hold of you.

empty cavern. More

all

as

lifeforms you

harmless as the photo-

think a photomorph was harmless

It’s

if

it

a good thing they’re slow.” She was

“Not much of anything comes
this close to the installation. Too much light and noise.”
“That’s what we want.” There was satisfaction in his
voice. “Dark and empty.” He stepped through the portrying to see past him.

tal.

“Come

on, what are you waiting for?”

He

tried to

see over the shelves and cylinders that filled the ware-

housing cavern. None of the invaders had penetrated this
far, but eventually they would start hunting for possible
pockets of resistance. Depending on what they had
brought down with them, they might need to begin scavenging for supplies. The warehouse would be a logical
place to start. For any of several reasons they might show
up at any moment, and he didn’t want to be around when
they did.

The same thoughts must have occurred

to Clarity, but

she continued to hang back. “I can’t,” she said

finally.

“Can’t? What do you mean, you can’t? Are you afraid
of dangerous animals?”
“No, it’s not that.” Her voice had grown very small.
“It’s just that I— Flinx, I’m afraid of the dark.”
He gaped at her. “And you came to work in a place
like Longtunnel?”
“There’s no permanent dark here.” She spoke defiantly. “The biotubes burn around the clock, and some

Flinx in Flux
part of the installation

169

always on work shift. The only
time it’s dark is when you turn out the lights in your
living quarters. It’s not the same kind of dark as that.”
She nodded toward the emptiness that swallowed the light
is

beyond Flinx’s tube.
“There’s all kinds of things down there, Flinx. For
every one we’ve found there must be a hundred more we
know nothing about.”

“Then it’s a choice, isn’t it? What you don’t know
about down there and what you do know about out that
way.” He gestured back the way they had come with the
brightly glowing tube.

As she stood

hesitating,

branching corridor.

It

was

someone screamed

far

up a

a long, drawn-out scream,

high-pitched but not necessarily female. Not the sort of
scream a person would make if he had just been hit by a

weapon. It decided her.
“I’m coming— but will you do one thing for me?”
“What’s that?”
“Would you hold my hand?”
He glanced at her extended right hand and tried to hide
his puzzlement. Clarity was a mature, intelligent human
being.

A

scientist, for Deity’s sake!

The simple absence

of light was not something to fear. It did not threaten, it
was not a physical presence, it could not hurt you in and
of itself. Yet otherwise-rational people were easily terrified of it. He could feel the fear within her and knew it

was

for real.

Now was

not the time or the place to debate unreason-

able psychological deficiencies.

He

just took her

hand

and gently brought her through the portal, carefully closing the millimeter-thick door behind them. The two tubes
enveloped them- in a circle of light half a dozen meters
in diameter, keeping the blackness at a comfortable distance. He did not feel it pressing in on him at all. It
simply was.
The first thing was to move deep enough into the next
cavern so that anyone peering through the door they had

Alan Dean Foster

170

used would not be able to detect their lights. He doubted
anyone would bother to check, since the logical thing for
anyone fleeing to do would be to try to sneak out to the
safety of the port. But he was not taking any chances.
The floor was relatively smooth except for pebbles and
gravel. In places, water had worn a flat but slick path.
They crossed a running stream, and Flinx paused for a
sip of pure, cold cave water. As he bent toward the rivulet, a host of tiny white legless creatures sped in all
directions, fleeing his light.

At the scritch-scritch sound of something much larger
hurrying away into the darkness he brought his light
around fast. There was nothing to be seen, not a suggestion of movement between the glistening stalagmites, but
he could feel the life all around, keeping to the hidden
places.

As they

traveled farther and deeper, he could see pin-

points of light flashing beyond the range of the tubes.

Photomorphs perhaps, or some other extraordinary kind
of bioluminescent creature, possibly

Whatever they were,

their lights

brighter illumination of the tubes

new

to

science.

winked out when the

came near them. When

they had hiked past, he turned and looked back to see
the pinpoints flashing brightly again.

The comparatively easy footing enabled

then! to cover

a lot of ground in a short time. For a while they were
able to hear voices and explosions. These faded with distance.

The

must have already reached the warehouse,
he surmised. He and Clarity had left just in time. He
fanatics

himself in the attackers’ position. If they
were smart, they would put a permanent guard or two on
station at the warehouse cavern’s entrance, but he did not
know how much credit to give them. Certainly they were
as fanatical as Clarity had described them. That they had
gone so far as to openly assault a legitimate commercial
enterprise, not to mention an entire Commonwealth outpost, was proof enough of their devotion to their cause
tried to put

Flinx in Flux

and
that

171

their willingness to risk everything in

was no indication they would

its

service. But

act logically in all

things.

They had come

far

enough from the

installation to re-

lax in safety, but he kept going, wanting to be certain.

The next

running stream, he promised himself,
and they would set up a camp to wait out the assault. By
then it might all be over, the invaders gone, the port
clear,

would behoove the attackers to
act rapidly on the outside chance a peaceforcer might be
in the area. But without a deepspace communications
beam, he reminded himself, a warship would have to be
extremely close indeed to pick up a distress signal.
He checked his chronometer. Technically it was nighttime, but within the caverns that was the only time it ever
was. Though he had developed the ability to catnap
whenever necessary, he did not think Clarity shared that
talent. So for her sake they would try to keep to a normal
authorities recovering.

It

twenty-four-hour day.

had enough time to
gather proper equipment: ropes, hard hats, long-range
penetrating-beam lamps, maybe even a tent and sleeping
bags. Not that he was complaining. They were lucky to
have escaped with food and lights. While not frightened
of the darkness, he had no desire to go stumbling blindly
about in it. It would be easy to become disoriented, lose
one’s way, and wander the endless caverns until food or
hope ran out.
“We’ll stay here a few days,’’ he murmured, reasoning aloud. “If they haven’t left and it looks like they’re
settling in for a while, provided the port is still holding
out against them, then I’ll try something else. I know
It

would have been nice

to have

you’re not enjoying this.”

“You’re so perceptive,” she

“What

said, but her heart

was

could you try?”
“After things calm down, I’ll sneak back with Pip.
They’ll have made a thorough search of the installation
and won’t be expecting any surprises. If I can locate a
not in the sarcasm.

Alan Dean Foster

172

who are approximately our size. I’ll try
to put them down quietly. Those chameleon suits they’re
wearing have hoods. There’s a chance we could pass ourselves off as part of their army and make a break for the
couple of them

port.

take

don’t want to try

I
it

it

unless

I

have

to.

I’d rather

easy here and wait for them to leave. Except you’re

not taking

it

easy.”

‘‘No, I’m not.

Do you

really think they’ll negotiate

and leave?”
‘‘Depends on what their ultimate aims
just to destroy Coldstripe,

stantly,

will run out.”

it

was

then they’ve done that. If

they’re planning to settle in for a long stay

“Our food

are. If

...”

Her eyes were moving con-

searching, as though she expected a patch of

darkness to suddenly become animate and jump down on
her. The determined, self-confident researcher was gradually giving way to a frightened little girl. He could see
she would not last a week in the caverns. All because of
nothing more than the potential absence of light.

“You shouldn’t be afraid.”
“I know that!” she shot back

angrily. “It’s stupid

and

childish and unreasonable to be afraid of the dark. I’m
quite aware of that.

I

know

the medical terms and

I

know

goddamn because if
you weren’t here I think I’d go catatonic. Or panic and
run around until I ran into something. Or until something
ran into me.”
“Well, I am here.” He spoke soothingly. “So take it
easy. We’ll rest, have something to eat, maybe get some
the causes, and

it

doesn’t matter a

sleep. If you’re that afraid, then I’ll reconnoiter the port

tomorrow.”

my friends.” She was murmuring to herself now.
“Maxim and Ling and Shorona and Amee ...”
“All

“We

saw only a couple of bodies, and we aren’t sure
anyone’s dead. Except the fanatic Pip put down. They
don’t have to kill people to stop your research and development here. They’ve obviously come equipped and
planned for extensive demolition work. If they do a lot

Flinx in Flux

173

be much harder for them to negotiate a
way out. They might not be able to slip free by the same
route they used to sneak in. They may have a use for
hostages. Besides, your friends weren’t the ones fighting
back. Security was doing that.”
“How could my friends fight? They had nothing to
fight with.”
of killing,

it’ll

“See? Then maybe
see

who

they’re safely out of

it,

waiting to

takes control. Standing comfortably on the side-

lines.”

“Yes.” She looked up gratefully, brightening. “Yes,
that’s right, they might be.” She sounded hopeful.
“Maybe everyone else will be okay.”

“How many
have?

nonsecurity

personnel did Coldstripe

’ ’

She thought a moment. “About

sixty, including ad-

ministration.”

“That’s a lot of hostages. You can bargain efficiently
with that many hostages. Sixty corpses do you no good
at all.”

“And

you’re not even twenty yet,” she said, marvel-

ing at him.

“When

did you ever have to think about hos-

tage bargaining and assault tactics?”

“I had to grow up in a hurry. I kind of regret that now.
I didn’t have what anyone would call a normal childhood,
which I suppose is appropriate since I’m not normal. But
I

regret

it

all

same.”

the

Another violent explosion echoed through the caverns.
Scrap stirred on Clarity’s shoulder. The emotional strain
of the past hours had taken its toll on the young minidrag. He flew rarely now, preferring to cling to Clarity’s
shoulder and sidetail.
Flinx was surprised. “I thought they were finished with
that, and it had to have been close for us to hear it all
way back here.” Ten minutes later a second explosion
followed the

first.

“Something’s wrong. They should have concluded

Alan Dean Foster

174
their demolition

your complex

work by now. Unless there was a

part of

’ ’

never saw.
Clarity shook her head. “You saw everything.”
He chewed his lower lip. “I can’t imagine what’s left
to blow up, unless they’ve gone completely mad and are
destroying the supplies.” He climbed to his feet, picking
up a tube. “I’ll go have a look. You can wait here.”
“Not a chance.” She rose nervously. “I’d rather be
lying half-dead on that beach back on Alaspin than be
I

down here.”
“All right. But when we

left

alone

to muffle the light

get close, we’re going to have

from the tubes.

We can use our shirts.”

“Anything you say, but I’m not staying here alone.”
They never did make it far enough to see what was
happening. When they had retraced half their steps, Flinx
noticed that the faint glow of distant biotubes through
spray- wall was absent. Rumbles continued to reach them
from progressively fainter explosions.
“We must have taken a wrong turn somewhere.”
“No, this is right. This has to be right.” She caressed
an oddly bent stalagmite. “I tried to memorize landmarks, specific features. That’s one of the first things
they drill you in when you come here, in case you do
stray from a lit path.”
“Then we just haven’t come far enough.”
He thought they had walked the required distance when
they found themselves standing opposite a solid wall of
rock. Flinx played his tube over the broken surface while

Pip and Scrap fluttered curiously nearby. The echo of
another explosion reached them, very distant now. That
was strange, because it should have been louder.

He

bent to examine a place where broken stone was
layered against a sparkling brown and white stalagmite.
Clarity

was kneeling and pushing aside fragments of

rock.

“These look like unicorn horns. There’s no fresh
growth, and the stalactites are still damp where they’ve
broken loose from the ceiling.” Her gaze rose to the

Flinx in Flux
solid wall in front of them.

175

“They must be destroying

the back passageways.’’

enough

them

your work here.’’
Flinx rose, his expression grim. “They’re trying to entomb it by demolishing the corridors and rooms.’’
A slight quaver crept into her voice. “If they’re blowing up all the tunnels on their way out, then we’re trapped
back here.’’
“They found a new way in, we can find a new way
“It’s not

for

to ruin

out.’’
‘

‘But they had proper spelunking equipment, and the

passage they found is somewhere in there.” She indicated the immovable wall. “We only have a couple of
light tubes, and when they run out—”
“Calm down!” Flinx ordered. It had the intended effect, which was to quickly dampen her rising hysteria.
“There have to be other exits to the surface from here,
otherwise there ’d be no decent air for us to breathe.”
“There are probably a hundred openings that go all
the way up,” she said tiredly, “and most of them less
than a meter in diameter, and they twist and turn and
curve on their way in. Nothing a human being could fit
through— nothing a cat could fit through— but enough to
allow air to circulate. Alternative entrances to the outpost
were checked and rechecked before construction began.
The only practical way into the complex is via the ancient
river canyon which forms the shuttle landing strip.” She
ran her hands along the wall. It might have been in place
for a million years for all the chance they had of forcing
a passage through the tons of collapsed limestone.
“We’ll have to find a way through this somehow,” he
told her. “Maybe a couple of large stones fell against
one another and left a clearable space between.”
They did locate one spot where an immense fallen stalactite three meters in diameter formed a low arch. A
hopeful Flinx crawled through, only to find his way
blocked by debris from a second wall less than half a
dozen meters beyond. Unable to turn, he laboriously

Alan Dean Foster

176

crawled backward until he was standing outside the archway.
“No good. They set off more than one charge in here.’’
He brushed dust from his clothing, noticed the small flying snake peering at him from Clarity’s shoulder, and
smiled. “Pip and Scrap could probably get out through
one of those air passages you spoke of, but they’re not

homing animals. They couldn’t take
and

in

a

any event, Pip wouldn’t leave

message through,

me

in

my

current

of mind.’’
“Then we’re trapped. We’ll never get out. Even if there
was another way, we’d never find it. We don’t have any
state

equipment.’’

“But we do have time. The food will last if we’re careful with it, and water’s not a concern.’’
“It’s not that. It’s not that.’’ She held her light tube
so tightly, he was afraid she’d crush it between her fingers.

“What happens when

“They’re not going

to

these start to go out?’’

go out

until

we’ve found a way

out.’’

“How

can you know that?’’
“Because we have to find a way out first.’’ He looked
past her. “If they’re slowly filling in the entire Coldstripe
complex, then our best bet is to try to circle around to
the port area. If they’ve taken over the entire outpost,
then it doesn’t matter where we go, but we can only proceed on the assumption that there’s a safe haven waiting
for us at the end of our search. We need to find a way
into a developed section of cavern.
“They can’t have brought enough people to keep watch
over every room, every chamber. Most likely they’ve
rounded everyone up and are keeping them under guard
in one place. By the time we’ve found our way around to
another part of the outpost, they won’t be looking for
strays.’’ He took a determined step past her.
She didn’t follow. “You think it’s that easy? You don’t
know anything about caves and cave systems. Caverns
big enough to shelter half a city are often connected by

Flinx in Flux

crawl spaces too low for an infant to pass. You

177
tell

your-

more, just a little farther and you’ll be
through, crawling on your belly, pushing with your feet,
clawing with your hands while dust you can’t brush aside
falls in your eyes. You can get close enough to see the
next cavern beyond, and then the roof dips another centimeter and you’re stuck, and you can’t back out and they
can’t pull you out and so you just lie there trying to shrink
your skeleton enough to pull free and—”
“That’s enough!”
She started crying, not caring if anyone overheard,
wanting someone to hear because anything was preferable to being marooned forever in that awful darkness,
alone in a cavern that had suddenly become a potential
tomb. Better to be a prisoner, better to suffer any amount
of abuse by captors than to be trapped here.
“F-Flinx, I don’t want to die down here.”
“I’m not particular about the place,” he replied coolly,
“but I am about the time, and it isn’t now. Come on,
we’re wasting time. We have to work our way around,
whether we have to climb or crawl or glide to do it. There
has to be another way out.”
They started following the wall, traveling north by
Flinx ’s illuminated compass, one of the hundred functions he could call up on his chronometer.
His hope was that they would quickly find a passage
leading to the back of some other company’s research
installation. But Clarity was right. He knew more of the
vastnesses above worlds than he did of the hollow places
beneath their surfaces.
The first problem was that the ground did not stay
level. Despite their constant efforts to remain at the same
depth, they found themselves unwillingly working their
way deeper. Nor did the wall they wanted to keep on
their left curve gently around toward the port. It wandered and split, forming new passageways and small
caves and tunnels until it was impossible to tell which
was part of the original wall and which was entirely new.
self, just

a

little

Alan Dean Foster

178

The narrowest crawl space might lead to salvation, while
spacious walkaways always seemed to end in rockfalls.
He thought they could find their way by following
breezes coming from the west, but holes in the ceiling
centimeters wide and hundreds of meters long
ted fresh air from the planetary surface.

a constant swirl of

The

The

all

admit-

result

was

directionless and unhelpful.

air,

chemtubes they carried did
little to dispel their sense of disorientation. Flinx had no
idea of the port’s layout and knew only the direction in
which they were traveling; Clarity, still terrified by the
darkness, was completely lost. To her credit, she struggled to keep mind and soul together with as much hope
bright flare from the

as she could muster.

“Maybe heading down
find the

good

Coldstripe’s.

in a
I

bad

isn’t so bad,’’

situation.

she said, trying

“There are

levels

below

think there’s a big storage area located

beneath the port. We just need to make sure we don’t
descend too far or we might walk right beneath it and
out on the other side.’’

“We’ll find it. Or something close
with an assurance he did not feel.

to it,’’

he told her

Chapter Eleven

They walked, ate several meals, and marched on. It
dawned on Flinx that one could go quietly mad trying to
find one’s way around Longtunnel. It did not help when
Clarity informed him that several of the geologists believed the wondrous cavern system extended the length
and breadth of the continent. The hoped-for back way
into another company’s chambers did not materialize.
Even while paying constant attention to a compass, it was
easy to get turned around.

Wild photomorphs fled from their lights. There was
also an unseen creature that spun an intensely phosphorescent, bright pink web. They carefully avoided the
sticky strands as they walked past, content to admire the
web from a distance without feeling compelled to summon its owner forth.
Following a straight path was impossible. The farther
they went, the

more

difficult

it

became

to

know

if

they

anywhere near the colony. For Clarity’s sake
Flinx espoused a positive line, but after several days of
climbing over fallen boulders and through forests of stawere

still

179

Alan Dean Foster

180

lagmites, during which time they encountered not a single sign of

humanx

presence, he found he was becoming

discouraged himself.
Pip’s

and Scrap’s moods reflected those of their hu-

mans. They rarely flew, preferring instead to ride shoulders and arms while displaying none of their usual
exuberance and curiosity. Flinx knew that Pip’s lethargy
was a true reflection of his own current state of mind. It

was not a good sign.
The sheer enormousness of the caverns was putting a
severe dent in his self-confidence. They might already
have walked past half a dozen tunnels leading straight to
the port complex. Instead, they had explored dozens of
blind alleys and corridors that gradually narrowed to the
width of a knife. As Clarity relentlessly pointed out,
climbing higher might only lose them in different caverns.

could get near enough to an installation to
see a light, hear a noise. But there was only the trickling
of water, the high-pitched squeals of cavern dwellers,
and the strange unnerving noises produced by shadows
in the darkness that scuttled out of sight whenever a tube
If only they

was thrust

On

in their direction.

the third day Clarity said,

to destroy everything.

Not

“They might

really

want

just Coldstripe.”

“How

do you mean?” Flinx had to turn sideways to
fit through a narrow passage between a row of stalagmites. She turned to follow him, carefully keeping her
precious tube away from any projecting rocks.
During the past days the tubes had faded slightly.
Hardly enough to be noticeable, but it did not take much
to panic Clarity. She had not complained, had not pointed
out the reduced level of illumination, but he knew she
had noticed. It was an effort for her to stay calm from
the time they began walking until they lay down to go to
sleep.

“If they can wipe out the entire installation, bury every
corridor and fill in every developed cavern, they might

181

Flinx in Flux

concocting a story about some kind of natural disaster. They could claim they were headed here to carry out
an experiment of their own, or to make a mild protest,
only to have found that an earthquake or something had
recently destroyed the colony. Make it look as if natural

try

causes were responsible. If they can invent a plausible

enough story, the Commonwealth office for this sector
might not think it necessary to send out their own inspectors to check it out.
“They could then convince the authorities that Longunsuitable for further exploration. It wouldn’t
take much. All you’d have to do is show a layman’s jury
tridees of the surface. They could shut down the whole

tunnel

is

But that would mean,’’
she finished in a small voice, “that they’d have to kill
everybody. Not just the scientists and administrators. Ev-

world, bar

erybody.

it

to further research.

’ ’

in silence for a while.

They walked

“Sometimes,’’

Flinx finally said softly as he raised his tube for a better
look ahead, “those who speak of preserving life aren’t

above taking

it

to further

what they perceive

to

be their

ultimate aims. Often the only life they’re not interested
’’
As he lowered
in preserving is that of their fellow man.
the tube, he studied it thoughtfully. “It’s a shame we
can’t switch

one of these

She shook her head.
action.

Once

it’s

off

and preserve

it.’’

“It’s a steady-state

activated,

chemical

you can’t turn

you break the tube and release the mixture.

“Only slightly.’’
“They don’t last
to

be useful,

it’s

forever.

it

off unless

It’s

When one becomes

just replaced.

Most of them

re-

fading.’’

too dim

are reliable,

predictable, but a few last much longer than the rest, and
a few ... a few go out rapidly. You never know which
the chemical
is going to do what. That’s a consequence of

imbalance inherent in every batch of luminescent liquid.
No matter how much attention is paid to the mixing,
there are always a few that are slightly off one way or the
other. I’ve seen some tubes wink out hours after they

Alan Dean Foster

182

were

and others that have been glowing steadily
since the first corridors were cut on Longtunnel.”
“I hope these are two of the long burners. Look, is
there anything in particular we should be watching out
for down here? I keep hearing noises.”
“I told you there were carnivores. So far we haven’t
run into anything except some photomorphs and that web
spinner. One thing I’ve been trying to keep an eye out
for is straw worms. They look a lot like those soda straws
installed

we passed

yesterday.”

‘‘Soda straws?”

“The

long, thin, almost pure calcite stalactites we
passed yesterday. The ones that look like needles hanging from the ceiling. Straw worms hide themselves among
the formations. They hang from a sucker at the tail end.

something edible passes underneath, they let go and
drop straight down on it. None of the four species that
have been studied thus far are toxic, but they all have
three concentric rings of teeth in their jaws. They’re like
If

leeches, only
in,

much harder

and secrete a

fluid

to get off.

which

liquefies

They lock on, dig
flesh and bone.

“Fortunately they aren’t very strong biters. As long as
they don’t land on exposed flesh and get a grip on you,
it’s simple to grab them behind the head and throw them

The critical thing is not to give them enough time
chew through your clothes. There ’ve never been any

aside.
to

fatalities

from straw worm

bites, but then,

nobody’s ever
been lost down here without light, either. You said you’ve
heard noises. Was a lot of that like a ringing in your
ears?”
He nodded. “Yesterday particularly.”

“There are small mammals

have huge ears and
cone-shaped mouths. They’re kind of cute, actually, once
you forget that they have no eyes. We call them coners.
All ears and mouth on oversized feet. They range their
prey with ultrasound. The biggest is maybe a third of a
meter tall. All they eat are blind insects.
“After they home in on a bug, they turn up the frethat

Flinx in Flux

183

quency and knock it off its perch, or out of the air, or
stun it on the ground. Sometimes we can feel the vibrations. Nothing dangerous. They’d eat us, too, if they
could, but they have no teeth. Only that funnel-like
mouth. So they just scramble out of our way.

“The coners

aren’t the only animals that hunt with

sound. We’ve one specimen only of something that looks
like a cross between a tiger and a hippo. If it can generate
sound in proportion to its size and on the wrong frequencies, it could conceivably be dangerous to us, but
with only a dead specimen to study, we can’t tell. It has

enough to do the job.’’
“Earplugs probably wouldn’t help.”

teeth big

“No,

they wouldn’t. But

we

shouldn’t be worried about

sound generators. The poison carriers are the ones that
concern me. There’s one that lives only on top of certain

You

by looking at the stalagmite.
The differences are apparent only to the darters, except
for the absence of water.
“They have a dozen legs that help them cling to the
drier limestone. The proboscis is ten centimeters long
and uses air pressure to fire a little dart, an organic hypodermic if you will, that’s attached to the inner nostril
by a thread-sized length of tendon. The dart contains a
particularly powerful hementin-based toxin that attacks
fibrinogen. If it’s not countered, you bleed to death
through the wound the dart makes because the hementin
prevents the blood from clotting. Then the little bastards
climb down off their safe, high perches and suck up the
remains. But if we don’t blunder into any, we won’t have
stalagmites.

can’t

tell

any trouble.
“That’s why I’m glad this is a live cave system. The
darters only perch on dead stalagmites. So try to stay
close to the growing ones. They don’t like the water that

from thd ceiling.”
“And I was thinking how peaceful and calm

drips

it

was

down here.”
“Don’t

let

the

darkness

fool

you.

We’re walking

Alan Dean Foster

184

through a treeless jungle. In its own way, this subterranean ecosystem is as vibrant and competitive as Alaspin’s. It’s just that we’re bigger than the majority of
inhabitants. And if they have any photorecepting capability at all, they instinctively

shy away from our lights.

“There is at least one big something, though. It’s never
been observed, but we have measured tracks. Eight legs
and pad prints a meter wide. It keeps to the largest caverns. It’s been named vexfoot.

“Then

there are the creatures that inhabit the under-

won’t go into them since I
don’t expect we’ll have to do any swimming.’’ Her tube
suddenly faded sharply. She shook it vigorously, stirring

ground lakes and streams.

I

the contents like a luminescent cocktail, and

warded when the
her

light returned to

normal.

He

was

re-

could sense

relief.

“So

these tubes are a defense as well as our guides. If

they went out,

I

don’t

that you’d quickly

know what would happen,

meet a

lot

more of the

you have thus far.’’
“There’s no reason for them
reassure her.

“No

to

go

reason according to

except

local fauna than

out.’’
all

He

tried to

you’ve told

me

why they shouldn’t last for weeks or months.’’
“No. No reason at all.’’
“Even if we were to be attacked by something, Pip
and Scrap would act to stop it.’’
“I know, but flying snakes need
do. Unless they have

light as

much

as

we

some kind of echolocation mecha-

nism.’’

“None

know

But by nature they’re nocturnal.
They can see quite well in very low light.”
that

I

of.

“That doesn’t do any good down here. When these
tubes go out, there’ll be no light at all. No moonlight,
no stars. It’s the blackest black imaginable, much worse
than empty space.”
“Except for the bioluminescents,” he reminded her.
“I guess

we could always

capture a couple of wild pho-

Flinx in Flux

tomorphs and put leashes on them.

own way

at

185

A

pet that lights

its

night.”

His attempt at humor failed. She was clearly worrying
about how she would react when the tubes started to fade
permanently. No matter, he told himself firmly. By that
time they would have found a way out. He wished they
had a way of knowing how the battle against the ecofanatics was going. They could have sealed themselves up
in Coldstripe’s station or taken over the entire port. Or
port Security might be driving them out, back the way
they had come, while he and Clarity wandered needlessly
through Longtunnel’s unmapped depths. That thought
was harder to deal with than the others. Not knowing
what was happening was as frustrating as not knowing
where they were.
She halted abruptly, almost stumbling, and looked back
sharply. ‘‘There’s something over there.” Scrap’s head
rose from behind her sidetail, the adolescent minidrag
looking more like a bejeweled shoulder ornament than a
living creature. His stance w&s alert, the pleated wings
half-unfolded. He had definitely taken a liking to Clarity,
Flinx thought.

“I heard it, too.”
He unlimbered the needier he had taken from the man
who had tried to kill them and checked the setting. Half
power remaining. That should be sufficient to deal with
anything they ran into. A needier was not his weapon of
choice. You had to be careful with them. Sometimes they
leaked and could give the wielder a nasty, unexpected

But he was glad to have the firepower.
‘‘We could backtrack a little,” she suggested.
“Backtrack to where? Let’s just stand here a minute.
Maybe it’ll go away.”
The rustling noise was moving around. They followed
its progress through another part of the cavern as it came
parallel to their position, then moved on ahead. Intervening formations played tricks with echoes as sounds
bounced off soda straws and draperies and flowstone.

jolt.

Alan Dean Foster

186

away could sound quite near, while
could use stone and water to muffle the

Something moving
a cautious stalker

noise of
It

its

far

approach.

was ahead of them now and

closer, a

rough mewing,

Flinx whispered to his companion.

“Recognize it?” She shook her head tensely “Well,
I’m not standing around until our light goes out.’ Taking
a determined step forward, he passed beyond a sheet of
rippling travertine and came face-to-face with a mouth.
It was a round, impressive mouth. Apparently, round
jaws were common on Longtunnel. This one was lined
with three concentric rings of inward-pointing, serrated
teeth. As he gaped at it, the rubbery lip ring flexed and
his nostrils were filled with the smell of decaying matter.

The jaw did not so much

close as iris-shut. If someone’s

head happened to be inside during the process, he thought
wildly, it would be snipped off at the neck as cleanly as
if by a surgical cutter.
The mouth was the face, and the face was the mouth.
Any vestigial eyes were hidden beneath the pure white,
long, silken fur against which the black lip lining the
mouth stood out starkly. Atop the massive skull, a fanshaped single ear flexed freely. Flinx wondered if it had
evolved that way or if two ears had eventually grown
together to form one.
He did not wonder about it long as he threw himself
sharply to one side. The irising mouth opened with
astonishing speed and snapped at him, the short neck
extending slightly. Teeth clashed as the snout-jaw was

sucked shut.
Clarity screamed as the monster lunged in her direction, advancing on four heavy legs. Flinx glimpsed the
nostrils set just behind the top of the mouth. Jaws, nose,
and ear were all set in line, like a multiple sight on a
gun, all positioned for maximum hunting ability.
Then he could not see Clarity anymore because her
tube went out. Frantically, he tried to set his own safely
aside and aim the needier.

Flinx in Flux

187

Pip and Scrap had both flown into action, but the

fly-

ing snakes were confused by the sight of a creature with

no eyes. While they puzzled over what to attack in the
absence of their natural target, the monster was trying to
decide which of two potential prey to strike at next. Clarity was moaning and trying to keep a large stalagmite
between herself and that singular mouth.
Maddened by the panic she felt in her master’s mind,
Pip

let

loose a stream of

The dense

venom

at the creature’s face.

most of the caustic liquid, but a
few drops struck the ear membrane. While not as sensitive as an eye, it was certainly delicate.
fur absorbed

Instead of roaring or bellowing, the white monstrosity
let

out a loud, pain-racked

legs

and snapped with

moan

as

it

rose on

that slightly extensible

its

hind

mouth

in

was extremely quick for
so massive an animal, but not anywhere near as agile as
the flying snake. Pip simply backed air and hunted for
the direction of the minidrag.

It

another opening.

By this time Flinx had the heavy needier aimed. There
was no time to fool with the setting. The important thing
was to distract the carnivore from Clarity. The gun
whined softly as the harrow beam struck its target just
behind the head. It uttered another of its oddly muted
moans and turned toward him. As it did so he fired again,
aiming for the open mouth.
It shuddered and moaned, the circular jaw irising open
and shut several times. As it came on, he fired a third
time, heedless of the weapon’s rapidly diminishing
charge. When it was several meters away, it dropped to
its knees and continued to advance in that manner despite
having absorbed three shots that would have killed most
creatures

its

size.

Flinx paused long enough to reset the needier.

enough time

to take

more

careful

aim when he

time the shot struck the monster’s spine.

and vibrated

all

over, then halted.

It let

He took

fired.

This

out a heave

The mouth slowly

Alan Dean Foster

188

opened halfway and froze
no eyes to close.
They were able to tell

in that position.

it

There were

was dead because

it

had

Shaken, Flinx recovered the light
tube, listening intently in case the monster had not been
alone. The cavern was still alive with noise, but there
was no more dangerous mewing.
An agitated Pip was darting like an angry bee around
the head of the fallen carnivore while Scrap fluttered anxiously nearby. But there was no need for her to spit again.
Clarity was leaning against her lifesaving stalagmite,
breathing hard and staring at the dead mass of fur and
flesh. “It’s all right,” she mumbled before he could say
anything. “I’m okay. I’m sorry I screamed.” Her anger
stopped breathing.

was directed

“No

at herself.

would’ve screamed myself except I
didn’t have the time.”
Her eyes met his. “No, you wouldn’t. But thank you
for saying so.”
matter.

I

“What is it, anyway?”
“Not a vexfoot.” She let go of
moved hesitantly toward the corpse.

-

,

resting instead of stone dead.

of legs.

Maybe

the stalagmite and
It

“Half the

might have been
requisite

number

a related form. I’ve never seen anything

and I don’t think anyone else has, either.”
“I must have surprised it. Otherwise I don’t think

like

it,

would’ve let me get that close before attacking.
course, without any eyes it couldn’t be that certain of

it

Of

my

position.”

“Don’t bet on

it.

We’ve been talking

for hours.

It

must’ve heard us.”

“Unless it was listening on a different frequency or
tracking something else. If it was stalking us from the
beginning, why didn’t it attack from behind?” Suddenly
something else came to mind, and he looked back at the
stalagmite. “Where’s your light?”
She swallowed hard, turned, and pointed. “Over
there.”

Flinx in Flux

He

raised his tube and

189

saw where she had flung

hers.

had shattered against a cluster of small stalagmites.
Like a phosphorescent worm, the liquid light that had
been contained within was running away in several directions, disappearing into cracks and holes in the floor.
“Never mind. We still have mine.’’ He did not offer

It

to let her carry

it.

“It startled me.

dumb

I

panicked, and I’m sorry.

It

was a

thing to do.’’

was a dumb thing to do. I’ve been
known to do one or two dumb things in my life, too.
Well, it can’t be helped and it probably doesn’t matter.
Chances are both tubes would have gone out at the same
time. We’ll have light for as long as we would have,
“You’re

anyway.

right. It

We just

won’t have as

much

of

it.’’

He frowned,

suddenly. “Where’s Pip?’’

She looked past him. “Scrap’s gone, too. They were
here just a minute ago.’’
“Pip?’’ He raised his voice and the light tube. Brown
and white flashed back at him from the ceiling, but there
was no familiar darting pink and blue diamondback pattern.

“She’s over there.’’ Clarity pointed to where the flying
snake was hovering, staring back at them out of slitted
eyes.

“Let’s go.’’ Flinx gestured with his chin.

“We

have

keep moving.’’
Instead of complying with her master’s command, the
minidrag whirled and sped off into the darkness, returning briefly only to vanish a second time.
“She’s found something.’’
“Not another of those round-mouthed carnivores?’’
“Think straight. If she had, would she be trying to
lead us toward it?’’
“No, but what else would make her act this way?’’
“Strong emotional reaction, but that doesn’t make any
sense since you and I are the only ones down here.’’ He
hesitated, watching his anxious pet. “Or are we?’’
to

Alan Dean Foster

190

*

* *

and uncomfortable position for one of his race. A light harness was
strapped to his thorax and was surmounted by an odd-

The thranx

lay

on

his side, an unnatural

looking double-barreled instrument slung crossways. As
they drew near, Flinx saw that the device was a shoulder
light. It was not working. Small picks and other duralloy
instruments dangled from the pack and abdominal belt,
the latter fashioned of yellow leather that was gouged and
scratched from heavy use.
He held his light close. By the absence of ovipositors
he knew the injured thranx was male. His chiton shone
deep blue with only slight purpling on the dorsal plates.
Middle-aged, then, and apparently otherwise healthy.
Brilliant orange and yellow ommatidia formed the large
compound eyes. The feathery antennae hung limp and
collapsed on the thranx’s face.
Flinx edged a little closer and then stopped, his expression changing to one of disgust. “Deity! What’s that
thing that has him?’’
The thranx walked on four trulegs. The right front limb

was shriveled and distorted by a dense growth of slimy
glistening tendrils that extended from the middle part of
the leg back to a huge wet mass that filled most of a
hollow beneath a drapery of flowstone.

arm and drew
wounded thranx as he

“Careful.’’ Clarity put a hand on Flinx ’s

him back. He kept

his eyes

on the

retreated, feeling the gorge rise in his throat. “It’s a nec-

romarium.

A

scavenging carnivorous fungus. It shoots
those tendrils at its prey, though like the photomorphs
it’s not hard to avoid them.’’
“I doubt he’d agree with you.’’ Flinx indicated the
inert form of the thranx.
“Is he still alive?’’
“Here.’’ He passed her the light tube. “Bang your
head against the wall if you want, but not that.’’

“Don’t worry.’’ She accepted the admonishment without comment. “I’ll break an arm before I lose this one.’’

Flinx in Flux

Dropping

191

hands and knees, he pressed his middle
three fingers against the b-thorax. Because of the unto

was difficult to take a
thranx’s pulse. The b-thorax, which corresponded to the
neck in humans, was the best place to try. Instead of the
rhythmic pounding a human being would produce, he felt
yielding outer exoskeleton

warm

it

he had laid his fingertips against a
concealed stream. The circulatory system was still functional, which meant the heart was still working, which
a

pulsing, as

if

meant
Something brushed
.

.

.

back of his hand.
One of the long antennae was stroking him. The head
moved next, slowly and painfully, and the four opposing
mandibles parted. Flinx leaned close, trying to make out
broken words in low thranx. Not an easy language but
simpler than high thranx. Thranx spoke Terranglo better
than humans spoke their language, and there was always
symbospeech, but in his pain and distress this one was
lightly against the

understandably resorting to his native language.
Flinx kept his comforting hand on the b-thorax. “Just
take it easy. We’re friends.’’ The antenna withdrew, and
the mandibles relaxed. Though he was a mature adult, if
the thranx had been standing on all four trulegs his head
would not have come up to Clarity’s. Flinx would have
towered over him.
Something lightly stung the back of his other hand.
Looking down, he was horrified to see a thin silvery tendril protruding from the skin. Instinctively he pulled
away, but the stuff was stronger than spider silk.
Pip was there in a second, responding to his distress.
But this time there was no enemy to spit at, nothing except a large mass of glistening brown and silver that
looked like a disintegrating pillow.
Flinx rose to his knees. A second tendril exploded from
the cushiony mass beneath the flowstone curtain and just
missed his flailing fingers. It landed instead on the
thranx’s b-thorax and began spinning and convulsing.
Flinx could see the tiny pinprick of a hook at the tip,

Alan Dean Foster

192

spiraled like a drill point as

it

tried to

work

its

way

into

could not penetrate the
tough exoskeleton. Flinx assumed the other tendrils must
have infested the thranx through a leg joint.
the softer flesh underneath.

It

could feel the one that had hooked his hand worming its way deeper into the muscle. The pain was severe,
barely tolerable. Forcing down the nausea he felt, he used
his free hand to pull the needier, reduce the setting, and
fire at the main body of the abomination, spraying the

He

beam methodically back and

forth across

its

surface.

was almost too primitive to kill. It had to be slain
one part at a time and absorbed more charge than they
could afford to expend, but he was in no mood to be
logical. He persisted until the entire organism had been
reduced to a steaming, smoky mass. It smelled of ooze
and carbonized corruption.
The tendril still clung to his hand. A minuscule burst
from the needier severed it a dozen centimeters from his
It

wrist.

The

Clarity carefully inspected the skin.

losing

its

tendril

healthy silvery sheen, turning a dull gray.

toxic or you’d be feeling the effects by

“It hurt real bad

when

not moving anymore,

Aiming

it

it

was

“Not

now.”

was digging

in.

Now

that

it’s

just stings.”

the needier precisely, he sliced

away the an-

kle-thick cables that clung to the thranx ’s shriveled truleg.

“Can we do

anything for

him?”

She checked the pocket on her left pants leg and removed a small packet. “Omnifungicide,” she explained.
“You don’t go anywhere on Longtunnel without it.

Comes with the clothing.”
He was staring at the thin

hung limply from
the back of his hand. “Do you know what this thing is?”
“No. The species is new to me. That’s not surprising.
I told you how little we know about Longtunnel.”
She pressed the applicator to the back of his palm.
Immediately the lingering burning sensation went away,
replaced by a soothing coolness. Several minutes went
tendril that

Flinx in Flux

by before the tendril

fell to

the floor,

193

no more dangerous

now

than a cotton thread.
Bringing his hand up to his face, he inspected the tiny

wound

the drilling tendril had

left.

A

single drop of blood

had emerged and was already beginning

to coagulate.

He

flexed his fingers.

“No

pain. You’re sure

it’s

not poisonous?’’

“I’m not sure of anything. I’m no mycologist, Flinx.
But most of the venomous flora and fauna we’ve cataloged so far possess toxins that are fast-acting. You’re
still walking and talking, so if it is poisonous, it didn’t
have sufficient time to work on you.’’ She nodded at the
motionless thranx. “Unlike him.’’

He

kicked the smoking ends of the tendrils that had
enveloped the thranx’s truleg. “What is this stuff, any-

way?

’ ’

“Haustorium. A hyphae network. The fungus you fried
puts them out, and they keep subdividing and subdividing until there’s one to penetrate each cell of the host.
That’s how it eats. It started to eat you.’’ She nodded at
the unlucky thranx. “It looks like it’s been eating him
for a while.’’

“I couldn’t break

it

with

my

hands,’’ he

murmured.

most wire, and I couldn’t snap it.’’ He
indicated her pants. “Any wakearounds in those pock“It’s thinner than

ets?’’

“Ought to be.’’ She felt her pants. “Do you think
they’ll work on him?’’
“They should work on any oxygen breather. We’ll find
out.”

She found two of the thin tubes, one in each side
pocket. Flinx bent over the thranx and snapped one above
the nearest quartet of breathing spicules.

The powerful

chemical made the thorax jump.
The insectoid moaned, an eerie inhuman noise. With
Flinx’s help, he managed to roll onto his front, gathering
his trulegs and foothands beneath him. The valentineshaped skull looked up at Flinx, mandibles trembling. A

Alan Dean Foster

194

sure sign of discomfort and pain.

capable of
relied

the

little in

The

inflexible face

way of expression,

on movements of the

was

so the thranx

entire head, the antennae,

and the delicate fingers of the uppermost set of limbs,
the truhands. These were working tightly against each
other.

“Try to relax.’’
The endless weaving of tiny stiff digits slowed. When
he spoke this time, the words were soft but comprehensible.

“You

aren’t with

them? The mad humans who attacked

the outpost?’’

“No. We’re refugees ourselves.’’
Clarity moved nearer. “I’m Clarity Held.

I

was chief

gengineer for Coldstripe. Who are you?’’
“Sowelmanu. I am with the research team from Willowane studying geofood sources.’’ The blue head swiveled to gaze at the smoking mass of tendrils beneath the
flowstone curtain. “It would appear that is an interest
which works both ways. A fair turnabout, though one I
could have done without.” He dropped his eyes to the
remnant of truleg still encased in the severed haustorium.
“I have consumed my share of the local flora. I suppose it only fair that they enjoy their meal in turn.” The
trembling in his voice belied the humor he was struggling

on the situation. “It hurts rather extensively.”
“What’s he saying now?” Clarity asked. “My low
thranx is pretty bad.”
“He’s hurting,” Flinx told her. “The thing’s been eatto put

ing his leg.”

“Damn.

I

hope

it

hasn’t

worked

its

way up

inside the

abdomen.”
Flinx put the question to their

new

friend

and ex-

plained about Clarity’s linguistic deficiencies.

“No,” he
infestation
at Flinx.
I

replied in perfect Terranglo. “I think the

was confined

“You speak

to the leg.”

He gazed

curiously

the finest low thranx of any

have ever met. Are you a linguist?”

human

Flinx in Flux

“No.”

195

Flinx looked away. “I had an excellent thranx

We

can chat about my expertise another time.
Right now we’ve got to do something about your leg.”
“Ah, yes. My leg.” He studied himself thoughtfully.
“I fear that is a lost cause. Little appears to remain of
the original limb. I am sure if you had not come along
that thing would eventually have consumed all of me,
leaving the head for last. An unpleasant way to die.”
“We could try to carry you,” Flinx suggested.
“That will not be necessary, as I think you well know,
but I acknowledge your courtesy. Truly you understand
the ways of the Hive. I could limp along on my three
remaining trulegs, but I think I would prefer to sulfer the
indignity of utilizing my foothands and enjoy easier if
less dignified locomotion. My posture will be servile,
but I will be able to keep up quite well, thank you.”
Flinx had suspected the thranx would choose that option, but Hive courtesy required that he make the offer
to carry the thranx in a proper upright position. In addition to their four trulegs and two small truhands, the
insectoids had a fourth set of limbs located at the base
of the thorax between truhands and fore trulegs. These
could be employed either as a second set of hands, as
was usually the case, or as an extra set of legs with the
individual walking with its body parallel to the ground.
instructor.

The thranx preferred not to walk
reminded them of their primitive

in that

manner

since

it

insect ancestry.

“I look for rock-borne food sources,” he said. “You
have told me what you are,” he said to Clarity. He looked
expectantly

at Flinx.

“I study things,” he said

move.

tersely.

“Look,

if

you can

There aren’t many danfrighten me, but I have fears of

I’d like to leave this place.

gerous lifeforms that

creatures that parasitize.”

“I comprehend. I can walk. You are a student?”
Clarity explained everything, including how Flinx had
come to share their predicament because of the help he
had given her.

Alan Dean Foster

196

“I am sorry for you to be involved,” Sowelmanu told
him, ‘‘but then, I am sorry to be involved myself. The
problem is not my leg. If you worked here, you would
realize that to leave an open wound unattended for very
long is to invite the worst sort of certain death. That must
be taken care of, somehow, before I can attempt to
travel.”

‘‘What’s he talking about?” Flinx asked Clarity.

The caverns are thick with them. The air
currents keep them aloft and moving around. Most of the
‘‘Spores,

fungi and molds reproduce through spores. They’ll infect

any open wound. Sooner or later a hyphae network will
develop and spread through the host. That’s why you
don’t see any corpses lying about, despite the extensive
animal population. There are no vultures or ants or their
analogs. The fungi take care of carrion disposal.”
‘‘We must find a way to close off the wound,” the
thranx muttered.
‘‘Your ‘wound’ consists of what’s

left

of your whole

leg,” Flinx pointed out.

what I mean,” Sowelmanu replied quietly.
‘‘I have observed the weapon you carry. From the destruction of the haustorium which infected me, I presume
‘‘That

it is

is

functional.”

Flinx checked the readout. ‘‘There’s

still

some charge

left.”

‘‘Very well, then.”

The thranx sighed,

a light whis-

sound. ‘‘You are not be any chance a trained surgeon?” Flinx shook his head. ‘‘Pity. At least you know
tling

how

gun.” With

he rolled back onto
his side. ‘‘Take your best aim and kindly relieve me of
this useless limb.”
Flinx stared at him. ‘‘I can’t perform an amputation.
If I do that, you won’t have a chance at rehabilitation. It
might be a long time before we reach medical facilities.”
‘‘I realize that. It could be worse. The creature could
have struck my eyes, in which case you would be in the
difficult position of having to amputate my head. I think
to use a

difficulty

Flinx in Flux

197

my

prospects for survival are better in this case. If you
do not comply, then I will acquire an airborne fungal
infection within a day, which will not be so easily ex-

The weapon

cised.

will cauterize the

wound and

seal

it

can obtain proper treatment. That is,”
he added softly, ‘‘providing these mad humans have not
destroyed the outpost infirmary along with everything
sufficiently until

I

else.”

“I wouldn’t put it past them,” Clarity said.
‘‘You speak as if you are familiar with their cause.

am

naturally interested.

What

is it

they

want?”

Flinx was calibrating the needier as they talked.

wondered

if

the geologist

was

I

really curious or if

He

he was

simply rambling to keep his mind off what Flinx was
about to do to him.

“They want to close down Longtunnel,” Clarity told
him. “Shut down all research here. They’re the worst
kind of ecopurists, the type who go berserk if they think
you’re gengineering a snail to change the color of

We’re

its

of us blasphemers against the True Religion: the religion of No Change.”
shell.

all

“I see.” The thranx whistled third-degree understanding layered with a suggestion of compassion. “That

would explain why they went first for Coldstripe. They
would naturally consider you the most serious ‘offenders.’

”

I’m not flattered. How is the fighting going? We left in a rush.”
“As did I, so I cannot tell you more than you probably
already know. When they broke into our cavern, a couple
of our study-team people began shooting back. They
carry sidearms for defense against the larger carnivores.
After that it was like a tunnel collapse: all dust and chaos.
I was just coming in from concluding some fieldwork
when I heard the shooting, saw it was going badly, and
turned to flee.” A foothand bent up and back to tap the
thorax pack and its peculiar lighting bar.
“I had not gone out with a full charge, not expecting

“Somehow

.

Alan Dean Foster

198

be gone long. Only when I stopped running did I notice how weak my light had become. I tried to retrace
my steps before it died completely on me, but in my haste
I had left behind all our marked trails.
“As you know, we can see quite well in poor light,
but no one can see in the total absence of light. I tried
to find my way back by feel, but in the blackness every
to

formation feels like

and

neighbor.

its

became

I

disoriented,

lost.

“Then

I

felt

something sting

my

leg.

I

tried to pull

away and could not. More stings followed. I could not
see what was attacking me, and when I tried to pull away,
I fell and struck my head.” He glanced up at Flinx, who
was almost ready. “That’s the trouble with this place,
you see. Nothing soft here, even in the oldest tunnels.

On Hivehom we

built a civilization out of soft earth.

didn’t try to dig through rock. But

I

We

bore you with basic

thranx history that every human learns in larva school.’’
“Bring the light over here,’’ Flinx told Clarity. She

approached and held herself poised like an ancient samurai warrior about to strike. “I wish we had some anesthetic.’’

“The

general region

already

is

numb from

nerve dam-

age.’’

Flinx considered the butt end of the needier. “I could
hit

you on the back of the head with

“Thank
is

you,’’ said

Sowelmanu

already tender where

I

this.’’

dryly,

“but

struck the ground.

my

skull

One such

blow is sufficient.’’ He stiffened, the digits of the truhands interlocking tightly, then the foothands, lastly the
back legs as he readied himself as best he could. “I would
appreciate it greatly if you would not linger any longer.
It would be disagreeable to go to all this trouble only to
find out I had been infected by airborne spores in the
interim.’’

“Go, ahead and do

it,

“The female speaks

Flinx. He’s right.’’

truth.’’

Pip stirred in alarm as Flinx pulled the trigger.

Two

Flinx in Flux
quick, sharp bursts were

all

it

took.

199

What remained

of

encased in graying haustorium.
The six-centimeter-long stump steamed slightly.
It was difficult to tell how the amputation had affected
the geologist. There were no eyelids to close tightly shut,
no lips to clench in pain. But the interlocking hands and
the truleg

fell

aside,

still

feet did not relax for a long time.

Clarity

was already down on her knees inspecting the

stub, the scientist in her fighting off any discomfort. “It

looks like a clean seal.

I

don’t see any haustorium pro-

She looked up at the geologist. “You should
be safe from redevelopment.’’
Sowelmanu had to speak slowly to make himself understood. “I am grateful. I am sorry you are trapped
down here with me, but I am glad you came along. I
would not have enjoyed a graceful death.’’ He tried to
sit up then. Flinx slipped an arm under his thorax, trying
not to block any breathing spicules.
“The growth is more of a danger to you than to me.
If I had not rendered myself unconscious, I would not
have been infected, since it can only penetrate an exoskeleton at the joints or eyes, whereas you who wear your
bodies outside your skeletons would be vulnerable all
truding.’’

over.’’
“I’ll

keep that

in

mind.’’ Flinx kept his arm behind

weakened thranx. “Do you want to try
“No, but I do not want to lie here like a

the

to stand yet?’’

helpless larva,

’ ’

either.

He

pulled his foothands up under his thorax, leaving

abdomen, and pushed.
His stride was shaky as he worked on compensating for
the missing leg. Turning a small circle was a major chore.
“Disgusting to have to walk like this, with one’s head
the remaining trulegs beneath his

so near the ground. This

is

the position our ancestral

workers were forced to maintain even after we had
evolved an upright posture.’’
“Don’t complain,’’ Flinx told him. “If I lost a leg.

Alan Dean Foster

200

be almost immobile. You lose one and you still have
five to walk on.”
‘‘One still can’t but view the loss of a limb with some

I’d

regret.”

move.”
Sowelmanu peered back
‘‘Don’t

over him.

‘‘I

at Clarity,

who was bending

assume you also are not a trained physician,

madam?”
‘‘No, but

I

am

a gengineer, and

do know some basic
thin spray can on the

I

medicine.” She was using a tiny,
stump of the missing truleg.
‘‘That is for sealing and repairing human flesh. It will
not work on chiton.”
‘‘True, but it will bond around the cauterization, and
it’s

a good sterilizer.

An

extra precaution against spore

intrusion.”

‘‘There

eaten what
than a day.

is

have already
took with me, expecting to be out less

the delicate matter of food.

little I

I

’ ’

‘‘We have concentrates,” Flinx told him. Many thranx
foods were safe for humans to eat and vice versa. Taste,
however, was another matter. In his current state Sowelmanu was not likely to be overly fastidious.

Chapter Twelve

The thranx preferred soft food, but the geologist had
no difficulty downing the protein cubes that constituted
the bulk of their scavenged stock.

“I think that’s going to have to be enough.” Flinx
passed the geologist a third cube and sealed the storage
sack that had produced it. “We’re going to have to measure out our rations since we don’t have any idea how
much longer we’re going to be stuck down here.”
“I beg apologies.” Sowelmanu made a sound of second-degree sorrow. “I was starving.”
“You ended up here by a different route.” Clarity was
trying to repress the excitement she felt. “Do you think
you can find your way back? They were blowing up all
our service corridors and storage chambers and walled
us out.”
“I ranjong and hard, and too much of the time in total
darkness. But I spent a lot of time in the main warehousing chamber beneath the shuttleport. My group has
limited funds, so we had to store our bulkier equipment
down there. Unless these people plan to demolish the

201

Alan Dean Foster

202

entire outpost, that area

them

to destroy.

“Do

It

would also be a good place

you think the area
beneath

“It’s directly
trol, Security,

too large and too critical for

is

to hide.”

will stay safe?”

all

port facilities: Landing Con-

everything. If any place holds out against

be that sector. If Security can keep
control, they can send a message to the first ship that
makes orbit. So these people must move quickly no matter what their ultimate aims.”
‘‘Unless the ship they arrived in is armed as well,”
these fanatics,

it

will

Clarity pointed out glumly.

‘‘Too

many imponderables.

Let us worry about our

problems several planetary diameters out. The first thing is to find our
way back to civilization. The second is to hope a little
civilization remains to be found.”
‘‘I’m open to suggestions.” Flinx nodded to his right.
‘‘We were heading in that general direction when Pip
found you.” He displayed his multifunction chronometer. ‘‘I have a compass, and Clarity has apprised me of
this world’s magnetic alignments, so we can’t be too far
situation here underground, not potential

off line.”

‘‘Excellent.

To carry such an instrument you might

almost be prescient.”
Flinx was startled for an instant until he realized that
the geologist could have

much

no idea of

his particular abili-

unique history. Sowelmanu was simply paying him a thranx compliment.
‘‘We can follow this little creek upstream,” he murmured.
ties,

‘‘I

find

less his

no reason

legs a last time, his

to object.”

Sowelmanu

tested his

head unnervingly near the ground.

“Embarrassing.”
“Better degraded than dead,” Clarity told him encouragingly.

“Two

humans. I am fortunate indeed. One
moment.” Reaching up and around with both truhands,
intelligent

he unfastened the straps that held the double light ar-

Flinx in Flux

rangement

to his

203

upper thorax. “I have no hope of

charging these down here. Therefore,
without the additional weight.”

“What’s

I

re-

will travel better

your pack?” Flinx inquired as they started

in

up the creek. Having reslung the nearly empty needier,
he had retaken the light tube from Clarity, who was glad
to be rid of the responsibility of carrying it.
“Drilling equipment, sampler corers, field test chemical kit, sample cases— the same assortment I habitually
carry with me on field trips. I dumped my specimens
when I ran. A thorax burdened by rocks is a liability
during flight.”

“Assuming some of them

are

power

tools,

why

couldn’t you switch packs with your shoulder lights?”

“Different voltages, terminals, and no way to homog-

The geologist whistled a note of

enize them.”

negativity coupled with

common

first-degree

assurance.

“That’s too bad,” Clarity said.
“Yes, too bad.”

Sowelmanu

mind the darkness that
but that was only natural. The

did not appear to

pressed close on

all

sides,

thranx had evolved and matured

They

in

tunnels beneath Hive-

be underground,
though not in the dark. With technology had come a need
for light as they had begun to rely on their eyes to the
exclusion of other senses. It was gratifying to know that
if their remaining tube faded to a strength of a few foothorn’s

surface.

candles,

preferred

Sowelmanu would

enough by

still

to

be able to see clearly

them.
Before that happened, Flinx promised himself, they
would have found their way to the vast common storage
room beneath the port and worked their way up to join
assuming any had managed to
its stalwart defenders
hold out against the attacking fanatics and provided that
they did not encounter any more haustorium-firing fungi
or pseudo-vexfoots along the way.
Thanks to Sowelmanu ’s superb night vision, they made
better progress than ever. He was able to see much farit

to guide

—

204

Alan Dean Foster

them could.
This saved them from exploring a number of dead ends
and enabled them to follow the most promising passages
ther by the light of the tube than either of

first.

But the geologist could only see farther; he could not
divine what lay ahead. They still had to back down two
tunnels for every one that led onward.
Two days of ups and downs, and discouragement had
deeply as before.
“If we watch our intake, we have enough food for
another week,’’ Flinx informed his companions.
set in as

“Never mind food. What about the light?’’ Clarity’s
voice was a dull monotone. The climbing and hiking had
exhausted her, and she was utterly disoriented.
So was Flinx. If they could just get close enough to
the base, he would try to pick up an emotional scent. At
least it would give them a direction. But days of straining
to detect a single feeling had produced nothing. He knew
his talent was functioning because he could easily sense
Clarity’s despair and Sowelmanu’s typical thranx stoicism. Beyond that was only an emotional void and the
cool, dark emptiness of the caverns. That meant either
that his perception was operating at a low level or that
they were farther from the port than they believed. And
all it would take would be a single localized magnetic
anomaly to render his compass useless.
In trying to find the major storage area beneath the

had they descended too deeply? The geologist did
not think so but could not be certain. Flinx was not about
to argue with him. When underground it was always better to trust a thranx ’s sense of direction, even one suffering from the aftereffects of a serious injury, than that of
port,

the healthiest

human.

“I think we have circled around far enough,’’ he told
them, studying dark shadows and shapes among the formations. “Now we need to start working our way back
to the west.’’

“What makes you

think

we can

find a

way

into the

Flinx in Flux

205

warehouse area? Surely when the place was excavated,
the contractor would have sealed off any entrances large
enough for dangerous animals to slip through.”
‘‘They may have missed some.” Sowelmanu did not
dispute Flinx ’s point. ‘‘Remember that we need find only
one. If we encounter a place that has been heat sealed,
we may be able to break through, and we will at least
know that we have reached our objective.” He nodded
needier Flinx carried.
‘‘The weapon you took from our assailants will cut
through any spray-wall.”
at the

‘‘//’there’s

enough charge remaining, and provided we

defend ourselves again.” He
glanced at his wrist. “All right. We’re going this way.”
“No.” Sowelmanu uttered clicking sounds of high
negativity. “That is a dead end. We must go around it—
that way.
Flinx squinted but could see only darkness ahead. He
shrugged and followed the geologist.
don’t have to use

it

to

’ ’

“It really

is

shame,” Sowelmanu

a

said the following

day.

“What is?” Clarity asked him.
/‘As a geologist I should be living on
level of delight.

the uppermost

We have observed unique formations and

growths these past days, yet I have not felt the urge to
take a single note.”
“When this is over and done with, you can return and
observe to your heart’s content,” Flinx told him. “Personally I marvel you can think about work at all at a time
like this.”

“A good scientist,”

the thranx replied evenly in a tone

suggestive of complete assurance tinged with second-

degree insight, “is always working no matter what his
personal circumstances happen to be.”
“That’s fine and philosophical,” Clarity argued, “but
in

my

case

I—”

Her comment became
on Flinx ’s

right.

a scream. She had been walking

He threw

himself aside as the hole

Alan Dean Foster

206
opened under

her.

Sowelmanu scampered

clear

on

his

five legs.

Both of them were cautiously leaning over the edge of
the gap before the dust had settled.
“Clarity!” He was poised to retreat. The stone beneath his feet felt solid, but so had the floor that had
given way under his companion. He had felt her fear as
she had fallen. The fact that he could still feel it was
ample evidence that she was alive and conscious somewhere below.
A small winged shape joined them. Scrap was coated
with limestone dust but otherwise unhurt. Flinx thrust
the light tube into the opening.

“Clarity, can you hear

Her

reply

was

faint but audible, full

The red-hot

fusion.

us?”
of fear and con-

was absent.
be seriously damaged,” Sow-

sting of pain

“She does not appear to
elmanu observed. “See there, to your left.”
Flinx moved the tube. The pit into which Clarity had
tumbled was steeply banked and slick-sided. Water trickled from an underground passage and limed the bottom

of the tunnel. There were no stalactites or stalagmites
visible.

“A

rain drain,” the geologist declared confidently. “It

has other names, but that
is

usually called.

It

is

what

this

kind of formation

carries excess precipitation

from

That is why there are no formations within the tunnel. Fast-moving water has kept them
from growing.”
“Very interesting, but what do we do? We have all the
supplies up here.”
“We could leave her some food and come back with
help. I am sure she is within reach of water.”
“We might not be able to find this place again no
matter how carefully we mark it. Besides, she has no
light. She’s afraid of the dark, Sowel. I know that’s difficult for a thranx to understand.”
“Humans are heir to many incomprehensible phobias.

above

to

lower

levels.

207

Flinx in Flux

sympathize, but what else can we do?” His mandibles
clicked disapprovingly. “I suppose we could slide down
and join her and then attempt to find our way back to this
level together. There should be a number of passages we
can climb. But I dislike the idea.”
“So do I. You can stay here if you want to.”
Flinx tossed Pip into the air. Then he sat on the edge
of the rain drain, his legs dangling. Scrap hovered close
to his mother. The minidrags watched as Pip’s master
took a deep breath and pushed olf, carefully resting the
light tube against stomach and chest.
The descent was wild, fast, and mercifully brief, ending in a shallow pond of icy water. Nearby, a two-meterhigh waterfall tumbled into a pool that was the birthplace
of a fast-moving underground stream.
Clarity let out a shriek at his unexpected arrival, then
relaxed gratefully when she was able to identify the in-

I

truder.

“I’m sorry. I’m sorry, I’m sorry!” She rushed into his
arms, and he had to juggle the tube to keep from dropping it. She was sobbing, and her clothing had been battered by the rapid drop through the drain. He reminded
himself that she had ridden the water-slicked chute in
total darkness, not knowing when or how it would end.
The darkness had magnified her panic and her fear.
‘‘It’s all right,” he murmured, trying to relax her. ‘‘It’s
all

right.”

A

second splash made him wince as cold water
splashed him anew. They turned to see Sowelmanu rising
carefully. The geologist began preening his antennae as
soon as he realized that the water barely came up to the
underside of his abdomen.
“Are you intact, Clarity Held?”
“Yes, thank you.” She released Flinx and stepped out
of the pool, terror having given
“It’s just that I didn’t

is

embarrassment.
the bottom of the

to

lay at

had a bottom.”
no need to apologize for your fear and con-

drop, or even

“There

know what

way

if

it

Alan Dean Foster

208

My

would doubtless have been similar
had I been the one to tumble through first.”
‘‘No, they wouldn’t.” She managed a small smile.
‘‘You would have been busy studying on the way down.”

cern.

reactions

‘‘Well, perhaps just a little,”

The

geologist

whistle of midlevel laughter. ‘‘In any event

it

let
is I

out a

who

should apologize, for not noticing the weakness of the
floor which hardly covered the drain.”
‘‘It looked the same as everywhere else,” Flinx chided
him. ‘‘Clarity doesn’t need to apologize, and you don’t
need to make excuses. What we need is to find our way

back up.”

We may

emerge farther west
or north than we were originally. I do not think I need
to add that we should watch our footing more carefully
lest we encounter a succession of these drains. They often cluster together in the same areas.” He indicated the
end of the tunnel that had dumped them in the pool.
Water dripped from the travertine lip. ‘‘This drain was
short compared to some which have been measured. We
do not want to find ourselves deposited on a level from
which it will be difficult to ascend.”
They resumed their advance, this time letting Sowelmanu take the lead. Not only was he much more likely
‘‘That should be possible.

to spot a possible drain before either of them, but with
five legs

and two truhands, he stood a much better chance

of avoiding a

fall.

was he on tracking the geologist’s progress
as they began to climb back to their earlier level that
Flinx neglected to watch his own footing. They were
So

intent

leaving an especially

was

damp

cavern, and the entire floor

only with water but because it supported
a profusion of mossy growths, molds, and fungi. There

were

slick, not

sulfide eaters as well, trailing tendrils in the water.

After surviving the pseudo- vexfoot’s assault, the haustorium-firing fungus, and the rain drain that had swallowed Clarity, it was almost ironic that he should stumble

on a dry, smooth chunk of rock. He

felt his

ankle twist-

209

Flinx in Flux

compensate, went over backward, and was
rewarded with a loud crack. A rich trill of horrified realization raced through him.
Clarity scrambled over to the broken light tube and
clutched at it as though she could heal the break by sheer
ing, fought to

strength of will.

“Get some

“The

tape,

some

skin spray, anything!”

spray seal you used on

me,” Sowelmanu mur-

mured. He and Flinx tore through the supplies.
Flinx finally located the svelte cylinder and emptied
the contents on the crack in the plastic. Clarity and Sowelmanu tried to hold the tube together as liquid light
leaked out around their fingers.
The spray seal worked wonderfully on human flesh and
adequately on thranx chiton, but it simply refused to adhere to the clear plexalloy tube. Despite their frantic efforts, the chemical light continued to trickle from the

broken tube.
hole.

It

was not simply a matter of plugging a

The crack ran

half the length of the illuminator.

smooth chunk of fallen
flowstone. “It doesn’t matter, anyway,” he muttered
morosely. “Once that stuff is exposed to air, it begins to
decompose.”
Finally Flinx sat back against a

“Yes,
sit

that’s right.” Clarity

moved

across the floor to

close to him, drawing her knees up to her chest and

clasping them with both arms.
Thereafter no one said anything.

The magnitude of the
Sowelmanu joined the two hu-

was sinking in.
mans as they watched the luminescent

disaster

liquid run across

the floor, forming a small glowing river.

It

was already

beginning to fade, the chemicals debonding under contact with oxygen.
Clarity let go of her legs to lean against Flinx. “Whatever else happens, when the lights go out, don’t let go of
me. I couldn’t stand not having some kind of contact.”
He did not reply. This would be a strange place to die,
he thought. There was plenty of air, food, and water, but
no way out. Trying to find a path would result only in a

Alan Dean Foster

210

freedom. There was no way they could
negotiate a route in the darkness. They had stumbled and
fallen into a region Longtunnel’s cartographers had yet
to explore. There were no guideposts, no landmarks,
faster death, not in

nothing to indicate direction.
In any case, they

would not perish

vexfoot or carnivorous fungus.

He

fondling the needier, wondering

remained

to

do the job he had

in

touch of a
found himself coldly
at the

enough of a charge
mind for it.
if

Clarity inhaled sharply as the last of the luminescent

had been their guide and hope gave way to
utter, total darkness. It was darker, Flinx mused, than
the inside of one’s eyelids when one closed them tight in
sleep, darker than dreaming, darker than any space above
liquid that

a rotating world.

was

There was the constant gurgle of
running water all around. When the light finally went
out, photosensitives began to emerge from their hiding
places and the cavern was filled with strange whines and
clicks and mewlings as the troglodyte inhabitants called
uncertainly to each other.
“We have no other source of illumination?” SowelSilent

it

not.

manu whispered.
“None.” In the

pitch black their whispering sounded

normal conversation. He could feel Clarity pressed
tightly against him and was suddenly grateful for her
presence and warmth, even if it was motivated by fear
like

more than by

affection.

“lam

wondering, though it is too late to do so, if we
might have modified the power cell in your needier for
use in my shoulder lights.”
“I doubt it. Weapons cells are a lot different from those
in commercial batteries. If it had worked at all, it would
have been only for a short time. That’s if it hadn’t blown
the elements on contact.”

“Ah,

I

understand. Perversely, that makes

little better.

There

is

me

feel a

always the chance that our security

Flinx in Flux

211

force has driven off the invaders and that our absence has

been noted. Searchers may yet find us.”
‘‘First they’d have to determine that we’re not among
the dead,” Flinx reminded him. ‘‘Then they’d have to
surmise some of us got trapped outside the demolished
corridors, in unlighted areas.

And

then they’d have to

Too much surmising and too much time. They’ll
be busy with more pressing concerns.”
find us.

had forgotten,” the crestfallen geologist
much wanton destruction.”
‘‘I

said. ‘‘So

Flinx blinked in the darkness. His mind never rested

when he

and not always then. ‘‘What about
natural bioluminescents like the photomorphs? Could we
do something with them? Try to capture and restrain a
photomorph or something like it? Even a little infrequent
light would be better than none at all.”
‘‘I suppose we could try.” Clarity didn’t sound very
enthusiastic. ‘‘The photomorphs put out more light than
any other lifeform we’ve studied, and that’s not a great
deal, except in brief bursts. There’s also something like
a long millipede that has a blue light which runs its whole

except

slept,

length.”
‘‘Perhaps

if

we can

capture several such creatures,

we

could fasten them together and at least use them to see
the floor. Remember that I can make better use of light
than you,” Sowelmanu told her hopefully. ‘‘If you can
see several centimeters by their light, then I can probably
see twice as far with the identical output of lumens.
Enough to find a slow way upward, perhaps, and to avoid
dangerous drop-offs.”
‘‘Then let’s keep our eyes peeled,” Flinx said, grinning at his own mocking joke, ‘‘for anything moving
that’s producing any kind of light.”
As they sat motionless, listening and watching, their
eyes grew accustomed to the blackness. Otherwise they
would never have seen the faint light emitters that were
starting to appear. Unfortunately they were all sliders, an
airborne

mammal

that lived in the larger caverns.

They

Alan Dean Foster

212

were impossible to catch but did give the trapped trio
something to focus on. The quarter-meter-long fliers
soared back and forth among the stalactites drooping
from the ceiling.
Pink triangular patterns flashed beneath their wings,
identifying individuals to others of their kind.
It

was almost noisy now. More photofauna gradually

emerged.

“They

fled

from our

Clarity whispered.
ness.

lights

“Now

and voices and footsteps,”

they’re reclaiming the dark-

They were around us

all

the time, watching and

waiting.”

While she was
a stone.

It

talking,

one of the

sliders

dropped

like

flapped spasmodically across the floor, the

on its wings shining brightly. Then it rose without
moving its wings and came straight toward them.
Clarity and Sowelmanu were puzzled and confused,
but Flinx only smiled. “Pip’s been hunting. No matter
what happens to us, the minidrags won’t starve. She can’t
lights

any better than us, but she can hunt the light
sources.”
see

They could hear the two flying snakes tearing into the
body of the dead slider. Biting and swallowing was an
unfamiliar process for creatures used to downing their
food whole, but the minidrags were not true snakes. They
had small teeth capable of rudimentary chewing. Oversized food was better than no food at all.
Flinx felt better knowing that his lifelong pet would
survive him as long as there were sliders to hunt. “If
there was enough light or another emotional presence
nearby, Pip could lead us out. We’re not completely paralyzed here. Sometimes I forget she can be more than
just a companion.” Suddenly he tensed.
Clarity felt him stiffen. “What’s wrong, what’s the
matter?

’ ’

“There’s something else here. Not sliders or
things. Something a lot bigger.”

little

Flinx in Flux

213

“Vexfoot,” Clarity hissed fearfully. It would have no
trouble finding them in the dark.
“No. Something else. Not a vexfoot. Different.”
“I can’t hear a thing.”
“Nor can I,” said Sowelmanu, straining with his great

compound

eyes.

“How

do you know,

my young human

anything out there at all?”
Flinx hesitated, then gave a mental shrug. They were

friend, that there

is

probably all going to die together, anyway, so what did
it matter what they learned about him?
“Because I can feel their presence.”
“I don’t understand,” Clarity said. “There’s nothing
around to feel.”
“I don’t mean with my hands.”
“There is something you are not telling us, young

man.”
Flinx turned toward the thranx’s voice in the darkness.

“My

an Alaspinian minidrag. They’re telepathic
on the emotional level, and they occasionally bond that
way with human beings. But in my case it’s not all oneway. You see, I’m telepathic on the emotional level mypet

is

’ ’

self.

Clarity twitched, but the darkness kept her from pull-

ing away. “You’re saying you can read others emotion’

He

’

snakes?
nodded, then realized she could not see the gesture

ally, just like the flying

and replied aloud.
“So you know what I’ve been feeling ever since we’ve
been together,” she said.
“Not all the time. It’s an erratic ability, it comes and
goes without rhyme or reason, and it always works better

—

when Pip

is

close by.

amplifier or lens for

I

think she acts as

some kind of

me.”

“I have heard of the empathic telepaths of Alaspin.”
He could sense Sowelmanu brooding intently in the darkness. “I have never heard of them ‘focusing’ such a talent in another creature.”
“That’s because insofar as I know, there’s no one else

Alan Dean Foster

214
like

me,”

thought

“I told

Flinx told him tightly. “I’m sorry, Clarity.

was better to keep
you I wasn’t normal.
it

she said

“It’s all right,”

really

know what I’m

I

He hesitated.
Now you know why.”
it

in

a secret.”

a small voice.

feeling, you’ll

know

“If you

that

it’s

all

right.”

“Absolutely fascinating,” Sowelmanu murmured.
“Heretofore telepathy was considered nothing but material for superstition and fiction.”
“It’s not true telepathy,” Flinx corrected

him. “It’s

only operative on the emotional level.”

“You

read emotions.” Clarity’s tone was

flat.

“Can

you sense the presence of a vexfoot or photomorph?”
“No. I’m only stimulated by an intelligent presence.”
“Then your talent is playing you false in the darkness,” Sowelmanu told him with conviction. “There are
no intelligences on Longtunnel.”
“Well, something is out there, and it’s much more
emotionally sophisticated than a flying snake.”
“We would know.” Clarity spoke patiently. “There
are no sentients here. Intelligencewise, this is an empty
world.”
Flinx was having difficulty searching and speaking simultaneously. “What if they didn’t want you to know
they were here? You’ve admitted the outpost is a small
one, that exploration has been limited to the area around
the port.”

“You

can’t have a sentient race existing in complete

darkness.”

“I’m sure

they’ll

find

your observation interesting.

Clarity.”

“What do your

‘sentients’ look like?” the geologist

inquired skeptically.

“I’ve no idea.

I

can’t see them.

There are no mental

images, only feelings.”

“Then what

is it

you feel?”

“Curiosity. Peacefulness.

A

particular intensity of a

215

Flinx in Flux

kind I’ve never felt before. What I’m not feeling
important.”
‘‘I don’t understand,” Clarity said.

“No

is

more

anger, no hate, no animosity.”

“That’s a lot to tell from sensing a few emotions.”
“I’ve had years of practice. Emotions don’t have to be
blunt. The subtle ones can be equally revealing. There
are a lot of them around us right now.
’ ’

“Perhaps we should try moving toward them,” Sowelmanu suggested.
“No. No sudden movements or gestures. They’re curious. Let’s keep them that way.”
So they sat silently in the darkness, two humans and
one thranx. For all his companions knew, the mysterious
creatures Flinx had spoken of were standing only centimeters away.
Clarity listened for a sound: breathing, feet or claws

The complete silence
was not surprising since the ability to move silently in
this underground world would be a necessary survival
trait. Only Flinx knew they were moving, inspecting,
scraping against stone, anything.

because only he could feel the individual emotional centers shifting around him. If they conversed, it was via
emotional surges and not words.
“They’re very close now.”
Clarity let out a yelp. “Something touched me!”
“Relax. I said they’re not hostile.”
“We have only your word for that,” Sowelmanu murmured. Then he let out a soft click as he, too, was
touched.

The quick,

hesitant contact turned into caresses, care-

designed to inform. They were accompanied
by a surge of emotion too vast for Flinx to handle. Pip
was curled tightly around the back of his neck, and he
knew she was sensing the same flood of feeling. Unlike
her master, she had insufficient mental equipment with
which to interpret that powerful rush. It was enough that
she felt no hostility.
ful fingering

Alan Dean Foster

216

Finally Flinx extended a questing hand. His fingers

made

Alien digits
icate,

and warm.
responded. The touch was so light and del-

contact with something soft,

he could not

tell if it

furry,

involved fingers or tendrils

one of the creatures let him run his hand along its
arm. They were true fingers, thin and fragile as the helectites Sowelmanu had delighted in pointing out earlier
in their flight. Tactile sensitivity would also be a useful
trait in a world of permanent night.
They let him run his fingers over their faces, or where
faces ought to have been. Even vestigial eyes seemed to
be absent, though they might have been concealed beneath the thick fur. There was a smaller than expected
set of nostrils; small ears that flared from the sides of the
head; and two arms, two legs, and a tail whose tip seemed
until

as sensitive as any finger.

During the entire extended physical exploration he was
overwhelmed with feelings of awe and amazement.
The fur was short and dense and covered the entire
body except for the ears and the tip of the tail. There was
no clothing, which made sense. They were insulated and
warmed by their fur, and there could be no nudity taboos
in a world of blindness. Throughout it all they kept projecting one particular emotion with regard to themselves.
Though it was a feeling and not a sound, he ascribed a
series of syllables to

it.

Sumacrea.

A

voice neither

human nor

thranx said suddenly in the

darkness, “Sumacrea!”

“They can

talk!” Clarity said in astonishment.

“I’m not certain they can. They have a rich emotional
language. They may make sounds to call attention to
themselves or to warn of danger, but I’m not sure they
communicate other than by reading and broadcasting
feelings.”

“Then

Sowelmanu said.
“I disagree.” He tried to prod the Sumacrea next to
him into making additional noises. They responded with
they are not intelligent,”

217

Flinx in Flux

a succession of chitterings and phonetic intonations that
if

part of a language, suggested a very primitive

one

in-

deed.

This was

in contrast to their highly

evolved emotional

discourses, full of sensitivity and understanding. After
trying to

make

sense of

humanx

feelings,

it

was

like dis-

covering a long-lost cluster of friends. He understood
easily, without recourse to clarification, and he felt that
they understood him, though his feelings must have

seemed crude and coarse by comparison.
Except for their unique method of communication,
however, they were no more sentient than a tribe of apes.

How perfectly suited to their environment! he thought.
Why try to construct a word to describe something one
could not see or show to a companion when one could
instantly convey everything about it to another by ascribing an emotional resonance to

it?

One could explain
soft. What he at first

whether it was good or bad, hard or
took to be color shadings he realized soon had nothing
to do with colors but with feelings. These people, he
mused, really could feel blue. It was an entirely new
means of communication, one that cut readily across interspecies barriers in a

way

verbal description of abstract

concepts could not.
The average Sumacrea stood a little over a meter high.
All those he examined fell within that limit. Either there
were no infants in the area or they were being kept out
of touching range. A hunting or exploration party, perhaps.

“I think they’ve been aware of the humanx presence
here for some time,” he told his companions, who were
about to go crazy with pent-up curiosity. ‘‘They’ve just
been cautious. One let me feel its teeth. I’d bet they’re
vegetarians. Both humans and thranx are omnivorous, so
they might have sensed you eating meat. That would
make them understandably reluctant to initiate any kind
of contact.”
‘‘It’s still

incredible

we never

ran into any of

them.”

Alan Dean Foster

218

As she touched and was touched,

Clarity momentarily

forgot her terror of the blackness surrounding them.

The

presence of warm, friendly creatures helped keep the
childhood fear at bay.
“Not when you consider that they could feel you coming before any mere instruments could detect their presence.’’

“If they can understand our emotions, then they must
know we intend them no harm,’’ Sowelmanu said.
“Possibly.” At that moment the individual he was caressing suddenly jerked away from him. Flinx tried to
ease his mind as much as possible. After a couple of

minutes the Sumacrea returned and let the human resume
his touching. This time Flinx was more careful when he
reached the area that had produced the sharp reaction.
“They do have eyes. Very small.”
“I haven’t felt any,” Clarity said.
“They’re on the backs of their heads.” He almost
laughed. It had a salutary effect on the Sumacrea nearby,
and they moved nearer. “I don’t know if they evolved
that way or if earlier eyes migrated around the back the
way a halibut’s move to the top of its head. If they’re
only light sensors, it’s a way of detecting what’s behind
you. Nose in front, eyes behind. You can watch your
enemy while running away from him.” The thought came
quick and unbidden.

“That explains it. Anyone mapping or studying the
caverns would come equipped with the brightest light they
could carry.

He

’ ’

tried to

brightness.

It

conjure up the image of an exploding
was not really an emotional concept, but

he put the feeling across. The Sumacrea recoiled, returning only when he had shunted the sensation aside.
“Light-sensitive.

The photomorphs would

threaten

them, too. Their concept of light is akin to a tremendous
flame going off inside one’s head. There must be natural
heat sources down here somewhere, hot springs or thermal pools. They have distinct, variegated emotions to

219

Flinx in Flux

describe differing degrees of temperature. Light comes

even though to us it’s something
quite cool. If someone had come down here without light,
they would probably have made contact by now.
“How fortunate we are,” Sowelmanu muttered. “Disaster enables us to make the most important discovery in
the brief scientific history of Longtunnel. A grand revelation no one else will ever hear about.”
At the moment Flinx could not have cared less about
their future. He was utterly immersed in the wondrous,
extraordinary world he had uncovered. His impatient
companions would simply have to wait until he tired of
near the top of the

list

’ ’

exploring

it.

Chapter Thirteen

The Sumacrea had developed an infinitely more intricate emotional language than humans had ever dreamed
of,

and they were not averse

to sharing

it

with him. In

encountering one so similar to themselves among the strangers who had come from the roof
of the world was exceeded only by their desire to learn
more about him and where he had come from. Sowelmanu and Clarity were forced to sit silently, occasionally
conversing with each other, while Flinx sat motionlessly,
his eyes closed, touching the natives on a level they could
fact, their delight at

barely imagine.

From time

time he would speak and try to explain
what he was feeling, what he was learning. Words were
a poor substitute for the actuality of soul-to-soul emotional

to

communication.

At the same time, he was trying to sort out Clarity’s
feelings toward him. His confession, coupled with what
he had told her of his history, would justify a certain
animosity and even fear toward him on her part, but he
could detect none of that. Her attitude was still friendly,

220

Flinx in Flux
affectionate even, but colored

221

now by

a definite ambi-

guity that she took pains to conceal in her speech.
It

did not bother him. Nothing could bother him now,

enveloped as he was in the swirling, complex rush of
emotions generated by the Sumacrea.
It was astonishing how much could be communicated
by emotion alone if one was subtle and precise, if one
knew how to convey as well as sense. Hunger and thirst,
fear of the fanatics above, admiration for the Sumacrea
and for how they had coped with their lightless world—
he had no trouble explaining himself or understanding
their replies.

Under

their tutelage his ability

was

rapidly refined, his

honed. They knew Pip for a friend as well as they
did his master, and Scrap also, but they were sorrowed
and puzzled by the blindness that afflicted his other companions. He tried to explain that he could understand
them clearly but that while they could crudely convey
their own emotions, they could not sense those of others
at all. They were shocked when he told them that of all
his kind, he was the only one he knew who could communicate readily with them via feelings and emotions.
He decided that blindness was a relative term, the lack
of sight a matter of history. Vision was a broad term
encompassing all manner of perception. In the case of
sight by light, it could be enhanced or brought to life by
any number of medical techniques. Transplants, inserts,
miniature video cameras connected directly to the optic
nerves— all were feasible if one had access to enough
talent

money.
But despite the Commonwealth’s technical skills, he
knew of no method for improving the emotional sensitivity of man or thranx, no way to make audible the deeply
felt and stirring dialogue of the Sumacrea.
“You’re sure,’’ Clarity asked him the following day,
“that you’re not just exchanging feelings with these people? That you’re actually communicating with them?
Without words?’’

Alan Dean Foster

222

“I’m

sure,

and

it’s

becoming

easier. You just

have to

your emotions the way you
would sentences. Like ancient Chinese writing, you exchange entire concepts at once instead of using words to
form sentences. For example, instead of saying, ‘I want
to go to the other side of the cavern,’ you have to express
your longing to be in a certain place. If you do that to
the exclusion of all else, I guarantee one of the Sumacrea
will come over and take you by the hand. It won’t do for
science or mathematics, but it serves better than you think
for putting across simple ideas.’’
“Since you are becoming so skilled at this unique
method of communication ...” Sowelmanu began.
“I didn’t say I was getting skilled. Just meandering
along.”
“Isn’t it about time you tried to project our intense
desire to return to the vicinity of the outpost? By a roundabout route, should they be familiar with one.”
“If it exists. I’d bet the Sumacrea know of it. We have
time. Shouldn’t we wait a while longer? Our food is holding out well, and if they do show us the way, it shouldn’t
take long to climb back to the level we left.”
The geologist’s mandibles made a sound indicative of
mild derision mixed with second-degree impatience.
“While I confess I am becoming used to this darkness,
that does not mean I am growing fond of it.”
learn

how

“The

to manipulate

longer

we

stay, the better

attuned

I

become

to

Sumacrea ’s method of communication.”
“Are you sure that’s the real reason you aren’t in a
hurry to leave?” Clarity was sitting close to him in the
darkness. He knew she was near because during the past
few lightless days, their respective senses of smell and
hearing had grown acute. “It’s obvious you share something unique with these people. Something which Sowel
and myself cannot share with you. As far as this kind of
communication is concerned, he and I are effectively
blind, as you’ve put it. It’s no fun being blind in the land

the

of the locally sighted, Flinx.

Flinx in Flux

223

“Maybe you aren’t in a rush to get back to the port.
Maybe this kind of emotional intercourse is all you want
right now. But Sowel and I need light and speech. And
of us need to find out what’s happening.’’
“Just a little while longer. That’s all I’m asking for.”
Flinx was not aware of the intensity of his plea, though
of course the Sumacrea were. “You don’t understand.

all

I’m completely comfortable here. These are the first people I’ve ever encountered that I could be totally myself
with. I don’t have to watch what I say or how I react.
I’m not constantly on guard. I can’t hide anything from
them, and I don’t want to, nor can they hide how they
feel from me. That’s the truth. I can tell.”
“You can,” she replied, “but Sowel and I can’t. Flinx,
we have to make our way back to port. We need to find
out if the rest of the installation has managed to hold out
against the fanatics or if we can help in some way. That
should be our first priority. If everything’s settled down
and they’ve left or been driven off, then you can scramble
back down here and
She hunted briefly for the
right word. “.
meditate all you want.
“The discovery of native sentients will naturally
change the way exploration and research are carried out
on Longtunnel. But it won’t stop. Our work will continue
and will enable us to help the Sumacrea. They must suffer dreadfully from the depredations of creatures like the
vexfoot and the dart shooters.” A different note crept
into her voice as she argued with him.
“Flinx, Sowelmanu and I are going a little crazy down
here while you sit like a statue swapping emotions with
your native friends. If my feelings mean anything to you,
and I know you can sense them, then please, please help
us find the way back to the port, where we can do some
good. We have a responsibility to our friends and coworkers.”
“I don’t,” he told her simply.
The mass emotions of the Sumacrea washed over him
like a warm wave, highly refined, precise, as complex as
.

.

.

.

Alan Dean Foster

224

any spoken language: feelings of love, of mild hunger or
thirst, of family bonding and affection. Curiosity and
confusion, amusement and sadness, admiration and disappointment needed no explanation or elaboration to be
understood. He could listen to them simultaneously or
tune out the background and concentrate on a single individual who would respond in kind. There was no hesitation or artifice, no lying when it could instantly be
detected.

No

theft

when

a thief’s guilt would

as brilliantly as a signpost in the darkness.

mark him

No envy

of

appearance when there was nothing to see. In the world
of the Sumacrea, no one looked good. All that mattered
was how one felt.
Odd that a blind society should be more peaceful and
content than a sighted one. The Sumacrea were calm and
relaxed among themselves. There was much to learn from
studying them, from living among them, and of all humanxkind, only he was properly equipped to do so. A
number of ancient human philosophers had imagined societies whose members existed in perfect harmony with
the natural world, but as far as Flinx could remember,
not one of them had postulated blindness as a precondition for the success of such a social organization. And of
course none of them had ever envisioned anything like
empathic telepathy.
If not for Clarity and Sowelmanu, he would have remained without hesitation, working and studying in the
darkness, exchanging ideas and whole concepts without
ever uttering a word. He would have Pip for additional
companionship. But his friends would go mad here, unable to share in the Sumacrean discourse, wondering what
was happening to their associates and colleagues back at
the outpost. His own revelations and conversation would
not substitute for that.

Dammit! he thought to himself. The one resolution he
had vowed to keep— not to involve himself in the affairs
of others and to keep aloof— was the one resolution he
was constantly breaking. By saving Clarity, he had in-

225

Flinx in Flux

volved himself

her

in

life.

By helping Sowelmanu, he had

done the same with the thranx. He now had

a responsi-

both of them. No matter how hard he tried, no
matter how diligently he worked at it, he always seemed
to find himself tied to the destinies of people he had
bility to

never met before.

Perhaps the port’s defenders had managed to subdue
the unmilitary fanatics. Or possibly they had reached a
truce allowing them to depart. Clarity was right. It might
be perfectly safe to return to the outpost complex. If not,
they could conceal themselves in the main warehouse, as
they had originally intended. And if the attackers still
held sway, the Sumacrea would be here to welcome them
back. In that event, he told himself, neither Sowelmanu
nor Clarity would argue with a decision to return.
Right now his companions’ desire to have light again,
to speak to other humans and thranx, far outweighed their
fear of being captured. Clarity had reason enough to stay
clear of the fanatics, but
turn, then he

owed

it

if

she was so desperate to re-

to her to at least find out

what was

happening. She had held up remarkably well since their
last light tube had been lost, but he could sense the constant edginess and terror in her. She was uncomfortable
at best.

Unable

to perceive as

benefit or reassurance

he could, she drew no

from the Sumacrea ’s presence. To

her they were not a soothing repository of friendship.

They were only whistling, grunting, unseen shapes.

Dammit

again.

I

can’t even bury myself literally.

He

sucked cool air. “I’ll talk to them about leading us back.
No, that’s not right. I guess you could say I’ll feel them
out on the subject. I’ll try to explain what’s happening at
the outpost, what our position is in the situation, and why
we have to go back.
“They’re not ignorant of the surface, by the way. They
have legends that speak of it, tales of brave individuals
who reached the great fiery cave that lies above the real
world. They wore masks to shield them from the light,

Alan Dean Foster

226

dim

as

it is

after

it’s

been

filtered

through that perpetual

cloud cover.”

A
his
his

hand fumbled at his shoulder. Fingers trailed down
arm until Clarity had hers locked in his. Her relief at
decision was apparent in her voice as well as her

emotions.

“Thank
longer.

“You

I

you, Flinx.

I

really couldn’t take this

tried so hard not to say anything.”

much

~

didn’t have to say anything,” he told her,

and

having reminded her of
her lack of emotional privacy. “I’ll converse with them
right now, tell them what we want to do. What we have

was immediately embarrassed

at

do.”
There were no Sumacrea close by, but it was easy
enough to call some. All he had to do was project a
desire for company, for companionship, and add his own
emotional signature. Clarity and Sowelmanu had them as
well, though they could use them only involuntarily and
to

without conscious control.

A moment

of the
natives could be heard shuffling toward them in the darklater several

ness.

companions turning toward the new arrivals
and smiled to himself. They might not have his abilities,
but smell and hearing compensated somewhat. They were
not as blind and helpless as they thought.
“Keep in mind,” he reminded his friends, “that first
of all they may not consent to help guide us, and second,
there may not be a way open to the outpost.” There were

He

felt his

plenty of additional reasons for pessimism, but he kept

them

to himself.

Clarity’s feelings of

hope were too

him to want to dampen them with reality.
Emotion traveled well in the caverns. He wondered if
a Sumacrea would be as overwhelmed and disturbed as
he was whenever his Talent was functioning at full castrong for

pacity in a major city, surrounded by thousands of feeling,

emoting people. Here

it

was easy

to

identify

individuals, to project precisely.

Strange to be having an in-depth emotional exchange

227

Flinx in Flux

with people you had never set eyes on and might never
actually see.

the ones with

He had

learned to think of them,

at least

whom

he conversed on a frequent basis,
by name. The names were suggested by their emotional
signatures. There was Weeper, who oddly enough was
the least emotional of the tribe, and his friend Heavy,
and Thoughtful-grave. They absorbed the feelings he
projected toward them and pondered.
As expected, the exchange did not proceed smoothly.
The Sumacrea were convinced that if they went too close
to the Outer Cave, they would not be able to find their
way back. It was a region devoid of all feeling, and it
frightened them. Flinx argued with them patiently, Pip
sitting supine on his shoulders, knowing that his emotions were going out pure and clean and unmistakable. It
calmed them, and they agreed to help.
Thoughtful-grave and Heavy knew the way up to the
Outer Cave, from which they had lately detected strange
emotions and sensations, feelings they now understood
after having encountered Flinx and his friends. Clearly
there were more like them above, thinking, intelligent
creatures in spite of their blindness.
There was nothing to pack. Food they would find along
the way. The route they would take was not far but complex.

When

the time

came

to leave, there

was much touching

and exchange of strong emotions. For the

time the
Sumacrea revealed the depth of their trust by bringing
forth their offspring, small, furry things

first

on short legs

that

whistled and hooted frequently as they carefully caressed
the huge bodies of the visitors from the Outer Cave.

When

the last farewell had been emoted,

Heavy

as-

sumed the front position, with Thoughtful-grave in the
rear. They would progress by touch, Heavy feeling for
the right way with Sowelmanu behind, then Clarity and
Flinx.

Scrap fluttered nervously against Clarity’s sidetail, reflecting her fear as they left behind the now familiar sec-

Alan Dean Foster

228

Sumacrean cavern. Flinx sensed it also and
let his hand slip frequently from her shoulder to her hip.
It confused her emotions and thus helped submerge her
fear in other thoughts and feelings. She could not turn to
slap away his hand since she could not see him and would
lose contact with Sowelmanu, so she had to content herself with comments. It took her mind off their difficult
tion of the

situation.

“I hope these people can feel their way as efficiently
as they can their emotions,” Sowelmanu said conversationally. ‘‘I would dislike stepping in another of the rain
drains which swallowed us all, or into a less friendly
hole.”
“This is their world, Sowel,” Flinx reminded the geologist. “They know where they are and where they’re
going. We couldn’t lose ourselves if we wanted to. They’d
simply trace our emotional projections through the darkness.”
“We’re ascending.” There was a hopeful note in Clarity’s voice for the first time in days. “They really do

know

the

“We

way.”

are not there yet,

young woman.”

It

was thranx

nature to be cautious. “Restrain your enthusiasm.”

“The less noise we make, the better.”
own voice to a whisper. “There might be

Flinx kept his
other ears

tening that are as sensitive as the Sumacrea’s but
intentions toward us are less benign.”
Clarity lowered her voice but

was unable

lis-

whose

to repress

her excitement. The higher they climbed, the nearer they
were to light and to being able to see once again.
Mindful of Sowelmanu ’s description of the main ware-

housing location, Flinx tried to explain to their guides
that it was necessary to enter the world of the Outer Cave
dwellers at a specific place. When he was through, he
could not be certain he had gotten the concept across. It
was one thing to express how one felt about something,
quite another to try to communicate specifics. A location, after all,

is

not a feeling.

One could

feel better

Flinx in Flux

229

about being somewhere or unhappy about being someplace else, but to project a feeling of one particular spot
was difficult no matter how sophisticated the emotional
language.
After climbing steadily for some time, the path they
were following finally leveled off. They kept on until the
injured Sowelmanu complained of exhaustion. Five legs
or not, he was still not comfortable with his awkward
gait.

They rested for several hours, then resumed climbing.
Eventually it was the turn of Heavy to call a halt. Sowelmanu and Clarity, unable to detect his intentions, piled
up against him and each other.

“What now?’- she asked Flinx.
He was straining to feel clearly. “Warning. Uncertainty.

Confusion and pain.’’

“You mean
“No.

he’s hurt himself?’’

an emotional pain. Something nearby is upsetting him. You and Sowel stay put. I’m going up to see

what

it

It’s

is.”

Feeling his

way

past his companions, he advanced by

placing one foot carefully in front of the other. If they

any immediate danger, Heavy would have warned
him to stay back. That did not mean there could not be
a sheer thousand-meter drop immediately to his left or
right. Sometimes the absence of light could be a blessing
instead of a curse. The danger one could not see did not

were

in

exist.

He touched Heavy, who
tiously felt his

way forward

stepped aside. Flinx cauuntil his right foot

bumped

something soft. He halted immediately.
Using his feet, he felt his way around the body until
he had circled it completely. At first he thought it was
one very large form. Closer tactile inspection revealed
the truth: There were two.
“What is it?” Clarity inquired from the darkness behind him. Though she was standing less than two meters
away, she had no idea what was happening.

Alan Dean Foster

230

“Humans. Both of them dead. They’ve been cold
a while.

“The

for

Both male, both armed.”

Or port Security personnel?”
know.” He bent and continued to

fanatics?

use his
“I don’t
hands in the absence of vision. “I think one’s wearing a
headlight. The other has some kind of lens arrangement
strapped across his chest. It might be a light, too.”
“Well, try them, see if they work!”
“What do you think I’m doing?” he replied irritably.
Moments later he straightened. “No luck. Both unre-

sponsive.”
“If they perished here,” Sowelmanu said thoughtfully, “they may have done so with their lights on. Perhaps they carried spare cells. I will help you look.”
“Me, too.” Clarity bumped into Sowelmanu, who
muttered a typically gentle thranx curse. Thereafter they
forced themselves to work slowly through the pockets of

two corpses.
“I’ve found something

the

—

I

think.” Clarity passed the

small cylinder across to Flinx.

“Might

Might be an old dead cell, too.”
“Just now I prefer optimism to realism, my friend.”
Sowelmanu ’s tone was thick with first -degree anticipation. “Try it.”
be.

“I’ll see if

I

can

fit

it

in the chest unit. It

should be

And don’t rush me. Be a fine irony if
somebody makes me drop it and it rolls into a crevice.”

easier to open.

took nearly an hour to accomplish the switch, a task
that in normal light would have required a few seconds.
He wanted to be sure of position and contact. Only when
he was positive that it was securely in place did he take
the additional time to unstrap the chest unit from the
It

faceless body.

“What

are you waiting for?” Clarity

prompted him.

“Try the contact.”
“I can’t just yet. One more thing I have to do.”
Concentrating the way he had been instructed to, he
imagined a tremendous burst of heat. It produced an im-

Flinx in Flux

231

many

times the brightness of a photomorph. Excessive, but better not to take any chances. Something as

age

intense as a high-powered incandescent

beam might do

permanent damage to the feeble light-sensing organs of
the Sumacrea. Heavy and Thoughtful-grave understood
and made sure they were facing him, their eyes pointed
away and well shielded beneath protective fur.
So concerned was he with protecting their guides that
he neglected to warn his companions. He also forgot to
prepare himself. The result was that all three of them let
out varying screeches of discomfort

when

the light

came

They had spent so many days in total darkness that
the refulgent beam stung them as severely as it might
have the Sumacrea. Pip and Scrap were similarly afon.

fected.

Heavy and Thoughtful-grave

retreated behind a drape

of opaque flowstone, bending their hands up and back to

cover their eyes. Enough light still managed to penetrate
hands, hair, and stone to cause them pain. Flinx felt the
emotional cries as deeply as any scream and quickly shut
off the

beam.

“Why

did you do that?” Clarity asked loudly.

you turn

it

back out? What

.”
What if
“Calm down.
.

if

it

doesn’t

“Why’d

come back on?

.

There’s nothing wrong with the unit.

It

needed the new cell. The light was hurting our
friends. It hurts them even when they hide from it. We
still need them to lead us to the back side of the warehouse. Just because we can light our way doesn’t mean
we’re any closer to finding the right route. When we had
the two tubes before, we just went around in circles.”
“We have to have some light.” Clarity was adamant.
“I’m not stumbling around in pitch darkness when we
have a perfectly good high-L beam.”
“A suggestion.” They both turned in the blackness to
face Sowelmanu. “Utilize the clothing of these unfortunate humans to muffle and dim the light to a degree the
Sumacrea find tolerable. They have observed sliders and

just

Alan Dean Foster

232

photomorphs and their cousins, so they can stand certain minimal illumination. We do not need light to follow
them, but it would, as Clarity implies, be refreshing to
be able to see where we are placing our own feet.”
Flinx considered. “Not a bad idea. I’ll try to explain
it to Heavy and Thoughtful-grave. Then we’ll give it a
try.”

was while removing the shirt from the first body that
he thought he felt something moving slightly beneath the
underlying layer of flexible body armor. The special plastic would stop a needier blast but not a laser. Evidently
it had failed to stop something less advanced but more
sinister. It reminded him of something
“Back!” he shouted as he rose hastily. ‘‘Everybody
back!”
‘‘What’s wrong?” He could hear Clarity and SowelIt

.

manu

.

.

retreat with gratifying speed.

something moving.” Pip was coiled tightly
around his neck, and he had to physically loosen her coils
so that he could speak clearly. ‘‘Under the shirt. Under
the armor. It felt familiar.”
‘‘I do not understand,” the worried geologist said.
‘‘Give me a minute to think.”
Once more he warned Heavy and Thoughtful-grave to
take cover. This time they would do a more thorough job
of it since they had some idea of what to expect. Only
when he was certain of their safety and of his companions’ preparedness did he switch the high-lumen beam
back on.
‘‘I

felt

Gradually, painfully, their eyes grew accustomed to

what was

really a very

low

level of illumination but

that to their light-starved optic

dozen suns
finally see

all

one

nerves seemed like a

blazing simultaneously.

When

without crying, Flinx shone the

they could

beam on

the

dead man.
His uniform indicated that he was a member of port
Security. The other body wore an ill-fitting chameleon
first

233

Flinx in Flux

None of

had meant anything to the organism
that had killed them.
Both bodies showed signs of hand-to-hand combat. In
battling one another they had fallen too near— something.
Thin but unbreakable loops of fungal matter were locked
tightly around the first man’s arms and the other man’s
neck. The second man had been lucky: He had perished
suit.

this

of suffocation.

What

moving slightly beneath the first
man’s body armor were bunched strands of haustorium.
Clarity moved up beside him to study the half-eaten
corpses. With the light it was easy to trace the hyphae
network to a nearby crevice. It was ten meters long, and
half of it was full of glistening fungus.
Flinx had

felt

because it already has all the food it
needs for a while.’’ She spoke with the enforced calm of
a lab technician readying a new tray of samples for in“It’s ignoring us

spection.

“I recognize the haustorium,’’ Flinx muttered, “but
where did those damn loops come from?’’ He could not
take his eyes from the bloated face of the second victim.

The man’s hands were
trying to tear

“From
drils,

I

it

still

locked around one loop as

if

free.

same place as the rest of those filthy tenwould venture to say.’’ Sowelmanu looked to
the

Clarity for confirmation.

“ Dactyella and Arthobotrys, only on a larger scale. A
mycologist could tell us more. They lasso their food.
This looks like a giant relative.’’
“We should bum them or something,’’ Flinx said disgustedly.

She shrugged. For a change, she was more

at

home

with the local flora than he, able to distance herself from
its

effects.

“In a few days

even bones.

there’ll

be nothing

left.

Not

’’

Flinx stared at the two bodies a

remuffled the light.

When

it

moment

longer, then

was almost too dark

to see

Alan Dean Foster

234

Heavy and Thoughtful-grave emerged from

one’s feet,

their hiding place. Their

As were

Flinx’s

emotions were

still

unsettled.

own.

everyone trod more cautiously than before
as they resumed their march. The security man and the
fanatic had engaged in a long-running battle through
Longtunnel’s upper reaches, because it took another day
for the refugees to draw near enough to the port to enable
Flinx to detect the first glimmerings of human emotion.
Without Pip he would not have been able to sense anything, but when she was near and his Talent was operaIf possible,

tive, his

range was considerable. Painful in a city street,

useful here.

His ability to control and manipulate his Talent was
increasing. Some of that he attributed to instruction from
the Sumacrea, but his skill had been rising before that
encounter had taken place. Maybe it had something to
do with him maturing physically as well as mentally.
“We’re getting close,” he informed his friends.
“I don’t hear any fighting,” Clarity said as she strained
for the slightest sound. “No shouts, no guns going off.”
“We’re not near enough to overhear verbal shouts, but
weapons discharging ought to be audible.”
“Either there is a lull in the fighting in this vicinity,”

Sowelmanu commented, “or we may presume

that

one

Clarity suddenly sprinted ahead, heedless of rocks

and

side has prevailed

and taken control.”

growths underfoot. “Light! I can see light!”
Flinx and Sowelmanu followed at a more controlled
pace until an emotional burst brought him to a halt.
“Heavy and Thoughtful-grave can go no farther. We must
make our farewells here. But I will have them wait a
while.”
“What for?” the geologist asked him.
“In the event the fanatics have won. We may want to
retreat this way again.”
Sowelmanu nodded, a human gesture acquired by the

Flinx in Flux

235

thranx soon after Amalgamation. Together they turned to
follow Clarity.

The

through a narrow slit in the wall on
Clarity was already peering through.
don’t come back soon, the Sumacrea will know

light burst

their left.

“If we

to return to their

home

below,’’ Flinx told the geologist.

“I want to come back here someday. There wasn’t nearly
enough time to converse, to learn. I may be the only apt
human pupil, human companion they’ll ever know. It’s
hard to explain, but I feel at home among them. Like
being with family.’’

“Have you been dwelling long

in

darkness,

my young

friend?’’

Flinx looked startled, then realized the thranx was just

employing a comfortable figure of speech. All the bugs
fancied themselves philosophers.

They

redistributed what

remained of their supplies. Clarity held the chest light they had salvaged while
Flinx hefted the weakly charged needier. Even on low
setting it was still capable of incapacitating two or three
opponents before it died completely.
little

As he turned sideways to face the cleft, Flinx felt
Heavy and Thoughtful-grave. Though he could no longer
see them, the regret and sorrow they were feeling at his

passing was as lucid as any verbal deposition.

It

was

mixed with the sensation of leaving behind a part of himself. They understood him, shared his difficulties and
troubles as easily as his friendship, and all without a
word having to be spoken.

A

different sort of illumination lay ahead.

and edged through the limestone

He

inhaled

slit.

Beyond lay a vast cavern roofed with low-intensity light
tubes. They shone dully on neat rows and shelves of
brightly hued plastic crates and cylinders. It was the main
warehouse beneath the port facilities that Sowelmanu had
described to them earlier.
“Still no signs of fighting,’’ the thranx whispered
hopefully. “Perhaps Security has at least retained control

Alan Dean Foster

236

of this portion of the installation.

most heavily defended and the

It

would be among the

last to surrender.

’ ’

“I don’t see any guards.” Clarity followed Flinx
through the crack in the limestone wall.
Nothing moved in the spacious chamber, not even
shipping and sorting robots. Except for the heavy whisper of air pushed along by ventilator fans and pumps,

was no noise save what little they made themselves.
“They would be mounting a successful defense somewhere above,” Sowelmanu speculated. “If they had been
driven back this far, the battle would be as good as lost.
there

we can ascend

confidence.”
“I’d rather ascend in caution,” Flinx muttered as he
studied the deserted stairway that flanked the service el-

I

believe

in

evators.

They kept

shadows of the largest crates, huge
containers full of drilling and excavating equipment. Each
package was color coded as to eventual destination. A
few were clad in the crimson of the United Church or the
aquamarine of the Commonwealth.
Sowelmanu led the way. Though Clarity had been on
Longtunnel longer than the thranx, she had never had
occasion to visit the main warehousing facility. Everything was unwrapped, acknowledged, accounted for, and
to the

delivered by the time

reached her lab.
The armed man whirled but lowered his rifle as soon
as he recognized Sowelmanu. “You’re with the Hivehom
geofoods team, aren’t you?”

“Tam

it

indeed. Are the authorities

still

in control of

this portion of the installation?”

The guard relaxed and slung his weapon over his
shoulder. “Sorry about this. Thought you might’ve been
some of those veginodes left behind. We’re in control of
a lot more than just this portion,” he declaimed with
grim

satisfaction.

“You said ‘left behind’?” Flinx was
him. “What happened? We’ve been in
touch.”

trying to see past

hiding and out of

237

Flinx in Flux

“Then I’ll start from the start, right? The slip-suited
bastards came at us out of the walls, like rats. They made
a lot of noise and set off a lot of demo charges before we
could organize and regroup, but they were lousy shots.
Unprofessional, you know?

“As soon

was under fullscale attack. Lieutenant Kikoisa pulled a bunch of us
together and organized a counterattack. They must’ve had
a shuttle some idiot actually managed to set down beyond
the strip. As soon as we plowed back into ’em, they
broke and took off for it. That’s the rumor, anyways.
Haven’t seen any of ’em for a couple of days.’’

“Then

as he realized the outpost

everything’s

all

right?’’ Clarity asked.

“You

drove them away?”
“Not all of ’em. There’s plenty scattered around the
corridors they didn’t cave in. But they’re a problem for
the burial squad, not me. Who the hell do you suppose
they

were?”

know,” Clarity said.
“No shit?” The sentry’s eyes widened. “Hell, you

“I think

I

better get yourself to the lieutenant or

somebody, be-

cause everybody’s been asking themselves that ever since
they came at us. They didn’t leave any wounded behind,
and the dead don’t have any identification on ’em. Not
even labels on the chameleon suits they were wearing.
.”
Kikoisa ’s definitely gonna want to talk to you, Ms.
“Clarity Held. I’m with Coldstripe.”
The guard made a face and looked elsewhere. “Coldstripe, huh? That’s tough. They really powdered your
.

.

whole setup. Got there first and did it down right. Nobody’s gonna be doing any work over there for a long
time, and I’m afraid some of your buddies ain’t gonna
ever be doing it again, either.
“We all thought they’d go for Communications and the
hangar first, but they didn’t. They hit Coldstripe, then
started in on your neighbors. Damnedest thing. Like they
didn’t care about anything except morbidizing the labs.”

He looked up

at

Sowelmanu.

238

Alan Dean Foster

“Yours, too, though I think I heard that your friends
got out in time.”
“Blessings upon the Hive.”
“Some of the labs are just rooms full of rock. You’d
never know to look at ’em that there was ever anything
in there.”

Clarity’s throat

was

tight.

“Where— where do

I

go

to

find out about survivors?”

“I dunno. I’m just walking sentry here. Try the dispensary staff. I’ll bet they’re set up for inquiries by now.
Everything’s been a lot more organized since we shot the
last of the bastards.”
Flinx put a comforting arm around Clarity’s shoulders,
forcing Scrap to squirm out of the way. “Maybe the loss
of life doesn’t match up with the physical destruction. If
they had mass murder on their minds, they wouldn’t have
taken so much time and care with the demolition
charges.”
“You hope,” she muttered.
“We all hope,” he told her. “Let’s go and see.”

Chapter Fourteen

Her depression did not lift until they found Amee Vandervort lying in bed in a private alcove, curtained off
from the rest of the wounded. The head of Coldstripe
had one arm encased in spray-plastic and locked at her
side. Her face was bruised and battered, but she sat up
promptly when the three of them entered.
Sowelmanu paused outside. “Now I must find out if
my good fortune equals your own.” He extended both
antennae, and they touched fingers to feathery tips in the
thranx manner of parting. “Perhaps we shall see each
other again. This is a small place. In that event I would

be honored to buy you both the best human meal remaining on Longtunnel.”
“Only if you let me pay for the drinks,” Flinx told
him.
/
They watched as their injured companion of many
lightless days hobbled off toward the thranx wing of the
dispensary, an enclosed compartment of higher humidity
and temperature. Only after he was out of earshot did it
occur to Flinx that he had gone to check on his corn-

239

Alan Dean Foster

240

rades’ welfare before seeking medical attention for his

amputation. That was the thranx for you. Quiet, unassuming to a fault, desperately polite, and always con-

cerned about the fate of others.

It

was

partly

their

and partly the lingering hive mentality,
where everyone looked out for everyone else.
Alynasmolia Vandervort extended her one functional
hand. “Clarity, dear!” She embraced the younger
woman, then turned her probing gaze on Flinx. “I see
you still have your charming and precocious young man
with you. When you were not brought in with the other
wounded, you were listed among the missing. That was
days ago. We’d all long since resigned ourselves. This is
the second time you’ve surprised us. Iam so pleased, so
very pleased you are alive and well. How did you escape
personalities

the fighting?”

“We
“Down

went out another way,” Clarity said tersely.
instead of up. And we found,” she added after

a quick glance in Flinx ’s direction,

“some

interesting

things.”

Vandervort’s eyebrows rose.

“You were running

for

’ ’

your lives and you made time for research?
“I’m not sure that we weren’t the ones being researched. Our assumptions about Longtunnel are going
to have to be revised, along with everything else. There’s
a sentient race living here. In the lower caverns.”
“I’d say that was impossible. But I said that about your
Verdidion Weave until I saw it with my own eyes.”
“You’ll see these, too, if we can find a way to look at
each other that won’t harm them. They’re as phototonic
as you’d expect. I don’t know about their sensitivity to
infrared. They call themselves Sumacrea. I’ll prepare a
formal report later. Probably several reports. The important thing is for you to rest and get better.
“Heavens, girl, I’d be out of here now if it wasn’t for
the damn doctors.”
“What happened at Coldstripe?”
’ ’

They

listened intently as the older

woman told the

story

Flinx in Flux

241

of the battle for Longtunnel. How some of them heard
or saw the attackers coming and managed to flee in time.

How

the crazed assailants ignored retreating people in

favor of destroying labs and records and demolishing

rooms and connecting

corridors.

Several of their colleagues had

than

common

shown more bravery

sense by trying to intervene and stop the

Most survived. Others perished accidentally when they were
destruction. For their trouble they were shot.

caught in the collapse of ceilings and walls obliterated
by the invaders. They might never know exactly who lay
buried beneath the tons and tons of limestone.
Eventually port Security had collected its men, arms,
and wits and struck back. None of the invaders had been
seen alive for several days. It was assumed they had all
been killed or had fled by a hitherto unsuspected exit to
other caverns or to the surface. The fight had ended as
abruptly and mysteriously as it had begun.

“I’m

pretty sure

I

know who

they were,” Clarity said.

“The same bunch that abducted you? Yes, my dear,
we know now. They inquired among their temporary
captives about certain personnel. Fortunate you had gone

ground elsewhere. Equally lucky, Jase had escaped to
a secured sector early on in the battle. Maxim was not
so fortunate. According to witnesses they brought him in
wounded, made a rambling, barely coherent speech about
meting out justice to the most serious offenders, and shot
him on the spot. None of our other people thought they
were going to get out of this alive. But when they fled,
they simply left everyone they’d rounded up behind. They
asked for me, too, you see. They were only interested in
making object lessons, of key personnel. In some ways
we were very lucky.”
“They want to shut us down. Like I told you. But I
to

never thought ...”
“Nobody ever thought, my dear. We don’t build
projectiles here. Coldstripe isn’t involved with
SC A

AM

munitions. There are no war industries on Longtunnel.

Alan Dean Foster

242

Who

would have expected a military-style assault? Fa-

A

unknown group,
well organized if not militarily efficient. For which we
can all be eternally grateful. The first supply ship that
natics, the lot of

them.

previously

goes into orbit will carry news of their outrage to the rest
of the Commonwealth. The peaceforcers will round them
up in short order, hopefully before they can wreak this
kind of damage on some other unsuspecting, innocent
colony.

“If as you said their aim was to stop our work here,
then in that they certainly succeeded. It’s going to take a
very long time to reconstruct even a shadow of what we
had here. But they didn’t think things through. True, they
destroyed all our equipment, all our specimens, but as a
matter of routine we put all our records out in duplicate.
We should be able to access most of what they think they
obliterated. As for a facility, we will simply develop a
new, untouched cavern. It’s not as if they destroyed a
structure. It’s simply a matter of ordering in new instrumentation and setting up in a new location. We’ll be back
in business sooner than they believe possible, though I
don’t mean to demean the severity of our loss. Reconstruction will be limited by our existing capitalization
until we can go outside for new funds.’’ She turned her
attention back to Flinx.
“The fact that there is a sentient race living here will
change many things. I believe our research will be allowed to continue. The interest of the Church and sector
government will be piqued. We may be able to tap into

Commonwealth development funds.’’
“I know I’m being premature, but you

don’t have any

ideas about doing gengineering on the Sumacrea,

do

you?’’

Vandervort frowned

him, obviously puzzled by such
a question. “Why would we want to do anything like
that? They’re people, if your observations of them are
accurate. They’re not fungi. If we were to even attempt
something like what you infer, anyone involved would be
at

243

Flinx in Flux

an instant candidate for mindwipe. You don’t turn intelligent beings into products. Usually the simpler the animal, the greater its potential for gengineering. Complex

make poor subjects.”
hear it. Now, if you’ll both excuse me,

creatures generally

‘‘Glad to

know you have

and

I

have to get Pip
something to eat.” He extended his arm toward Clarity,
and Scrap fluttered across to join him. “They’ve been
surviving on concentrates and what they were able to
a lot to talk about,

I

catch below. Their diet requires certain minerals. I’d pre-

of dietary problems before they occur.
pale Pip is?”

fer to take care

See how

The flying snake looked the same
was she to argue with its master?

“The

to Clarity, but

who

port commissary wasn’t touched. I’m sure they’ll

be able to accommodate the needs of your pets.”
Both women watched Flinx depart. It was Vandervort
who spoke first.
“What an extraordinary young man. A pity he has no
interest in biomechanics. I think he’d train well for any
field.”

“That’s just the beginning,” Clarity told her. “You’ve
heard about the emotional bond that can form between
humans and Alaspinian flying snakes?”
“No, but I take it from what you say now that such is
the case with our friend and his animals.”

“There’s more to it than that. These Sumacrea we discovered are also empathic telepaths. That’s how they
communicate. They also use a rudimentary kind of
speech, but their emotional language is much more highly
developed.”
The older woman considered thoughtfully. “If what
you say is true, dear, the budget for research on Longtunnel will be quadrupled by every organization with the
slightest interest in its future. It’s not a commercially
exploitable discovery, but the fallout will be of benefit
because there will be a multifold expansion of government facilities that can only aid in Coldstripe’s growth.

Alan Dean Foster

244

As

applaud your industry. There are
no proven telepathic races of any kind anywhere in the
Commonwealth, the Empire, or our contiguous borders.
But you say they are not telepaths in the accepted sense?”
“That’s right. They’re only telepathic on the emotional
level. Like the flying snake and our remarkable Flinx.”
Vandervort smiled indulgently. “Now, child, just because he has a bond of affection with a primitive flying
creature doesn’t mean there is anything more to him than
a fellow scientist

I

that.”

“No,

no,

it’s

much more

Amee, he comhow we found our

than that.

municated with the Sumacrea. That’s
way back to the outpost. He spoke with them, engaged
in some kind of intricate emotional discourse, made
friends, and had them lead us back to safety.”
“Sheer nonsense! You’re simply misinterpreting the
available data. Instead of communicating, he was only
broadcasting his emotions, much as you and your thranx
companion were doing. These Sumacrea, as you call

them—”
“That’s their

name

for themselves.”

“Whatever. They latched on to what you were feeling,
your longing to return to your home, and thoughtfully
escorted you back to us.”
“I’m sorry, Amee, but it wasn’t like that at all. Flinx
is a true emotional telepath, just like the Sumacrea. He
can do it with people, too. He can tell what I’m feeling
at any given moment, or you, or anyone else.”
Vandervort ’s expression darkened. “That cannot be,
my dear. Mankind has been studying the concept of telepathy for well over a thousand years, and there simply
are no such things as telepaths, not even on the empathic
level. It may be that he can project his feelings more
strongly than others, but read them? No, you must have
it wrong.” She had sat up straight in the bed and then
leaned back, shaking her head and carefully favoring her
injured arm. “He is simply a very perceptive, and perhaps persuasive, young man.”

245

Flinx in Flux

Perhaps it was the excitement of the moment, perhaps
only a desire to convince. For whatever reason, Clarity
rushed on. “He’s been altered. Did you ever hear of a
banned organization called the Meliorare Society?” If
anyone would understand that reference and make the
right connections, it ought to be Amee Vandervort, a
woman with forty years of experience in gengineering,
biomechanics and related fields, and administration.
She was not disappointed. Vandervort reacted as if she
had been stung, sitting up straight and staring at her cleverest employee hard for a long moment before slowly
lying back against the cushion rest. She started to steeple
her fingers, then stopped in irritation when she realized
her injured arm would not be able to participate. Her
tone was cool, polite, unemotional.

“What makes you
girl” now. She

was

think this?”

all

No “dear”

or

“my

business.

“Because he told me so.” She smiled, reminiscing.
“We’ve become close. I think he wanted to confide in
someone. No, I think he needed to confide in someone.
Each year it gets harder and harder for him to hold it all
m.

“So my

of the amateur psychologist in her, eh? You know he could be making all
this up to impress you, not to mention to give false subbest gengineer has a

little

stance to his story.”
Clarity shook her head.

“He

didn’t say

it

to try to

impress me, and he has better evidence to back up his
claims than clever words. I think he actually did it because he felt we were growing too close, to try to put
some distance between us.”
“A fine young man.” Vandervort spoke thoughtfully.

“He’s right, of course. You do need to distance yourself
from him. Don’t get too close to him, my dear. Don’t get
involved with him personally.”

was the younger woman’s turn to be confused. “Why
not? What could be wrong with that? Just because some
renegade bunch of neeks fiddled a little with his DNA
It

Alan Dean Foster

246

before he was born doesn’t
yourself

said

how

make him

a monster. You’ve

extraordinary he

quiet,

is:

polite,

thoughtful, and good-looking in the bargain, though he

doesn’t think so. Brave and courageous

danger

in

to help

afraid of. True,

man
it’s

me.

it’s

I

to be,

if

put himself

don’t find anything in that to be

a little disconcerting to think that the

you’re with always

not as

— he

knows what you’re

he can read minds. If he

an emotional telepath,

I

is

feeling, but

what he claims

don’t see

why

I

should

fear that.”

‘‘You

make

a

good case

for him, Clarity.

And

you’re

no
reason to fear. But we don’t know that. We don’t know,
can’t imagine what else he might be. Something he’d prefer not to admit to being. Something he’s chosen not to
reveal to you. Or even something he’s not aware of himself. Just as importantly, no one including himself knows
what he might become— besides admirable.”
‘‘You’re saying that you think he might change? Into
someone dangerous?”
“I’m saying that where the products of the Meliorares’
work is concerned, nothing is certain, nothing is predictable. They were among the most brilliant gengineers
who ever lived. Also the most unbalanced. They tried
things nobody else thought of trying, without much of an
idea of what the results would be. The majority of their
results were unpleasant to contemplate. A few were salvageable as human beings. A very, very few went unaccounted for.
“This young man’s mind and body are a genetic time
bomb that could go off at any time. He may be almost
normal now, depending on how much of this empathic
right. If all

he

is

is

an emotional telepath, there

is

—

talent he lays claim to having he actually possesses.

may remain normal

for

many

years.

He

Then,” she added

ominously, “unexpected changes in mind, body, personality may abruptly manifest themselves. Why do you
think the work of the Meliorares has been so efficiently
suppressed?”

247

Flinx in Flux

“Because the practice of human eugenics
by the Church.”

is

proscribed

Vandervort smiled knowingly. “There’s much more to
it, my dear, than that. The Meliorares were reaching beyond their own limits, were tinkering with the very foundations of humanity. They were trying to improve on
nature by eliminating serious diseases right in the genes,
reducing the effects of aging, increasing physical
strength, and raising intelligence levels. All well and
good.

“But they also tried new things. Frightening things.
They tried to goad the human body into achieving gains
had never been designed or intended to cope with.
They were trying to stimulate evolutionary leaps, not
merely cosmetic ones.” She stared down at her left arm
and its plastic sheath.
“A great many, too many, of their experiments ended
in grotesque failure. There was a lot of mercy killing. I
remember some of it from when I was young and just
getting interested in gengineering and its related disciplines. As I matured, I developed the usual perverse interest in the Society and its work. Every gengineering
student does, sooner or later. You dig up everything you
can, which is very little. You learn enough to figure out
that the Meliorares were as mad as they were brilliant.
Skill and intelligence gone amok.”
it

“You remember
finally

happened

a lot,” Clarity said shrewdly.

to

them?

student. I’d like to see

“The

Society

how

it

my own

reading as a
matches up with yours.”

did

I

“What

members? Most of them were

killed in

A

few chose to surrender and endure mindwipe. One of them,” she added
with no change of inflection, “was my mother’s youngest
fights with arresting peaceforcers.

brother.

Not a member of the inner

circle, but a sup-

porter of their cause.”
Clarity gaped at the older

Amee ...”
“How could you?”

woman. “I

didn’t have any

idea,

Vandervort smiled gently. “I don’t

Alan Dean Foster

248

walk about with the information emblazoned on my shirt.
It wasn’t something the family was proud of. Fine biomechanic, my uncle. Not blazingly intelligent or innovative, but more than just moderately competent in his
field. Only the fact that he was a peripheral supporter
and not intimately involved in the most outlawed work
the Society did enabled

him

to escape.

“When I was little and we were alone, he used to tell
me stories. I thought at the time they were amusing. You
spoke of our Flinx feeling the need to unburden himself.
I think my uncle had the same need. So he delivered
himself to a young girl who had only the vaguest comprehension of what he was talking about. I’m sure he had
no idea that I’d some day enter the same field or that I’d

remember anything of

his tales, but

I

did.

“He rambled on

about ancient Terran philosophies and
made up stories about creating a superhuman, someone
who’d be immune to disease and doubt, full of confidence
and vitality and physical strength, able to cope with any

and solve any problem.’’
Clarity laughed with relief. “That certainly isn’t Flinx.
He’s strong but not abnormally so. I’ve known plenty of
stronger men. He’s talked about his illnesses, so he’s

difficulties

hardly disease-resistant.

obviously

much smarter

As

far as intelligence goes, he’s

than the average nineteen-year-

old man, but there are dozens of other factors which could

account for

that. I’ve

spent a lot of time with him, and

he never propounded any

new subatomic

to explain the true nature of

Society’s

space-minus to me. All the

work did was give him the

other person’s emotions, and
result of a Society operation.

theories or tried

ability to read an-

we can’t be sure that’s the
He may be a natural emo-

tional mutant.’’

“All of what you say may be perfectly true, my dear.
That was the sad thing about the Meliorares and my uncle. They had grand goals and vaulting dreams, worked
so hard to achieve them, and in the end created nothing

249

Flinx in Flux

but misery and despair

among

their subjects. Flinx

is at

deformed.
‘What the Church and government have fought so hard
to suppress is any information about those experimental
subjects who were neither destroyed, deformed, nor surgically made human again. Those extreme few, perhaps
only two or three, who might just possibly have become
something else. Something the Meliorares with their
scattershot approach to eugenics did not themselves foresee. Something new.”
‘‘Like empathic telepathy?”
Vandervort forced herself to sit straight and slide close
to the spellbound Clarity. ‘‘Because I had a personal interest in their work and history, I spent more time researching it during my early studies than any of my
colleagues. I never completely lost interest in what is
after all a most fascinating subject. As an accepted scientist and scientific administrator, I eventually gained access to certain records that are kept sealed from the public
and lower-level researchers.” She glanced at something
over Clarity’s shoulder, then dropped her gaze again.
“I never suspected, no one imagined, that any of those
special people might still survive, although it’s interesting to note that even after all these years the Meliorare
least not miserable or visibly
‘

files

are

still

listed as active in the relevant records. In-

dividuals the government salvaged have been fully rehabilitated

and

certified

human. There shouldn’t be any

blank spaces, but there are.”
‘‘You think Flinx is a blank space?”
‘‘If his claims are true, then anything is possible.”
‘‘Did your uncle ever speak about things like emotional telepathy?

’ ’

you a story that might make
you think.” She adjusted her position on the dispensary
‘‘No, never. But

I’ll tell

bed.
‘‘There are oblique references to an

who was

unnamed

individ-

group
of die-hard Society members. This took place on a minor
ual

involved with the capture of the

last

Alan Dean Foster

250
world, oh,

some

six or so years ago.

thought they had him along with the

The government
others.” She was

watching Clarity carefully now.

“The

records acknowledge the possibility that this in-

dividual spontaneously imploded, taking an entire ware-

house complex and a group of peaceforcers and Society

members with him.”
Clarity stared at her a long time before breaking the

uncomfortable silence with nervous laughter. “That’s a
crazy story, all right. Even if it’s true, it has nothing to

do with Flinx because he’s right here. You saw him leave
for the commissary. Did he look imploded?
“Obviously not, my dear.”
“So the records and your story must be referring to
’ ’

someone else.”
“Yes, you must be right. It is self-evident that if he
was involved, he did not implode.” She added nothing,
just sat on the bed and waited while implications quietly
percolated inside her most skilled protdgee.
“You’re implying something that makes even less
sense.”
“I am not implying much of anything.” Vandervort
was watching the movement of medical personnel beyond her privacy curtain. “In any event, he is a free
individual, and what he is or what he does is none of our
business.”

“Right.” Clarity wondered why she felt so relieved.
“Now, go and run after him. But keep your distance.
Bear in mind what I’ve told you and don’t get too friendly.
It’s for your own good, child. He may be nothing more
than a pleasant young man who may or may not also be
an empathic telepath, but if his claim is true, he might
on any given day become something else.”
Clarity rose from her chair. “I think you’re dead wrong
there.

I

“My

think

I

know him

that well.”

dear Clarity, you have as

he does not claim to

much

know himself.”

as told

me

that

Flinx in Flux
“It couldn’t have been
he’s here

and unharmed.

I

251

him in that warehouse since
hope your arm feels better.’’

“Thank you, dear. It’s healing properly. I will talk to
you later. Remember that you’re still an employee in good
standing with Coldstripe. Look on this little enforced hiatus as an overdue vacation.

With pay.

I’ve already de-

termined to request that status for all surviving
employees. I’m sure our backers will go along with it.’’
“Then I might as well enjoy myself for a while.’’ Clarity turned and headed out of the dispensary.
Yes, child, Vandervort thought. Enjoy yourself and
watch your step.
Their fascinating young man did not present the appearance of an imploded personality. He was all of one
piece, whole and intact. Which meant that the supposition she had read years ago was in error. Or else someone
was trying to cover up an impossibility with an implausibility.

That suggested that something inexplicable had taken
place in that obliterated warehouse. If this Flinx was the
individual referred to only by number in the records, and
he had not imploded and destroyed himself while the
warehouse and its other occupants had unarguably gone
to their respective destinies, then what had happened on
that day and time? That was all much more interesting
than it would be if he had imploded. It suggested certain
things.

Lying in bed watching her arm regenerate, Alynasmolia Vandervort had plenty of time to think.
Flinx was eating at an empty table surrounded by

The reason

was clear to
Clarity as soon as she entered the commissary.
Pip lay sprawled full-length in front of him in all her
iridescent glory while Scrap squirmed nearby. The two
flying snakes had raised off the table on their belly scales,
looking like Terran cobras, their wings half-spread. They
were begging for food.

empty

tables.

for his isolation

Alan Dean Foster

252

them, he sipped from a tall glass
of dark liquid. Some kind of protein drink. Clarity decided. Quick and nourishing and that was about all. It
struck her that he never discussed food. Perhaps he was
one of those people who considered it nothing more than
necessary fuel. It would help explain his wiry slimness.

While Flinx

“Amee

idly fed

sends her regards.”

He looked up

at her.

“I’m glad

she’s feeling better.

Just like I’m glad the trouble here has

means

been resolved.

we’ll be able to leave as soon as we’re ready.

It
I

have business that needs to be taken care of before I can
return to make a proper study of the Sumacrea.”
She sat down next to him, making sure there was some
space between. “That’s something
Flinx.”

“How

do you mean?” he
“I’m back where I belong.

we need

to talk about,

said, frowning.
I

don’t need to go anywhere

else.”

“You want to stay
pened?” He flipped a
tion,

here? After everything that’s hapsmall salty object in Scrap’s direc-

watching as the young minidrag darted sideways to

from the air.
“This is where my work and my friends are. Those
who’ve survived. There’s a great deal that needs to be
pluck

it

done. Tracking records, rebuilding

“None

of which

...”

your responsibility. You’re a gengineer, not a construction specialist. I’ve been thinking
about everything you said on our way here, about all we
talked about, and I thought you might like to take some
time off and go somewhere different. How about New
Riviera? I’ve never been there myself, but I’ve heard
about it.”
“Everyone’s heard about New Riviera. It’s just not
is

possible, Flinx. I’d like to go someplace like that,

I

really

would. I’ve dreamed about that kind of traveling.”

“Then why
easily.”

He

The Teacher can make it
her then, and it was open and in-

not go there?

smiled

at

Flinx in Flux

253

nocent enough to break her heart. “Didn’t we get along
well on the journey here from Alaspin?’’
She turned away, pretending to be watching the flying
snakes but unable to meet his gaze. “We had a wonderful
time, but now it’s time for me to work.’’
“I don’t understand. Surely after all you’ve been
through your firm will grant you a leave. If it’s a question
of money, if you’re embarrassed to let me pay for every.’’ He reached
thing
out for her, and she flinched.
She tried not to but could not help it. It was a very small
movement, but he noticed immediately.
“That’s not it, is it? Nothing I’ve said has anything to
do with what we’re talking about. You pulled away from
me just then. Jerked away.”
“I’m just nervous, that’s all. Still jumpy after all those
days we spent in the darkness, after the kidnapping and
escape and all the shooting. Being shot at doesn’t go
away as fast for everybody as it seems to for you.”
He bent to peer into her face. Amber eyes seemed to
see right through her. “What’s really the matter, Clar.

.

ity?”

had been a mistake to
confront him like this. She had thought she would be able
to handle it easily, and she had been badly mistaken. “I
have to get back. There are records I have to
As she turned to leave, he reached out and grabbed her
by the arm. Initiating contact with another human being
was something he did only rarely. He heard her sudden
intake of breath and felt the fear race through her. Not
fear of the blackness, not this time. Fear of a different
“I’ve told you.” She rose.

It

—

sort of dark.

“All of a sudden you’re frightened of me. Deity knows
I tried to keep you at a distance when I thought we were
getting too close, but I thought all that had changed. In
spite of what I told you. Now everything’s changed again.
What happened? Don’t try to tell me I’m wrong.”
“I can’t.” Her reply was a feeble whisper. “How can

Alan Dean Foster

254

Could
to?”
I?

He
it’s

I

hide

my

feelings

from you even

go of her arm. “No.

if I

wanted

can feel your fear. But
not straightforward, not simple. You’re confused; you

don’t

let

know what

I

you’re really feeling.”

“Please,” she pleaded with him, “don’t.” She unexpectedly found herself starting to cry. “Maybe that’s all
it is. Maybe I’m just uneasy about being around someone
who knows what I’m feeling all the time.”
“But it isn’t all the time. My— ability— waxes and

wanes.”

“How

can I believe that?” She turned and ran out of
the commissary.
A few fellow diners watched her retreat, then turned
to glance in Flinx’s direction before returning to their
meals. His gaze slowly came back to the table before
him. Attuned to his mental distress, Pip watched him
expectantly. After a while she resumed eating but kept a
wary eye on her master. Though puzzled, Scrap continued to eat as before. Flinx occupied half his mind by
hand feeding the little minidrag.
What had happened to change Clarity’s attitude toward
him so radically? It was one thing to decide she had work
to do, another to feel the fear he had sensed in her mind
when he had grabbed at her. On the trip out from Alaspin
she had been the one always flirting and teasing. Now
the brightness had gone out of her.
Nor did it have anything to do with their sightless journey through the lower caverns of Longtunnel. The aversion she projected was directed at him, not at their shared
experience together. No doubt the Sumacrea would be
able to interpret it, but he was not that skilled, that sensitive. He could only feel the reality of her fear, not understand the reasons behind it.
That was the moment when he realized he was in love
with her. Having never fallen in love before, he was unfamiliar with the process and so had failed to recognize
it until now. His love for Mother Mastiff had been of a

255

Flinx in Flux

had his restrained affection for

different kind, as

women

Atha Moon. This was different, very different.
She had been the one seeking a closer relationship.
She was the one with her finger on his emotional trigger,
and now she was pulling out. It was not fair. He was

like

disconcerted to discover that years of studying the emo-

had failed to prepare him for dealing with
own. She was manipulating him when he should be

tions of others
his

manipulating her.

What

was

he could see no reason for
her sudden change of heart. Perhaps being back among
her own kind, friends and colleagues, had made her realize how much she missed them and their companionship. Jase had survived the fanatics’ assault. Did her
relationship with him go deeper than they had revealed?
After all, what could she see in him, a young man just
emerging from adolescence? Except that he had never
truly hurt

that

been an adolescent.
Had he been normal, unable to read her emotions, he
might have handled her reaction better. It was bad enough
to have your love spurned, far worse to know that someone you felt so strongly for feared you. How much nicer
to be normal and ignorant. Then he would merely be
baffled, not hurt. His Talent functioned when he wanted
to be deaf and failed when he desperately needed it. What
good was the damned thing?
All right. For some reason she’s no longer interested
really

in

you. She’s afraid of you.

You warned her

Why

not?

It’s

only sensible.

damn fool. You’re a selfthan you— though not sig-

yourself, you

confessed freak. She’s older

nificantly— and a respected scientist. You saved her

life,

and for a while she couldn’t do enough to express her
gratitude. Now that she’s back among her own kind, her
own people, safe and secure, she doesn’t need your protection anymore. It’s easy for her to see you for what you
are. Nothing has really changed.
His eyes and throat were burning. That was the way it

Alan Dean Foster

256

was. That was the way it would probably always be for
him, so he’d damn well better get used to it.
You’re going to have to adapt to what you are, he told
himself. You’re going to have to be like Truzenzuzex and
Bran Tse-Mallory— calm, logical, analytical in all things.
Much easier to absorb and retain new knowledge that
way, with no petty emotional distractions. You’re the one
who can feel what others are feeling. You’re the last one

who

should

let

himself be overpowered by his own. Fin-

your meal and get out, get away from this place.
He took a long draught of his carotene-flavored protein
drink. It slid down cold and undemanding. No, nothing
had changed. There was still a whole Commonwealth to
explore, to study. He would go and study as he had originally planned, and someday he would look back on this
encounter as just another in a long list of learning experiences. Knowledge in and of itself. Knowledge of how
another could feel about him. A valuable lesson. Wonderful how simple it was if you just put your mind to it,
this ability to rationalize away extreme disappointment.
Go somewhere else. Find another intriguing world and
punch it up on the holo projector. A world chosen at
random. Not one where you would become lazy and vulnerable like New Riviera or a dangerous one like Alaspin. Something in between. A place stinking of
normality. An ordinary, happy, content, developing world
like Colophon or Kansastan where no one would know
anything about him or his abilities. Where he would not
have to confess to being the owner of a starship. Where
he could lose himself among the masses of humanxkind
and be free to observe while he matured. Blandness was
what he needed now most of all. He needed not to be
bothered, to be alone among his own kind.
Except that that was not ever really possible.
He was sitting there, content that he had come to terms
with himself, when the shadow fell over him. Resolutions
and hard decisions vanished as he turned quickly, heart
leaping because he thought it was Clarity come back to
ish

257

Flinx in Flux

him how sorry she was and say
meant a word of it.

tell

Instead he found himself eyeing a

tall

that she

had not

man wearing

the

uniform of port Security. His cap was cocked to the right,
and the right sleeve of his shirt was shredded. Transparent skin-seal glistened through the rips where a doctor
had performed some hasty but effective skin grafting.
“You the visitor who calls himself Flinx?”
Pip caught a last crumb and swallowed it whole. The
officer’s gaze took in the flying snake’s movements, and
Flinx felt his admirably brief flash of fear.
“Since everybody seems to know who I am by now, I
don’t see much point in trying to deny it.” Realizing how
belligerent he must sound to a polite stranger, he added,
“I’m sorry. My friends and I just had a very trying ex-

Amazing how

perience.

fast

word travels.”

I’m Feng Kikoisa, head of Security here.
What’s left of it.” He looked to be in his early fifties,
taut as duralloy, the kind of professional who could cope
with a world like Longtunnel.
“We’ve got one ship in geosynchronous orbit. Next
scheduled arrival isn’t due for a month yet. I’m told that
maybe it’s your ship.”
Flinx wiggled a finger in front of Pip and watched as
the flying snake toyed with the movement. “I guess I’m
not denying anything today.
I in violation of some
“Isn’t

it?

Am

regulation?

’ ’

“Wouldn’t matter

if

you were. Nobody’s

in

any posi-

tion to object. I’m just glad you’re here.”

Flinx turned his head sideways to squint up at the officer. “It’s

more

to

it

nice to be popular. So

than that?”

He had

why do

a pretty

I

think there’s

good idea where

was headed.
an observant young man. I’m sure

the older man’s conversation

“You

strike

me

as

you’ve noticed how limited our facilities here are. We
never expected to have to deal with anything like this.
We don’t have enough supplies, the right kind of—”
“I’ll take

them,” Flinx said

tiredly.

Alan Dean Foster

258

was taken aback by Flinx’s abruptness and
perhaps also because he would not be able to deliver all
of his carefully rehearsed speech. “There aren’t that
many.’’ He spoke as if he were still reluctant to believe
his request had already been approved.

The

officer

“I said I’d take them.’’ What else could he do? Leave
and create a wake of notoriety behind him? “It won’t be
very comfortable. I’m not running a liner. There are only
three staterooms.’’

“Wherever you put the seriously wounded, they’ll be
more comfortable than anywhere down here. Our medical people suggest Thalia Major or Minor as a destination.’’

Flinx considered. “I’d prefer to take them to Gorisa.

about the same distance.’’
“Gorisa? I’ve never been there myself, but of course
I know of it. Everyone in this sector knows Gorisa. I
don’t see any objection to that. Not that we’re in a position to argue with you or order you about. Yours is a
It’s

private vessel.”

“That’s right.

It

is.”

convey your generous offer to my colleagues. I’m
informed that for some of the injured, time is of the essence. When can you leave?”
“Immediately. Now.”
“Very generous of you, yes.” The Security chief had
come prepared to rage and to beg. Instead he found himself overwhelmed by the young visitor’s ready generosity.
Actually, it had nothing to do with generosity. Not
overtly, anyway. It was partly a matter of maintaining
protective coloration and partly that Flinx wanted off
Longtunnel as quickly as possible.
“You could also carry the official report of the incident
here to the appropriate authorities. A pity we have no
description, no knowledge of the ship our assailants employed.”
“I’ll send it down by high-speed transmission the moment we break out of space-plus,” he assured the officer.
“I’ll

259

Flinx in Flux

“How many
to get

shuttle trips

do you think

I’ll

have to make

everyone up?”

“I’ve taken the liberty of inspecting your craft. I’d say

two would do

it.

Most of

the

wounded we can

care for

here. You’ll be taking people who’ve lost limbs or or-

gans.

We

don’t have organ banks or regeneration facili-

We’ll send along a couple of medtechs to look
after the injured for the duration of the voyage.” Kikoisa
hesitated, then glanced away. “I really don’t know how

ties here.

to express

my —

necessary to thank me. Anyone else in my
situation would do the same.” That was not necessarily
“It’s not

was not used to taking credit for a good deed
even when it was due him.
“All the more reason to do so.” The lieutenant turned
and headed out of the commissary at a brisk pace, no
doubt to spread the good news to the rest of the outpost
true, but he

authorities.

Flinx methodically drained the rest of his drink and
thought.

Chapter Fifteen

The

person he expected to see boarding the shuttle
for the second and final run up to the Teacher was Clarity.

last

The

little

vessel

was already crammed

full

despite

wounded
were small in number. No matter. They would find room
for everyone. The common area was filling up with spe-

the lieutenant’s insistence that the seriously

beds and oxy -cocoons, but there was still space
around the fountain.
“You injured?’’ She winced at his tone, and he was

cial

instantly sorry.

“No, but another ranking officer of the company has
to come along to deliver our damage report so we can
begin ordering new equipment. Amee may not be in any
condition to do so. As chief of gengineering, I was
elected.’’ Coldstripe’s director

had been brought aboard

the Teacher on the previous shuttle flight. “Besides, with

everything ruined, there’s nothing for

me

to

do

here.’’

“I understand.” He turned to go forward.
“I’m sorry,” she said hurriedly. “I’ll try to stay out
of your way. I’m sorry if— I hurt you.”

260

Flinx in Flux

“Hurt me?
wounded.”
“Flinx

“Save

.

Funny.

I’m

not

261
listed

among

the

.

know

much, I
guess. Let you see too much also, but I had no choice
there. We needed the Sumacrea to find our way back.”
A small, brightly colored shape dashed from his shoulder
to the back of her neck and began playing with her sidetail. She had bronze thread woven into it this morning,
it.

I

I

frighten you. Told you too

he noted.

you.” He was unable to
smile as he watched Scrap toy with her

“Somebody’s happy
repress a slight

to see

blond hair.
She giggled as she tried to stroke the small flying
snake. “Sometimes he tickles when he moves around
like that.”

“He’ll

settle

as well let

down

soon. Just glad to see you. Might

him keep you company. He knows

around the ship.”
She gazed back

his

way

him. For the moment there was no
fear in her. “Thank you,” she said simply.
He had to leave. “Yeah, sure. Forget it.”
Though a long journey through space-minus lay ahead
of them, he had no intention of talking to her. But the
Teacher's living area was not large, and the ship was very
crowded, and since his presence was not actually required on the bridge, he found himself with a great deal
of free time and nowhere to spend it except in his private
stateroom. Since he was not by nature quite as solitary a
person as he liked to believe he was, it was inevitable
their paths should cross on more than one occasion.

The

result

again, but

was

now

at

that eventually they did start talking

without the playful intimacy that had

characterized their earlier relationship. Both were ner-

vous at first. The second meeting was easier, the third
almost relaxed. He was glad. Better they should part as
friends.

Several times she

seemed on

the verge of unburdening

Alan Dean Foster

262

herself to him, of trying to explain her fear and uncer-

Each time she caught herself and changed the sub-

tainty.

something inconsequential. He never pressed for
an explanation. If she wanted to tell him something, she
would do it in her own time. Besides, he was not sure he
wanted to hear what she might have to say.
Thalia Major and Minor were more mature worlds than
Gorisa. Their populace was sophisticated and bored. Reports of an attack on an isolated scientific outpost would
draw a lot of newsfax attention. Arriving wounded and
other survivors would be subject to penetrating, thoughtful interviews and debriefing.
In contrast, Gorisa generated more than enough news
of its own to keep several fax feeds occupied around the
clock. It was the epitome of the fast-growing colony
world. Bountifully endowed with heavy metals, productive oceans, and rich alluvial soil for farming, it lay on

ject to

the fringe of the

Commonwealth

flanking a bulge of the

AAnn Empire

and the impossibly distant galactic edge.
Gorisa was already home to a frenetic, bustling population of over a hundred million. They were concentrated on the second largest continent, but a dozen
satellite cities were under development on the four other
major land masses. The climate was temperate and oxygen-rich, the gravity a shade less than Earth-normal,
and each day offered incoming immigrants new ways to

make

their fortune.

A

hundred sixty newsfax and entertainment channels
competed for audiences on a world destined one day— its
promoters insisted to become the wealthiest in the
Commonwealth. The arrival of a group of injured scientists and workers from a distant outpost scarcely rated
a mention by the biggest newsfax combines. Only a single young and persistent faxer was more interested in
how a nineteen-year-old without a famous name managed to run his own private starship than in the incident
that had brought him to Gorisa. Flinx finally lost him in
the crush and confusion of arrival and customs.

—

Flinx in Flux

263

Owngrit was a city of eight million, with three major
shuttleports and all the related facilities one would expect to find on a world where competition was fierce and
credit flowed freely. The wounded from Longtunnel
might have received slightly better care on Thalia Major
or Minor, but Gorisa provided it immediately and without question, since there was heavy competition for business among the major medical facilities. Half a dozen
deepspace beams offered Amee Vandervort the opportunity to transmit the detailed report Clarity had composed. Plans for rebuilding their installation on
Longtunnel were under way before the last of the injured
had been off-loaded from the Teacher.
Coldstripe was not the only organization to have suffered grievously at the hands of the fanatics. Research
institutes and universities had lost material and personnel
to the attack. The Counselor First of the United Church
for Gorisa ’s sector had to be notified, as did Commonwealth authorities. Everyone became very busy very
quickly.

As she watched him operate

and confidently
in Gorisa’s complex and combative society, Clarity was
more impressed than ever with the young man who had
saved her. He acted as if he had been dealing with
wealthy merchants and self-important bureaucrats all his
life. His attitude never became demanding or imperious,
nor did he kowtow to government functionaries. At all
times he was courteous, even deferential. He could also
be immovable on issues important to him.
All this he did while maintaining his basic anonymity,
a skill he had spent ten years developing. His increased
quietly

made it slightly more difficult to hide in the background. He had also considered dying his distinctive red
height

though the electric colors currently popular on Gorisa made that unnecessary for now.
Clarity thought she was beginning to understand him:
how his mind worked, why he acted the way he did in
public, what he might really want. His age and youthful
hair,

Alan Dean Foster

264

appearance led others to underestimate him, and she believed he preferred it that way. She knew that behind
those guileless green eyes a mind of extreme complexity
and unique ability was always busy.
He had spoken to her of a difficult childhood. How

much more

to his personality

he, after all, nothing

pleasant young

Of one

man

was there than

that?

more than an unusually

Or was

intelligent,

with a special talent?

was utterly convinced, despite anything Vandervort or anyone else might say: There was
not a milligram of malignance in his whole body. If he
was half-afraid of himself, what was more natural than
thing she

that she or

any other possible friends should share that

fear?

She watched as he quietly helped care for and reassure
the seriously wounded. The longer he was left alone, the
more attention he devoted to others. It was as if he were
afraid of being thought compassionate. Clarity

was sure

Amee’s suspicions were unfounded, her warnings
misdirected. There was ample reason to like and even
pity this young man, not to fear him.
that

Vandervort finally had her damaged arm properly attended to. She and other ranking members of the outpost
told their stories to the authorities, who subsequently
contacted Thalia Major. A peaceforcer cruiser was dispatched to Longtunnel to help with the cleanup and to
begin the search for her assailants. It was more an expensive gesture than a necessary or practical move, but
expensive gestures were crucial to the survival of any
popular government. So the cruiser carried a full complement of marines even though there was no one left on
Longtunnel to fight.
Contact was made with Coldstripe’s backers. They
were not as upset as Clarity had expected, but then, her
expertise lay in gengineering, not in finance. Insurance
covered much of the loss. What could not be replaced
was the loss of key personnel Everyone was greatly re.

Flinx in Flux

265

lieved to learn that Vandervort, Held, Jase, and the

ma-

jority of the research staff

had survived.
“They value us greatly, my dear,” Vandervort told her
via tridee. “There will be hazard pay and large bonuses
all around. We may lose some people, but I believe most
will elect to retain their positions and return to resume
their work. What about you?’’
“I have no intention of quitting, Amee. I want to go
back to Longtunnel as soon as possible, both to continue
my earlier work and to help with the new developments.’’

Vandervort smiled out at her from the flat screen. “I
thought you would be one to see possibilities, but I wasn’t
sure until now. I cannot tell you how gratified I am by
your decision. You are going to be a very wealthy and
famous young woman.’’ She glanced at something be-

yond the pickup’s range.
“I’d like you to see our temporary

field

headquarters.

be coordinating the acquisition of new equipment and
instrumentation from there. We’ve already begun.’’ She

I’ll

numbers giving a structural position
in Owngrit’s north commercial suburbs. Clarity’s unit
would store it for easy retrieval. “Come by tonight, why
flashed a series of

don’t you.’’

“Actually, I’d planned to see Flinx tonight.’’

Vandervort’s brows rose. “I thought you were going
to take my advice and keep your distance from that young

man.’’
“I’ve done that. I don’t see any harm in occasionally
visiting with him. He has to be lonely, though he handles
it very well. I think you’re all wrong about him, Amee.
He’s not dangerous to anyone except maybe himself.’’
The older woman let out a sigh. “I told you. Just because he isn’t dangerous at the moment doesn’t mean he
never will be. Anyway, it doesn’t matter because he’s
going to be here tonight, too. I’ve invited him, and he’s
already accepted. So if you want to see him, you can
meet him here. Good for you, good for me.’’

Alan Dean Foster

266

Something in Vandervort’s voice made Clarity want to
probe further— but if Flinx had already agreed to visit
the facility

.

.

.

be there, too, then.’’
“Good! I think it will have a bearing on your future.
That is important to me, my dear.’’
Clarity grinned. “You aren’t going to spring some kind
of promotion on me, are you?’’
“How perceptive you are, my dear. Something like
that, yes. I’ll expect you around nineish, local time.’’
“See you then.’’
Clarity let Vandervort break the connection, wondering what kind of promotion her director had in mind.
She was already chief of Coldstripe’s gengineering division and too valuable in the lab to be boosted into an
administrative position. But then, Amee had not actually
said it was a promotion. “Something like that” was what
she had said. Curiouser and curiouser. She had always
“I’ll

liked surprises.

was lovely if lonely.
Coldstripe’s expense account was generous, more a reflection of good corporate policy than of benign munificence. As Amee had told her, personnel were more
important than machinery. They intended to keep her and
Jase and the others in good working order.
She took an MLV to the main northsub station,
switched to a local, and hired a robocab for the last run.
Coldstripe’s temporary facility was housed in a brandnew, beautifully landscaped industrial park where none
Supper

in the apartel’s restaurant

of the buildings rose higher than the imported trees. Two
rust-leaved boles shaded the structure’s entrance. A temporary sign floating above the front door identified the

new

Dax

wondered only briefly
at the name change, deciding it must be for competitive
reasons. It hung slightly crooked. The sign’s field needed
lessee as

Enterprises. She

tuning.

With night having
occupied. Nearly

all

near outer office was unthe adjacent concerns had shut down
fallen, the

267

Flinx in Flux

Those few which still displayed
lights were located at the far end of the complex. There
was no receptionist on duty, a luxury Coldstripe did not
until the following day.

require. Clarity’s

company

ident card passed her through

several security checkpoints until she encountered

Amee

outside an inner office.

“You’re on time. That’s good.’’
“On time for what? How’s your arm?’’
.The older woman raised her rebandaged limb. “As
you see, it’s no longer necessary to keep it immobilized.

The new

skin-seal

is

inconvenient, but that’s

all.

The

itching should stop soon.’’

“I want to see what we’ve been able to get so far. Did
the backers approve my request for the Sentegen modeling projector?’’

“You and your

Vandervort led Clarity not into
the large storage area behind the office but to a side door.
“That hasn’t come in yet, but I’m sure it will. I’ve been
given a free hand reordering. The firm wants us reestablished on Longtunnel as quickly as possible, so they can
take advantage of the free security the government is providing. For one thing, I’m told it lowers insurance rates
considerably.

toys.’’

’ ’

Clarity did not recognize the security card Vandervort

inserted into the appropriate slot next to the door.

It

was
The

of a type unfamiliar to her, and it glowed faintly.
door opened promptly, and they walked down a single
flight of steps.
“More storage? I thought we had enough upstairs.”
Vandervort smiled at a private joke. “This is for special

equipment.”

The

made

bend

middle
and descended another half a flight before ending in a
well-lit chamber. Since they were below ground level,
there were no windows, only featureless walls. Pipes and
ductwork hung exposed and unshielded. The entire room
was an afterthought, added on after the main structure
above had been completed.
stairs

a ninety-degree

in the

Alan Dean Foster

268

There were basic living

facilities off at

one end: a cou-

ple of folding beds, cold food storage, sanitary setup,

and simple storage. There was also a very large man who
was currently aiming an extremely impressive handgun
in their direction. He lowered it as soon as he recognized

Amee

Vandervort.

“Evening, ma’am.”
“Hello, Dabis.”
Clarity noticed a second man watching a wall tridee
from one of the folding beds. He did not turn around or
sit up. From the sound, she guessed he was eyeing some
sort of sporting event.

“Everything all right?” Vandervort inquired as she
stepped off the last step and started across the floor.
“Quiet as a nursery,” said the big man. As he replied
to Vandervort, his gaze was fastened on Clarity. It was
not a kind gaze, and she laughed nervously as she looked
away from him.
“What is this? Some kind of secret laboratory? Or are
we into drug running now?”
“Neither, my dear. This is no more than a temporary
way station. A stop on the road to fame and extreme
fortune of the kind Coldstripe could never give us.”
Clarity turned a puzzled face to her superior. “I don’t
follow you. And where’s Flinx? You said he’d be here.”
“So he is, my dear.”
She walked over to where a large curtain hung suspended from a supporting bar and pulled it aside. Resting
on a table behind it was a large octagonal container
molded of gray plasteel. It looked like an oversized coffin. The surface was lightly pebbled, smooth and cool to
the touch. Attached to its base was a second plasteel
container a meter and a half long. It matched the larger
one perfectly but was dyed beige instead of gray.
Set into the side of gray container was a touch control
pad composed of glowing contact squares. Vandervort
played a short sequence on them. A motor hummed compliantly, and the top layer of gray plasteel retracted half-

269

Flinx in Flux

way. Without being told, Clarity moved forward and
peered through the transparent inner shield. Her heart
skipped a beat.
Flinx lay beneath the transparent plexalloy. His eyes
were closed, and his hands were crossed over his chest
like those of a primordial Egyptian relic. Pip formed a
tight, brightly colored coil below the crossed hands while
a smaller duplicate of herself lay nearby.
Clarity whirled on the older woman. “Dead?”

“No, not

Almost as shocking to Clarity as
Flinx ’s appearance was her superior’s ability to muster a
laugh. “They’re only sleeping.” She walked the length
of the table and rested a hand on the beige container.
“This assures that they sleep.”
“You’d better explain yourself.” Clarity was astonat all.”

ished at the hostility in her

own

voice.

The other woman ignored her tone. “One thing I never
forgot about my uncle’s tales was his fear of the Meliorapproach to manipulative eugenics, the possibility that one or more of their experimental subjects
might develop unpredictable abilities. My actions merely
reflect ordinary caution when confronted by such a possibility.” She studied the gray plasteel coffin.
“There is also the fact that even if our young friend is
as harmless as he claims to be and you seem to think he
is, his pets are anything but and should be handled with
the utmost care.” She smiled at Clarity. “You told me
as much when you related the story of your flight from
ares’s wild

Alaspin.

“Fortunately, our young friend’s desire to maintain the
lowest possible profile worked to our advantage. As a
result

it

is

unlikely anyone will miss him.

He

ate in av-

erage restaurants, traveled by ordinary transportation,
and, best of all, stayed in a middle-level hotel. Not too
expensive, not too cheap. A place where people may be
bribed.

“Since

my

expertise lies in administration,

I

took the

time to locate and employ reliable help. You’ve already

Alan Dean Foster

270

been introduced to Dabis. The gentleman on the bed goes
by the name of Monconqui.” The latter never looked up
from his sporting match. Dabis grinned unpleasantly at
Clarity. “They supplied advice, obtained necessary
equipment, and provided muscle.
“The gas that was introduced through the hotel room’s
venting system was quite odorless and colorless. We also
took the precaution of injecting it while our young friend
was asleep. Your story made me additionally cautious,
you see. At first we feared his scaly companions were
immune, but eventually they, too, were overcome. Dabis
was for needling both on the spot, so I had to explain to
him that the bond between man and minidrag would be
an important component of future research. Difficult to
carry out if half your subjects are dead.”

“Future research? What are you talking about, future
research?’’

Vandervort ignored her as she continued. “Once they
had been anesthetized, it was a simple matter to place
them in this specially designed container, which is used
by zoos and related institutions to transport dangerous
fauna. I think our young man and his friends fit in that
category. I did not and do not want him conscious until
he has been placed in a facility that will render his pets
harmless.” She patted the beige container.
“This holds the sleep gas as well as equipment for
mixing it with breathable air. The supply is constantly
monitored to ensure the health of the larger container’s
occupants. In reality the two containers comprise a complete life-support system. Ports on the other side permit
intravenous feeding when necessary without compromising the system’s integrity. Don’t be so melodramatic.
Flinx and his pets will enjoy the kind of deep rest and
comfort the rest of us can only dream about. This system
is designed to keep expensive specimens optimally
healthy.

’ ’

“He’s not a specimen!” Clarity could not contain her
anger or her anguish any longer.

Flinx in Flux

271

Vandervort pursed her lips. “My dear, I don’t think
you’re taking this in the proper spirit. Perhaps you’ve not
yet glimpsed the opportunity that lies before us. This
young man can make our fortune. If he cooperates, it
will make his fortune as well.”
“I don’t think he’s interested in fortunes. His or anybody else’s,” was the angry retort.
Vandervort shrugged. “People often choose to deny
their interest in large

sums of money

until

it’s

actually

offered to them, until they are faced with the reality in-

stead of the concept. Your lack of interest in this project

puzzles me. Insofar as we know, this young man is the
only surviving sane product of the Society’s work. I’d
think you’d find that fascinating.”

“Of course

I

find

it

fascinating. That doesn’t

mean I’m

going to go poking around inside his head and nervous
system without his permission. He’s an individual with
rights

and—”

“Yes, yes.” Vandervort waved off her objections. “I’m
familiar with all the pertinent regulations. But we have
here gn exception to all the rules. An exception worth

bending regulation*

“He may

not cooperate.

Have you tnougm Cf

-

Again the smile, which in its own way, Clarity saw for
the first time, could be more sinister than that of Dabis.

“My

dear,

I

like to think that I’ve thought of everything.

believe he will cooperate— eventually.

hope
that he will. If not, there are ways to induce him to do
so that do not involve physical coercion. For example,
I

I

sincerely

very attached to his pet. I am speaking of genuine
affection and not just the unique emotional bond that exists between them. While I would be reluctant to countenance probing him against his will, I do not think I

he

is

would have the same compunctions where a flying snake
is concerned.”
Clarity managed to calm herself. “I liked you, Amee.
I thought of you as a second mother.
“I’m flattered, but I would much prefer it, my dear, if
’ ’

Alan Dean Foster

272

you would think of

me

as a fellow scientist striving to

extend the reach of human knowledge.” She nodded at
the coffin. ‘‘Our young friend is reluctant to explore himself because he doesn’t understand himself. That’s to be
expected. The conflict within him is social, not biological. As soon as he can be made to realize that, I think

he will be eager to seek our cooperation. We intend to
see that he has everything he could possibly want, that
he’s given the best conceivable living environment, and
that he’ll be working with dedicated professionals who
only want to help him understand himself.
‘‘I think he’ll be grateful to us. He won’t have to hide
anymore, won’t have to run. We’ll keep him hidden from
the government functionaries who’ll only want to ‘normalize’ him.”

A

sudden realization struck Clarity like a window
opening in her mind. ‘‘My function in all this is to act
as one of his teachers and observers?
“I can’t imagine what else you had in mind.”
‘‘You wouldn’t be trying to include me as part of that
‘everything he could possibly want’?”
Vandervort stared evenly back at her. “If your presence at the facility which is in the process of being established resulted in your performing a dual function,
I’m sure the company would be correspondingly grate’

’

ful.”

wanted to make certain I understood my position in all this. But suppose you have him figured wrong,
Amee? Suppose he doesn’t want any part of your gener‘‘I

just

ous offer to help him learn to ‘understand’ himself? What
if all he wants is to maintain his privacy? Suppose that’s
more important to him than helping you ‘extend the reach
of human knowledge’— for your profit?”
‘‘He’ll profit as well.” Vandervort sounded hurt.
‘‘This will benefit

him more than anyone

else. I truly

believe that.”

“I don’t. What I also can’t believe is that Coldstripe’s
backers would countenance something like this. I had the

Flinx in Flux

273

opportunity to meet several of them when I was hired,
and they didn’t strike me as the type who’d go in for this
kind of thing. Sure, they want to preside over historic
breakthroughs and get their names on the newsfax. Sure,
they want to

and

women

make money. But
I

the necessary

“A

I

don’t see any of the

men

talked to approving kidnapping as part of

methodology for achieving those ends.”

harsh choice of words,

my

dear.

I

prefer to think

of what we’re doing as helping a mentally distraught
young man to find himself. And I should add that Coldstripe has nothing to do with this. Your assessments are
correct in that respect.”
That brought Clarity up short. “Then who?”

“Scarpania House is paying all our expenses. I’ve kept
in touch with friends there for a long time. A survival
tactic in the world of business. Always keep lines of communication open to alternative employment. Scarpania is
a hundred times bigger than Coldstripe. They can provide private spacecraft, unquestioning customs clearances, everything an operation like this requires. When
I explained to them what was at stake here, they readily
opened their hearts and minds to me. Also their line of
credit.

“I

my

still

don’t think you’re seeing the potential here

?

Imagine watching this young man under controlled conditions as he matures and develops. Even if he
manifests no other talent, the close study of his capacity
for emotional telepathy will be sufficient to guarantee us
comfortable employment for life. Having been emotionally involved with him, you are in a better position than
anyone else to engage in such research.”
“I see where you’re going with this, Amee, and I can
tell you right now I don’t want any part of it. Underdear.

stand?

’ ’

“Think

carefully,

my

dear.

Think

clearly. Cultivate a

proper scientific attitude.”
“I’m not going to cozy up to him so you can measure
and record and analyze his reactions,” she said bitterly.

Alan Dean Foster

274

“I’m not some damn soporific you can inject into his life
to make him feel a little better about what you’re going
to do to him.”
Vandervort moved away from the beige container. “At
least you know what is wanted of you. I’m sure you’ll
change your mind, if for no other reason than that he’ll
need you. I urge you not to commit yourself to a snap
emotional decision but to give it time and consideration.
If nothing else, he is a very handsome young man, for
all

the pains he takes to conceal it.”

You can’t buy me.”
older woman was genuinely amused.

“I’m not one of your

tools.

This time the
“That remains to be seen, my dear. I haven’t tendered
you an offer yet, have I? Consider also that if you return
to Coldstripe, and I say now I will not stop you from so
doing, you will never find out what happens to our Flinx:
how he develops, what unsuspected talents he may display, or who might be hired to take your place.”
This could not be happening. Clarity told herself. This
was not Momma Vandervort speaking to her, calmly laying out the details of a plan as nefarious as anything seen
on the tridee. Flinx was not lying doped and still as the
dead in a plasteel coffin on that table to her left.
She knew the truth of what Vandervort had told her.
If she did not

agreS ?C

^cipate,

then they would find

someone

else to try to insinuate herself into .IIS-* ?

fidence.

They would keep trying

until they hit

con "

on the

combination of empathy, beauty, and intelligence.
Someone with less understanding of Flinx and fewer
scruples than herself. If she wanted to help him, then she
had to accept the older woman’s offer, work for her and
Scarpania at least temporarily until she could think of a
way out for both of them.
Think Buy some time.
“Just for the sake of argument, what if I abjure everything you’ve proposed and take this straight to the Goriright

san authorities?”

Vandervort ’s tone did not change.

“I’d rather you

Flinx in Flux

my

275

what you may think
of me at this moment, I’ve grown fond of you during the
time we’ve worked together. I think you are a highly
didn’t

do

that,

qualified,

dear. Regardless of

potentially

brilliant

gengineer

who

is

also

blessed with enthusiasm and the talent to inspire her co-

workers beyond their natural abilities.”
That was all she said. No threats, direct or implied.
Only admiration and a gentle request backed up by the
presence of Dabis and the still supine Monconqui.
“I could go along,” Clarity told her, “agree to all you
ask, and then slip away and spill everything to the

Church.”
Vandervort considered briefly, nodding. “Yes, you
could probably do that. You’re resourceful, and not as
naive as when you first came to work for me. You might
even find a padre who’d believe your story. But by the
time anyone came looking, we’d have moved our facility
and our young man to a place of safety. You won’t be
able to trace us, and neither will the Church. And while
I would simply shrug off the additional expense, Scarpania likely would not. Since you would not have the
money to reimburse them for their trouble, I’m afraid
they would find another method of obtaining satisfaction.”

Having run out of arguments, Clarity slumped visibly.
Realizing she had gained everything she wanted, Vandervort forced herself not to smile with satisfaction. The
younger woman would only react emotionally, and Vandervort had had enough of emotional reactions for a
while.

Flinx was used to strange dreams.

He was

This one was n©

below the surface of a lake of pure crystalline water. Pip bobbed beside him, and Scrap next to her. But none of them were
swimming. None of them were breathing. They simply
hung there below the glassine surface adrift in cool
exception.

drifting, floating just

,

peacefulness.

Alan Dean Foster

276

Though he knew he risked drowning by doing so, he
tried to taste the water, only to find he was unable to
inhale a drop through either his mouth or his nostrils. It
was very peculiar water, almost like air. Maybe that was
it. Maybe he was floating beneath the surface of a sea of
methane or liquid nitrogen.
At times he thought he could see shapes moving above.
They passed by infrequently. Faces with wings that gazed
mournfully down at him before fluttering away. He tried
to speak to them, tried to reach up to them, but could
not do so. He was unable to move. Nor was his Talent
functioning, since he could not sense their emotions. What
pale impressions he did receive were tenuous and imprecise. He felt neither hostility nor affection, only bland
indifference.

He was

not alarmed. Contentment seeped through him.

Hunger and

thirst

were abstract concepts. Very

faintly,

something deep inside his mind tried to insist that this
was not right, that he needed to bestir himself, to move
about, to stand.

Waste of time. Useless and unnecessary to try to analyze his situation or his environment. Enough to lie in the
lake heedless of the world around him, whatever it might
be like.
He sensed the minidrags emotions and knew they paralleled his own. They dreamed offlying through an empty
sky with no land below, no trees, no clouds above. It was
an unsettling dream, and Pip and Scrap fluttered their
’

wings.

No one

room noticed

two minidrags twitching and trying to fly. It did not matter, anyway, because
they remained sedated. While their tolerance for the morphogas was higher than Flinx’s, neither had recovered
enough to regain consciousness. They simply moved a
little before growing still again, moved and lay still,
dreaming of flight while trapped on the ground.
in the

the

Chapter Sixteen

Clarity had agreed to everything her boss had re-

quested. In the final analysis the young

woman was

as

and sensible as herself, Vandervort knew. Possibly she still harbored thoughts of somehow freeing Flinx,
but she had neither the experience nor the knowledge to
do so. Vandervort was confident that as time passed she
would be able to manipulate both young people as relogical

quired.

She had a private transport service coming to help with
the moving. Dabis and Monconqui would be available
also.

The

reveal

its

now

closed so as not to
contents to casual observers, would present no
plasteel coffin,

its

top

problem.

was an off-work day and she had to pay double for
the moving service, but that was one of the nice things
It

about having a virtually unlimited expense account.
Scarpania’s own research people were more than anxious
to have a look at her prize.
Two weeks to get everything ready. A secure installation had been thrown together on an isolated island on a

277

Alan Dean Foster

278

modest colony world clear across the Commonwealth.
They would travel on a Scarpanian freighter devoid of
cargo except for themselves and their precious sleeper.
To any outsider it would seem a flagrant waste of money,
but several

members of her new employer’s

scientific staff

had recognized the importance of her discovery and appreciated
Clarity

its

potential fully as

was

much

as she did.

there, too: packed, ready to depart,

and

downcast, having barely resigned herself to the situation.
Plotting and planning, no doubt. That was fine, Vandervort thought. It would give her something to do during
the long, dull journey through null-space.
Dabis called down to her from the top of the stairs.
“They’re here, ma’am.”
“You checked their idents?”

“Yes’m.”

“Then let them in and let’s get on with it.”
She made a last sweep of the room in which she had
spent so many busy hours this past month. Monconqui
was checking the morphogas tanks to make sure they
were full and working properly. He did not talk as readily
as Dabis, but the two men were cast from the same mental mold. They were much more than simply dumb asone was willing to pay, one could hire
intelligent muscle as easily as stupid.
The moving crew wore light green jumpsuits and caps.
She expected people Dabis ’s size, but apparently the
company had opted for numbers instead of individual
mass. Perhaps it had been difficult to bring in their regulars on short notice even for double pay. Not that size
and strength were necessary, she reminded herself, in
these days of labor-saving devices. With the levitating
sassins.

If

grapples they carried, the four of them could easily position a two-ton generator. One of the women, a tall

blonde of icy mien, looked capable of lifting one end of
the coffin all by herself, though her three companions did
not appear nearly as capable. Even with the grapples
taken into account, one man in particular looked too old

279

Flinx in Flux

be engaged in this sort of work. Not that she knew
anything about the particular expertise moving work re-

to

quired, she told herself.

She walked over

to the curtain

and pulled

it

aside for

the last time. “Let’s start with this.”

“Right,” said the young man who seemed

to

be

in

charge.

The four of them placed their grapples and switched
them on. Wrist movement alone was sufficient to raise
the coffin and

its

attached atmosphere unit several cen-

timeters off the table. Carefully they turned

ward the

its

head

to-

stairs.

“Remember,

you’re handling extremely fragile and

Somewhere

valuable equipment,” Vandervort told them.

behind her, Clarity made a disparaging noise. Vandervort almost frowned but resolutely kept her expression
neutral.

On

the other hand, the

tall

blond

woman

smiled.

Why

should she smile? Come to think of it, why would
she react to such a bland statement at all? The smile was
already gone. No need to say anything. No reason to

comment.
But something made Vandervort
confront the

much

taller

woman.

forward and
“Something funny

stride

about that?”

was blank. “No, ms.” She
hesitated. “It’s just that we’re proud of our work. I was
amused that anyone would think we’d take less than the
best care of anything we were moving.”

The blonde’s

beautiful face

“I see.” Vandervort stepped aside.
sible explanation for an innocent little
ble?

Or

too pat.

“One more

A

perfectly plau-

grin.

Too

plausi-

thing.” The four movers

paused, each with a hand holding the trigger of a grapple.
“Could I see your identification one more time, please?”
The young man in charge hesitated for just an instant,
then reached for his chest patch. It was the very old man
who made the fatal mistake. Perhaps he thought he was

speaking in a lower voice than he actually was.

Maybe

Alan Dean Foster

280

he was just slightly hard of hearing. Whatever the reason,
Vandervort heard him hiss quite distinctly.

“Don’t show it to her.’’
The blond amazon’s eyes flicked in his direction. Ignoring the advice, the young man removed his chest patch
and passed it to Vandervort, who made a show of inspecting it closely. Whispers, eye movement, inexplicable smiles.

“No
fully.

problem, ms,’’ the young

man was

saying cheer-

“Something the matter?’’

“Just a routine check.’’ Holding the ident patch, Vandervort turned so they couldn’t see her face. Her lips

moved

silently

when she caught

Dabis’s eye. His wid-

ened, he nodded slightly, and that was when she dived
for the cover of some hastily packed crates.
Dabis crouched and pulled his needier. Not having

been warned, Monconqui was slower on the uptake, but
he, too, made a dash for cover as soon as he saw his
partner in motion.

The movers reacted

swiftly,

but they were not fast

enough. Despite their recent experiences they still did
not possess the fighting skills of professionals. The trailing member of the quartet took the blast from Dabis’s
needier square in the chest. It penetrated his sternum to
fry nerves, blood vessels, and his spine as it emerged
from the back of his shirt to spend itself against the wall.
Screams and shouts filled the room. Clarity was an
easy mark for the movers, but they had no time to concentrate on her, and she was able to find shelter. Dabis
and Monconqui were the problem. Both had taken good
cover behind heavy packing crates filled with electronics
and monitoring instrumentation. They were outnumbered three to two but were better shots. While they commanded the only exit, the fanatics had to expose
themselves on the stairway in order to take aim into the
room.
Firing continued steadily. A burst from a neuronic pistol just missed Clarity, momentarily paralyzing her left

Flinx in Flux

281

side. Feeling returned rapidly following the near miss,

leaving behind a tingling sensation.

Vandervort lay nearby, watching the battle. “Keep your
head down, child! You and I have nothing to do with the
outcome of this.” She was peering between two huge
crates, her observation made easier by the fact that the
fanatics were concentrating their firepower on the two
bodyguards.
The mover who had been shot lay crumpled at the foot
of the stairs, eyes staring blankly upward, the hole in his
chest still smoking. Having been released by the movers,
the plasteel coffin had drifted to a halt against the ’wall
nearby, still suspended in its four softly humming grapples.

“Your friends from Alaspin and Longtunnel,” Vandervort murmured as she struggled to get a better view
without exposing herself. She raised her voice, “Give it
up! These two

men

here will pick you off sooner or

later.

They’re professionals, and you are not. There is nothing
more for you here, whatever you intended. You cannot
have Clarity.”
“We’ll have her.” Clarity thought she recognized the
voice of the young man. He was keeping out of sight near
the top of the stairs. “And we’ll have you, and we’ll have
the mutant as well.”
“How could they know about that?” Vandervort was
shaking her head in disbelief. “How could they have
found out? Abruptly she looked at the younger woman
crouched nearby. Clarity’s eyes widened, and she shook
her head violently. The administrator considered
thoughtfully before speaking again.
“I don’t know what you’re talking about.”
The tall blonde responded this time with a harsh, feminine laugh. “We broke the Coldstripe communications
code a long time ago, so forget about lying to us. We
know everything. We knew about the mutant before Scar’

’

pania did.”

“God damn,”

Vandervort muttered. “I told our peo-

Alan Dean Foster

282

pie they had to change keys at least every other day.

Lazy

sons of bitches!”

The blonde was not through. ‘‘How do you think we
knew where to find you on Longtunnel, knew where your
records were stored and the labs were located?

When

she

was our guest on Alaspin, your life meddler told us some
of what we needed to know, but not all. The rest we
obtained from monitoring your local transmissions and
from our operative within your own organization.” She
laughed humorlessly. “Didn’t it ever occur to you that
your friend Jase seemed to have nine lives?”
The color drained from Vandervort’s expression. Clarity delighted in the older woman’s distress. “Thought of
everything, did you?” The administrator did not reply.
The blonde was still talking.
“The life meddler comes with us, to ensure she won’t
tamper with nature any further.
“What do you want with our young man? He’s being
well looked after. His name is Flinx, and you have no
’ ’

right

to—”

was the young man who interrupted her.
“You’d lecture us on the rights of the individual? Do you
This time

it

think we’re fools, like your former employers? You’re

Vandervort.”
Despite her superior’s warning, Clarity raised her head
so that she could be heard clearly over the packages
shielding her. “Let nobody have him, then! Why not just
let him go?” She ignored Vandervort’s frantic gestures.
“He’s done nothing to you.”
“It is what has been done to him that matters in this.”
It was the voice of another man, speaking for the first
time. His tone was commanding. “We will treat him
kindly while we attempt to return him to normal, try to
spitting air,

correct the

damage done by

expert gengineers

who

the Meliorares. There are

are sympathetic to our aims.”

“The Meliorares worked with

prenatal cells,” Clarity

argued. “That was different. You can’t tamper with the

Flinx in Flux

283

genetic code of a mature person. You’ll end up ruining
his

mind or

“We

his personality or

intend neither,” the

both.”

man

replied. “Regardless of

improvement on what now exists
because the individual in question will once again be truly
human when we have finished with him.”
A burst of neuronic fire passed just over her head, and
she was forced to duck back down, her scalp tingling.
Dabis and Monconqui were quick to return the shots.
“You want him? Come and get him!” Dabis ’s tone
was deliberately taunting. “He’s floating right there at
the bottom of the stairs, where he bumped into the wall.
Why don’t you just stroll on down and pick up your grap-

the result,

it

will be an

ples?”
“We’ll do that soon enough,” the blonde shouted.
“We may not have your training, but we’ve practiced
long and hard for moments like these. We aren’t ignorant
of tactics. Maybe we can’t take you out or recover the
mutant, but you’re trapped down here. We’ve cut all
communications to the outside and secure-blanketed the
entire building.

You

A

stray electron couldn’t find a

way

out.

anyone on the outside, nor are you expected anywhere for some time, so nobody’s going to
come looking for you. Your obsession with privacy, Vandervort, works to our advantage as well. We cannot get
in, and you can’t get out. So we’ll have to find another
way to resolve our little impasse.”
“We’ll resolve it, all right,” Vandervort snapped back.
“The three of you will join your friend on the floor.”
“I think not. What we’ll do is sit here and relax while
one of us goes for help. That’s our advantage. One person
could guard this exit.”
“You can bring a hundred cephalos back with you, but
you’ll never get them down those stairs!” Dabis was
earning his money.
“No need to. The morphogas you use to keep the mutant inert can just as easily be introduced into this room.
can’t talk to

Alan Dean Foster

284

You’ll all quietly go to sleep.” Dabis had no ready an-

swer for

that.

Monconqui

tried.

‘‘We have

filter

masks. Gas won’t

bother us.”

‘‘Maybe you do and maybe you don’t. Let’s find out.
We’ve nothing to lose by trying. Unless you’d consider
bargaining with us.”

The young man took

only a job for you.

this is

credit

over. ‘‘You

Why

two with the guns

risk getting shot for a

boost?”

‘‘Because it is our job,” Dabis replied simply.
‘‘Whatever Vandervort’s people are paying you, we’ll

double it. Triple it.”
“Sorry,” and Monconqui sounded genuinely so, “but
if we break a contract we’ll never get another job. Also,
there are bonuses waiting when we deliver our people to
their destination.”

“Admirable

ethics in the service of a lost cause,” the

man declared.
“Maybe we can strike some

second

sort of bargain,”

Van-

dervort suggested.

“What

kind of bargain?” Suspicion tainted the young

man’s reply.
“You want the gengineer. The mutant’s more important to us.”
Clarity stared at the older woman, and began backing
away until she was pressed up against the wall. Vandervort smiled apologetically. “I am sorry, my dear, but the
situation is grave. Extreme measures are called for to
resolve it.”
Clarity’s response

was a

horrified whisper. “I never

should have listened to you. I should have listened to
Flinx. He’s not the dangerous one here. He’s not responsible for the way he is. You’re the one who’s evil and

dangerous.”
“Since you

way, I consider myself under no
obligation to apologize.” Vandervort turned away and
raised her voice anew. “What do you say? You’ve already
feel that

Flinx in Flux

285

destroyed the Longtunnel installation. I’m only an administrator who’s about to enter a different line of work.
’ ’

You can have the gengineer.
The amazon replied, “We must have the mutant also.
The way I see it, we have the upper hand strategically.
You can try to cross an open floor and fight your way up
these stairs

if

you

like. I don’t see

any reason why we

have to bargain with you for anything.’’
“We might not make it, but some of you will die,”
said Dabis. “Be better if all of us could get out of this
without any more deaths.”
A long pause ensued before the blonde responded.
“We’ll think about it,” she said finally.
“Don’t think too long,” Vandervort warned her. “We
might decide to leave without your permission.” Having
said that, she slumped back down behind her protective
crates, suddenly looking her age. Still favoring her injured arm, she brushed hair from her face and caught
sight of Clarity glaring at her as if frozen.
“Oh, don’t look at me like that, my dear,” she muttered irritably. “It is quite boorish and unbecoming to
you and does not affect me in the slightest.”
“You know,” Clarity said evenly, “I used to want to
be just like you. I admired you for the easy way you
mixed business with science. Someone who’d done it all
and on her own.”
“Indeed, I have done everything on my own. I intend
keeping it that way. This would have been easier with
you assisting me, but even though you’re the best, I will
manage by replacing you with the next best. It is our

young man who

is

irreplaceable, not

you.”

The lake blurred. Suddenly the water was not quite so

He

sensed rather than
saw Pip and Scrap drifting alongside and kne\v their
tranquility had also been disturbed.
Shapes continued to float above the lake’s surface, but
they were no longer placid and dreamy. Now they were
clear, his floating not as peaceful.

Alan Dean Foster

286

angry and demonic of expression, full of tension and hatred. For the first time he sensed he was not alone in the
lake. Things were moving in the depths, far below his
range of vision, down where the water grew cold and
dark. There was one immense green shapelessness that
kept straining to reach him, impinging on his consciousness like a flint striking sparks from another rock. Forms
in the void at once familiar and unrecognizable.
Though he concentrated hard, the green shape and the
strangeness faded as the demonic faces hardened like glass.
He felt as if he were starting to rise toward the lake ’s surface,
acquiring a sort of mental as well as physical buoyancy. Even
so, he was not prepared when he broke through.
Nothing made any sense. When he had been drifting
underwater, his breathing had been relaxed and easy.
Now that he was back in atmosphere once more, he found
himself choking and gasping for air. His eyes bulged, and
his lungs pumped wildly. Next to him Pip and Scrap were
two bundles of contorting coils.

When
its

the coffin had been abandoned,

levitating grapples until

it

it

had drifted on

banged against the subter-

ranean wall. The beige plasteel adjunct containing the
morphogas cylinders and flowmix valves had been very
slightly jarred. The result was a crack in one of the feeder
lines. Monconqui would have noticed it during one of his
routine inspections, but that individual had been otherwise occupied for some time.

Room

air

was leaking

into the line while gas

was

leak-

The atmosphere inside the coffin was very slowly
returning to normal. While the container was airtight, it
was not soundproof. The noise of arguing voices and
unleashed weapons was audible within.
ing out.

was, however, black as Longtunnel’s caverns inside
with the observation window shield shut.
Flinx tried to make his brain work. The last thing he
could remember was sitting on the bed in his hotel room,
It

watching the tridee with Pip curled up on a chair nearby

Flinx in Flux

287

and Scrap racing his tail around the overhead lighting.
Now he found himself lying on his back in a restricting
container of some kind with Pip and Scrap next to him.
The ghosts of gunshots and voices penetrated the material. They sounded human; therefore, it was likely if not
guaranteed that a breathable atmosphere existed outside
his prison.

He

explored the interior as best he could, but found
nothing in the way of a release button or latch. That

meant

was designed

be opened only from the
outside. That much made sense. Three thick hinges
that

it

to

yielded their identity to his questing fingers.

He

recalled his

restful

sojourn in the lake of his

Whether by injection or by some other means,
he had been tranquilized, and judging from his aching
muscles he had been unconscious for some time. Despite
that, he felt healthy and alert. The long sleep had swept
cobwebs from his mind. He let his Talent loose and found
thoughts.

he could perceive proximate emotions clearly. Perhaps
the combination of extended enforced rest and whatever
narcotizing agent had been used on him had resulted in
a heightening of his perception. Perhaps something had
happened to him while he had been locked in his prison,
unable to use anything except his mind. He had vague
memories of powerful unseen forms, and in particular a
vast greenness. Echoes of an exhilarating dreamscape.
He touched a number of hostile minds and moved on
flower. Sounds mid
like a butterfly sampling IICTT

emotions told him people were shooting at each otner.
Adrift amid the ocean of unfamiliar feelings were two he
knew well. One was Alynasmolia Vandervort, a remarkable combination of greed, lust, ambition, hope, and hatred.

with disgust, worry, fear, and something he could not lock down. That was when he whispered to Pip. Not all their communication was empathic.
The flying snake was intelligent enough to learn and reClarity

spond

was

to a

filled

few basic verbal commands.

Alan Dean Foster

288

he tapped the
lowest hinge of his prison with a finger while uttering
the word. Pip noted the placement of his finger from the
sound it made striking the hinge, waiting until her blaster

Edging as

far to his right as possible,

had withdrawn

The

his hand,

and

spit.

acrid stink of dissolving metal and plasteel filled

the container and threatened to choke Flinx anew. Fight-

ing for breath, he tapped two

more

times, uttered the

command

twice more, and waited while Pip’s response
ate into the hinges. No one came to see what was happening. Either the dissolving hinges were not noticeable

from outside or, more likely, the combatants he sensed
were busy trying to kill one another.
Choking out the fumes, trapped in the confining darkness, he began to get angry. Everything that had happened to him had come about because he had tried to
help someone. His own emotions had been toyed with,
and the more he tried to help, the more people seemed
to want to do him harm. He was more than a little fed
up and more than a little furious.
Lying contentedly in his private lake, he had learned
a lot about himself. Enforced meditation had revealed
things he had never acknowledged before. One was that
in all the universe there seemed only two intelligences
that truly understood him. The Sumacrea were one. The
other was a gigantic weapon constructed by a long-dead
race. The Sumacrea ’s main purpose in life was to understand. The weapon’s was to destroy. So be it.
Except he was not a weapon. He was Philip Lynx, ne
Flinx: a nineteen-year-old orphan with an unusual history, an enigmatic lineage, and an erratic Talent of un-

known promise.
Whatever he was,

was quite a shock

everyone else
in the room when he shoved the ruined lid of his container off its rim and sat up. It took a moment for his
eyes to adjust to the light. In that instant everyone else
had a chance to react.
Vandervort rose halfway above her protective wall of
it

to

289

Flinx in Flux

and screamed, “Get them!” Dabis and Monconqui started to move. The older man squatting at the top
of the stairway stared at Flinx as if he were regarding a
reptilian carnivore instead of a slim young man.

crates

“Kill the thing!” he bellowed. “Kill

it

now!”

The young man seated on the top step hesitated, but
not the tall amazon next to him. She started to raise the
muzzle of the neuronic pistol she was holding. Without
being touched by any visible weapon, she abruptly
slumped forward, rolling down the stairs to fall in a heap
atop the dead man already there.
Pip and Scrap were airborne and ready to attack, but
for the first time in his life Flinx did not need them.
Having fought to break free of the lake, he found he
could now break through with little effort. Using Pip as
an empathic lens, he was able to project emotions as well
as receive them. Maybe more than the lake and his sleep
was involved. Maybe it had something to do with the
shapes and forms that had tried to touch him. Perhaps he

hsd been touched. He did not know.

Time later to find out,
What he had projected

if

he lived.

into the

mind of the

tall

woman

had been fear and overwhelming terror. Now he sent it
into her companion, who let out a quavering moan, rose
to turn and run, and then fainted on the steps. The older

man managed

a shot in Flinx ’s direction.

missed him, numbing

his

The

bolt just

arm. Instinctively he responded

with greater force.

The

result

was unintended. The

elderly fanatic rose

trembling, eyes bulging, and collapsed atop his younger
colleague. Unlike his companion, he had not simply been

rendered unconscious. Fear had stopped his heart.
Observing the collapse of their opposition, the two
bodyguards had halted in the middle of the room, re-

would not have to try to dodge the pistols
of the fanatics. At almost the same time they noticed that
their prisoner was sitting up in his coffin facing them.
lieved that they

Alan Dean Foster

290

They did not connect

his resurrection to the destruction

of their opponents.

An

uncertain

Monconqui

raised his pistol. Clarity

saw

him, stood up, and screamed.
The two bodyguards proved harder to put down. They
were familiar with the kind of fear Flinx had used to
eliminate the fanatics from the scene. Nonetheless, every
man has his breaking point. Beneath the barrage of withering terror they both eventually keeled over.
Then he was alone in the room except for Clarity and
VandervOrt. The older woman came around from behind
her little fortress of crates and started toward him, a broad
smile on her face, hand extended.
“Well, my boy, I don’t know how you did that, but I
know you are responsible. I saw you stare them down,
or whatever it was you did. First that slime on the stairs
and then my own people, who didn’t have the sense to
lower their weapons before they could find out we were

same
Flinx was climbing out of

all oil

the

^
the cottin.

,

4

VT lllvi.

A

^

that?’’

“Don’t
ily.

listen to her, Flinx!’’ Clarity blurted out hast-

“She’s the one

who had you drugged and

put in that

thing!’’

Vandervort whirled on her. “Just shut up, you little
bitch. If you know what’s good for you, you’d better keep
your mouth shut.” Still smiling, she looked back at
Flinx. He studied her noncommittally.
“Dear Clarity is upset. She’s confused by everything
that’s happened, and I must say I don’t blame her.” Vandervort laughed, a velvety, comfortable laugh. “I am
somewhat confused myself.”
“Me, too.”
Vandervort seemed to stand a little taller. “I’m certain
we can sort all this out.”
“So you’re not responsible for any of this?” His stare
was level, his voice calm. Pip hovered close by while
Scrap darted uncertainly toward Clarity, back to Flinx,

»

Flinx in Flux

and ended up spinning miserably
tween the two.

291

in the air

halfway be-

“I didn’t exactly say that. What I said was that it’s all
been very confusing.”
That was what she said. What emanated from her was
a combination of fear and anger, not all aimed at the
unconscious or dead fanatics piled on the stairway. Some
of it was directed at Clarity. Some of it was directed at
Flinx.
‘‘If

you want

afraid of

me

to help

so badly,

why

are you so

me?”

‘‘Afraid of you, young

man? But I’m not.” Suddenly

and she smiled, but this time the smile
was uneasy. ‘‘You can tell what I’m feeling, can’t you?
Not what I’m thinking, but what I am feeling.”
realization struck,

‘‘That’s

it.

What I’m

not as fond of

me

feeling right

as you’re trying to

now is that
make out.”

you’re

‘‘You mustn’t take emotions literally, young man. They
can be confused, and confusing. You just knocked out
five

armed

hand.

I

assailants without so

much

as lifting your

believe I’m entitled to at least be intimidated.”

‘‘But you’re not intimidated. You’re afraid, and that’s

something else again. I think you’re feeling that as soon
as I turn my back on you, you’re going to go for one of
those guns that your henchmen dropped.”
All the color drained from her face. ‘‘You can’t feel
that. It’s not an emotion; it’s a specific thought.” She
retreated a step. ‘‘You

can’t—”

“Absolutely right. I can’t read thoughts. But if I suggest something and you react to it, I can sense your reactions and thereby tell the truth of it as clearly as if
you’d answered honestly. If you’d responded any other
way, then I might have hesitated. I might have been unsure. I might’ve been tempted to listen to you.”
“You aren’t going to kill me,” she whispered hollowly. “It isn’t in you.”

“Hey, we don’t know what’s in me, remember? I’m
the unpredictable mutant you keep warning everyone

Alan Dean Foster

292

” He was sickened not by the look of sheer terror
on her face but by the fact that he was enjoying it. He
against.

“Enough death.” He

sighed.

indicated the stairs.

“Two

of them are dead, the rest unconscious. One of the deaths
was an accident, and the other the result of a needle shot.
I’m not going to kill you, Vandervort.”
The older woman stopped. “What are you going to

do?” She was looking
them?

made

“Just
Tell

past him.

“What you

did to

’ ’

me:

sure they wouldn’t bother

Is there

for a while.

anything you’re really afraid of? Any-

thing that truly frightens

“No. I’m

me

a scientist.

I

you?”
look

at

everything analytically.

have no fears.”
Suddenly her eyes bulged like those of a fish trapped
by a receding tide. Her head went way back, and she
turned a slow circle. Fingers dug into hair, and she uttered a single piercing shriek before folding over in a
dead faint.
Clarity came out from behind the other crates. “What

I

did you do to her?

He gazed
thing

I

’

’

sadly at the crumpled figure.

“The same

did to the others. Projected fear into them until

nervous systems were overwhelmed. I sensed crawling things in her mind. Bugs, something else, I don’t

their

know.” He shook his head. “Specifics weren’t
So much for the analytical approach.”

required.

“Flinx, I’m so glad that everything—”

He

turned sharply.

“I think you’d better stop right

there.”

She did so, puzzled and obviously hurt. “I can imagine what you’re thinking. I had nothing to do with any
of this.”

“You knew about

it.

Tell

me you knew

nothing of it.”

“I can’t. You’d be able to tell if I was lying. Flinx, I
didn’t know what to do, what to think. She told me stories—” She nodded toward the motionless form of her
former superior, “—stories about the Society and their

Flinx in Flux

293

work and you. About what you might become. I didn’t
believe her. I didn’t want to believe any of it. But she’s
so much more experienced than I. I didn’t have any
choice. If I’d refused, they would have found someone
else to take my place, someone who cared nothing about
you.”
‘‘Everyone has a choice.”
of staring. Tired, period.

‘‘It’s

He lowered
just that

his gaze, tired

most people don’t

have the guts to make the right one.”
“I’m sorry, I’m so very sorry.” She was crying now.
“They had you here in that damn box before I knew
anything. It was too late for me to stop them. I went
along hoping to help you later, somehow, when they’d let
down their guard, You’ve got to believe that! You heard
me shout a warning, didn’t you? You just heard me tell
you that she was responsible for everything that’s happened, that this is all her doing.”
“Yes, I heard you. That’s why you’re still walking instead of lying on the floor with the rest. I know you’re
telling the truth, or else you’re the most skillful liar I’ve
ever encountered.”
“If you know that, if you can sense that, then you must

know that I love you.”
He turned away from her. “I

also

don’t

know anything

of

Your feelings are strong, but no matter what you
say, I can tell that they’re still confused and uncertain.
One moment you say you love me, the next you’re afraid
of me. Hot and cold. I don’t want that kind of relationthe sort.

ship.”

“Give me a chance, Flinx,” she pleaded. “I’m so
ribly

ter-

confused.”

whirled to face her again. “How do you think Fm
feeling? That’s the one set of emotions I can never get

He

After all that’s happened, how can you think I
could ever trust you with anything, much less with my
life? Not that it matters, anyway. You can’t share my life.
rid of.

Nobody can. Because, ironically enough, Vandervort
may have been right about that. I can’t, I won’t take the
Bj

?

Alan Dean Foster

294

chance of endangering someone else in the event I do
turn out to be dangerous.
“I was uncertain about that before. Now I’m not. I
shouldn’t have let myself get involved with you in the
first place. That much of it’s my fault.”
‘‘Flinx, I know what you are. It doesn’t frighten me
anymore. You need someone like me. Someone who can
give you understanding and sympathy and affection and

—

love.”

‘‘Someone to help me be human. Is that it?”
‘‘No, dammit!” Despite her best efforts to repress
them, the tears began afresh. ‘‘That’s not what I mean at
all.”

He wanted

her to be lying, but she was not.

was asleep, or unconscious, or drugged, or
whatever, my mind roamed freely in a way it never has
before. I feel better about myself than I ever have. It was
more than a rejuvenating rest, Clarity. Something happened to me while I was in that box. I can’t define it yet
because I’m not sure what it was. But while I was in there
I sensed things. Some of them were beautiful and some
were frightening and others were inexplicable, and until
I can figure them out, I need to be by myself.
‘‘You go back to whipping out custom genes and designer biologicals, and I’ll get back to my studying.
That’s the way it has to be.”
‘‘While

I

‘‘You’re not being fair,” she sobbed.

‘‘Once

The more

was

I
I

told that the universe isn’t a fair place.

see of

it,

the

more convinced

I

am

of the

rightness of that observation.”

The rumbling began as a hum in the ears and a subtle
quivering underfoot. The two met somewhere in the vicinity of the stomach. Not an earthquake but something
much more pervasive. Clarity rushed to the plastic crates
for support while Flinx stood his ground as best he was
able. Pip stayed aloft while Scrap finally came to a decision

and landed cautiously on

Clarity’s shoulder. That

Flinx in Flux

was painful

295

for Flinx to see, but he could not waste time

worrying about it now.
Of more immediate concern was the fact that the center of the floor was crumbling beneath his feet. He
scrambled to one side, staring as the stelacrete and duralloy mesh turned to powder and vanished into the gaping maw of a vast dark pit some three meters in diameter.
The huge creature that stuck its head out of the hole
and gazed curiously around the room was as tall as the
opening was wide. Its dense fur was mottled with
splotches, and it must have weighed close to a ton. The
flat muzzle ended in a tiny nose above which a pair of
plate-sized yellow eyes hung like lanterns. The ears were
comically undersized.
Placing two immense, seven-digited paws on the edge
of the hole, it boosted itself into the room, the furry head
barely clearing the ceiling. Clarity goggled at it in disbelief as if it were something coalesced whole from a
fever dream. Flinx flinched, too, but for a different rea-

son entirely. At that point the monster saw
smiled hugely.

“Hello again, Flinx-friend,” it
Except its mouth did not move.

said.

him— and

Chapter Seventeen

Clarity heard
herself. “There’s

it,

no such thing as a true

no such thing.’’
“I’m afraid there

He

She was mumbling dazedly

too.

is,’’

to

telepath. There’s

Flinx said with another sigh.

turned to the monster. “Hello, Fluff.

It’s

been a long

time.’’

“Long

time, Flinx-friend!’’

It

was a mental boom.

The massive Ujurrian trundled over to the red-haired
young man and rested both massive paws on his shoulders. “Flinx-friend

“Very

is

well?’’

well, thank you.’’

He was somewhat

surprised

mind-to-mind, human-to-Ujurrian communication was easier this time than it had been years
ago, when he had first encountered Fluff’s species on
their Church-proscribed world. It was no longer difficult
to find that the

to understand.

Fluff

nodded approvingly

popped out of the hole

as

two more giant Ujurrians

like ursinoid jack-in-the-boxes.

Flinx recognized Bluebright and

296

Moam. They examined

Flinx in Flux

297

their surroundings with the boundless curiosity of their

kind.

mind

“Flinx-friend’s

is

clearing out.

Not

as

much mud

inside as before.” Fluff tapped the side of his head with

a fat finger.

Flinx gestured to his right. ‘‘That’s

my

friend, Clar-

’ ’

ity.

Fluff started toward her, overflowing with gruff

good
feelings. ‘‘Hello, Clarity-friend.” She backed away from
him until she was flush against the wall. The Ujurrian
halted and looked back at Flinx. ‘‘Why your friend
frightened of Fluff?”

your size.”
‘‘Oh-ho!” The Ujurrian promptly dropped to
“It’s not you, Fluff. It’s

all

fours.

‘‘This better, Clarity-friend?”

She hesitantly stepped away from the cold wall. ‘‘It’s
better.” Her gaze rose, and she found Flinx watching
her amusedly. ‘‘These are friends of yours?”
‘‘Can’t you tell by now?”
‘‘But how did they get here? What are they?”
‘‘They’re Ujurrians. I think I mentioned them before.”

‘‘The world Under Edict, yes. That means nobody can
get in or out.”

‘‘Apparently someone neglected to inform the Ujurrians of that.

As

to

how

they got here, I’m as interested as

you are.”
‘‘Heard you.” Bluebright’s mental voice was as distinct from Fluff’s as it was from Flinx ’s. ‘‘Her mindlight
is

bright.”
Clarity frowned uncertainly. ‘‘What does that
‘‘It

means you have

rians everything

is

a strong mental aura.

mean?”

To the Ujur-

like a light, brighter or darker to a

varying degree. Don’t be intimidated by their size. Oh,
they’re quite capable of taking a human being apart like
a wooden toy, but we’re old allies. And if it makes you
feel better, they’re

mostly vegetarians. They don’t like to

eat anything that generates ‘light.’

”

Alan Dean Foster

298

Scrap cowered against Clarity’s neck. It was the first
time Flinx had ever seen a minidrag show fear. To the
young flying snake, the Ujurrians’ emotional auras must
have appeared overpowering. Pip did not fear because
she remembered.
“Heard you calling,”

Moam explained as

he examined
the unconscious forms scattered about the room. “Came
fast as we could to offer help.”
“Calling?” For a moment Flinx forgot Clarity. “I
wasn’t even conscious.” He tried to recall what it had been like floating beneath the surface of
the lake. Little remained of that memory, that fading
wasn’t calling.

I

mystic melody of thoughts suspended in morphogas.
“How did you people get here?” Clarity forced herself not to gaze into the black pit. “Flinx told me you

made him

“A

a ship.”

ship, yes,” Fluff said proudly.

“A

Teacher for the

don’t like ships. Noisy and confining.
We only built his because it fits the game.”
“Game?” She turned back to Flinx. “What game?”

teacher. For us,

we

of civilization.” He spoke absently, still
trying to remember. “The Ujurrians love games, so before I left Ulru-Ujurr I started teaching them that one.
By the time the Teacher was finished they were getting
very good at it. I can’t imagine what stage they’ve reached

“The game

by now.”

“Like some parts of the game,” Bluebright said.
“Don’t like others. Keep the parts we like, throw out the
ones

we

“Very
along?

don’t.”
sensible.

How’s

the

tunnel digging coming

’ ’

“You

aren’t

making any sense.”

Clarity couldn’t dis-

guise her confusion.
“It doesn’t have to

make

sense. Listen and you’ll learn

a few things.”

“Going very well,” Fluff told him. “Still have many
more tunnels to dig. Heard you calling. Decided to dig
a new tunnel. Fastest digging we’ve ever done, but

Flinx in Flux

teacher was

maybe?
“I’m

in

trouble.

299

Got here too

late

anyways

’ ’

was Flinx ’s turn to frown. If he had
not known from experience what the Ujurrians were caokay.’’

It

pable of, he could never have asked the next question.
“Are you telling us that you tunneled here from Ulru-

Ujurr?”
Fluff

made

a face.

“Where

else

we

tunnel

from?”

Smiling to show he meant no offense even though he
knew they could read the same thing in his mind, he said,
“Clarity-friend is right. That doesn’t make any sense.”
The huge Ujurrian chuckled, his voice full of mock
puzzlement. “Then how we get here? Was hard work,
Flinx-friend, but also fun.”
“That’s it. I’m lost,” Clarity mumbled.
“Not lost,” Moam said earnestly, misunderstanding
her thoughts as well as her words. “You start tunnel.
Make bend here, then twist, then wrap around like so
and so, and lo! There you are.”
“I wonder if they ‘tunnel’ through space-plus or nullspace,” Flinx murmured in awe. “Or someplace else the
theoretical mathematicians haven’t invented yet. How did
you find mel Can you tap into my specific thought signature across all those parsecs?”
“Wasn’t easy,” said Moam. “So we had somebody
come and look.”
Flinx ’s brow wrinkled. “Come and look? But who—”
A voice from behind made him jump. “Who you

think?”

was Maybeso, looking dour^ and distressed as always. Even for an Ujurrian, Maybeso was unique. His
fellows thought him quite mad. If the inhabitants of UlruUjurr were an anomaly among intelligent races, then
Maybeso was the anomaly of anomalies.
“Hello, Maybeso.”
“Good-bye, Flinx-friend.” The giant ursinoid vanished as silently and mysteriously as he had appeared.
He was not a talker.
It

Alan Dean Foster

300

Flinx saw Clarity staring. She had convinced herself

she was beyond shock, but Maybeso’s brief appearance
had proved otherwise. “He goes where he wants,” Flinx

explained apologetically, “and he doesn’t have to use a
tunnel. Nobody knows how he does it, not even the other
Ujurrians, and he doesn’t

They think

tell.

he’s a little

strange.”

“Not

Mad.”

A

emerged from
the bottomless pit in the center of the room. Looking
like a cross between a grizzly bear and a lemur, Softsmooth plopped down on the floor and began cleaning
herself. That was when Flinx noted the softly glowing
rings each of them wore.
“These?” Bluebright responded to his inquiry. “Toys
strange.

that help with the digging.

fourth Ujurrian

We

built

your ship.

We made

game, yes?”
“Wait a minute. The other one.” Clarity was gesturing weakly. “The one that appeared behind you, Flinx.
Where did he come from? And where did he go?”
“Nobody knows where he comes from,” Moam said,
“and nobody knows where Maybeso goes.”

these. All part of the

“I think I’m beginning to understand,” she said
slowly, “why Ulru-Ujurr is under Church Edict.”

“You have

keep in mind,” Flinx told her, “that the
Ujurrians are complete innocents. The A Ann were beginning illegal exploitation of their world when I showed
up there. At that time the Ujurrians had no concept of
civilization or modern technology or anything related to
either. They lived and ate and mated and dug their tunnels. Playing the game, they called it. So I introduced
them to a new game, the game of ‘civilization.’ It didn’t
take

to

them very long

to learn

how

to build a starship.

my Teacher. I can’t imagine what they’ve
now. How to make rings, apparently.”
was

“How

to

Had

learned by

have more fun!” Fluff roared. “Got here too

late to help Flinx-friend

fun.

That

to find you,

— but

anyway.

not too late to have

New

more

element has entered

Flinx in Flux

301

game. Very intriguing. You would say, ‘Involves in”
explicable astrophysical and mathematical metastasis.’

the

“Maybe

wouldn’t,” Flinx said carefully.
“We ought to get out of here.” Clarity was studying
the stairway. “More of those fanatics might come lookI

ing for their friends.”

“It doesn’t matter anymore.

There are Ujurrians
here.” He spoke to her, but he was thinking at Fluff.
“What do you mean when you speak of a ‘new element’
in the game? I thought the rules I set down for you were
fairly

straightforward.”

“Were,

yes.

You remember you

also taught us that not

everyone plays the game by the rules. You explained
cheating. This is a kind of cheating.”
Softsmooth took up the refrain, her mental voice distinctly feminine compared with that of the three big
males. “You know we have always dug the tunnels,
Flinx-friend.

Found some

interesting ideas for

nels in the information the cold

a tunnel that

minds

left

new

tun-

behind. Started

way.” She smiled, revealing long fangs and

bone-crushing teeth. “We can dig all kinds of tunnels;
dig through rock, through sand, through what you call
spacetime.”
“Fun to dig to other worlds,” Moam commented.
“Same world gets boring.” He was inspecting one of the
laser pistols Vandervort’s bodyguards had dropped. Flinx

was not worried. All

Moam

was

interested in

was

the

pistol’s construction.

Softsmooth carried on. “Been digging many tunnels
to other worlds.” She indicated the empty pit. Flinx was
careful not to go too close to the edge. If one fell in,
there was no telling where and when one might stop.
“Dug tunnel to place your people call Horseye, natives
call Tslamaina. Found an interesting thing there.”
“Big machine,” Moam put in. “Biggest machine
we’ve seen ever.” The usual feeling of frivolity was absent

from

his thought.

“Did some studying,” Softsmooth continued. “After

Alan Dean Foster

302

a while something really very strange detected us study-

came

ing and

there.” She smiled again.

we have

you know. Found smaller similar things all
this one big thing on the Horseye world. Links

to,

linked to

go

we left before it got
“We can move quickly when

to chase us away, but

our tunnels, only a lot smaller.”
“What is horse?” Fluff asked suddenly.
“A Terran quadruped,” Flinx told him. ‘‘They’re no
longer common.”
‘‘Too bad. Image is nice.”
‘‘Shut up, Fluff,” Softsmooth admonished him. ‘‘I was
like

talking.”
‘‘Don’t

tell

me

to shut

up.”

which would
have killed a large man instantly, before settling back
down as though nothing had happened. Clarity had run
to Flinx ’s side at the start of the fight, and he reluctantly
allowed her to remain next to him. His mind was clear,
but his emotions were in turmoil.
‘‘Before the really very strange something arrived to
chase us away, we found out what the machine was all

They exchanged blows,

the lightest of

about.”
‘‘It’s

an alarm,”

Moam

was busily taking the

muttered. Flinx saw that he

laser pistol apart, his

huge fingers

picking delicately at the internal circuitry.

‘‘What kind of alarm?”
‘‘To warn against something. Against a big danger.
Except that the people it was supposed to warn have all
gone away a long time ago.” In Flinx ’s mind the mental
picture of ‘‘long ago” that Softsmooth was projecting
stretched into infinity. That was impressive, because the
Ujurrians never exaggerated.
‘‘You said you had to find me, anyway. Because of

come
Horseye, much

this?” All four ursinoids nodded in unison. ‘‘Why
to

me?

less

I

know nothing

of a world called

any weird machines on it.”

‘‘You are the teacher,” Fluff said simply. And then,
shockingly, ‘‘Also because you are involved somehow.”

Flinx in Flux

“Me?”

Pip did a

little

before settling back down.
feeling

is

hop on her master’s shoulder

“How

can

I

be involved when

heard of it?”

this is the first I’ve

“The

303

there.” Even Fluff was

nicating with great seriousness.

“You

now commu-

are the key to

something, whether the machine or the danger or something else we do not yet know. We would like to know.
It would help in the game. This danger worries us.”

was

and

worried the Ujurrians, Flinx knew,
then everyone else ought to be properly terrified. “Is the
danger imminent?
If

it

real

it

’ ’

“Imminent?” wide-eyed Bluebright echoed.
“Is it going to strike soon?” Flinx inquired tiredly.
their innocence, the Ujurrians could instantly

In

compre-

hend the most complex mechanical and mathematical
concepts while simultaneously misunderstanding

much

simpler terms.

“Do

not know. You must help us to understand this

thing,” Softsmooth said.

“You

are the teacher.”

“I’m not a teacher!” he replied angrily. “I’m just a
student. By now any one of you has more accumulated
knowledge stored in your minds than I ever will.”
“But you know the game,” Fluff reminded him. “The
That we are still learning.”
“This is somehow part of the game,” Bluebright said.
All four were staring at him, and he was unable to look
into those vast yellow eyes and lie. Here it was again.

game of

Just

civilization.

when he was

else’s

certain he

was through with someone

problems, another set materialized to take their

place. If he insisted, they

would go away and leave him

alone. If he insisted.

They were pleading silently. It did him no good to turn
away because that meant he had to look at Clarity, which
was just as bad. There was no escape for him from himself. Not in this room, at this time, in this place. Maybe
not anywhere, ever.

“I can’t do anything to help,” he said

finally,

“be-

Alan Dean Foster

304

cause I don’t know anything about this. Can’t you understand that?”
‘‘Understand ignorance, Flinx-friend,” Softsmooth
said without hesitation. ‘‘Can fix that.”

Flinx was taken aback. ‘‘How?

By

taking

me

to Hors-

eye?” He eyed the black pit uneasily.
‘‘No. Can show you a little, maybe. We cannot see it
ourselves but can help you to see. Will not be dangerous hopefully.” Fluff had come over to put a paw on
Flinx’s shoulder. ‘‘We must know, Flinx-friend. Is important to us, too. It might be serious enough to stop the
game. To stop all games.”
Was there really anything to think about? Did he really
have any choice? Did he ever?
‘‘How are you going to show me? Is this threat

—

nearby?
‘‘It is

You

’

very, very far away.

We

can only guess where.

Teacher must trust his pupils.”
‘‘If it’s so far away, how can you show it to me?”
‘‘The same way we found you here.” A huge finger
pointed at his neck. Sensing the emotions directed her
way, Pip lifted her head curiously.
‘

will have to trust us.

Tip ?”

‘‘She is,” Fluff struggled to frame a difficult concept,

something deep inside you, inside your
mind. Something even we cannot see. Whatever it is that
lets you tell how others are feeling and may let you do
other things someday. We can help like that, a little. Your
small companion is an amplifier. We can be a preamplifier. A very, very big one.” He tilted his head back to
‘‘an amplifier for

regard the ceiling.
‘‘Your body will stay here, but

we can send your mind

elsewhere.”
‘‘Elsewhere? Can’t you be a little more specific?”
‘‘Toward the threat, the danger. To observe and learn.
We cannot do it with ourselves, but we can do it with
you. Because you are different from us. Because you are
different from anyone else.”

Flinx in Flux

The proportions of

305

problem were
expanding far faster than he could keep pace with. “Why
not just dig one of your tunnels in that direction?”
“Because it is too far. Unimaginably far.”
“If it’s unimaginably far, then how can it be dangerous
to us?”
“It can move. It does not seem to be moving this way
now, but we are not sure. We need to be sure.” Fluff
gazed fondly down at Flinx. “We would not force you,
the Ujurrians’

little

teacher.”

“Oh, hell, I know that. Does it make a difference?
Just make sure you don’t lose track of me after you shoot
me out to wherever it is I’m going.” He took a long
breath. “What do I have to do?”
you to lie down, Flinxfriend, so you don’t fall over and hurt yourself.”
“Makes sense. If I’m going to engage in some kind of
Ujurrian astral projection, or whatever, I wouldn’t want
“It might be a

good thing

come

with a sprained wrist.”

to

out of

sarcasm was

mask

a

little

it

lost

on

for

As

his hirsute friends, but

always, his
it

helped to

of the fear that was beginning to surge within

him.

He took

a step toward the coffin, then quickly changed

mind. He was not going back in that thing. There
were a couple of folding beds at the back of the room,
and he chose the nearest, lying down after making sure
Pip’s coils were clear. He kept his arms at his sides,
hoping he was not as stiff and uncomfortable as he must
have looked.
“All right. What do I do now? Do you pick me up and
throw me toward the ceiling?” He laughed nervously.
Each of the Ujurrians stood at a corner of the bed. He
could see Clarity between Fluff and Bluebright, eyeing
his

him anxiously.
“Flinx? Maybe you shouldn’t do this.”
“Probably you’re right. But I never have been able to
do what was good for me. I always seem to end up doing
what’s best for others.” He closed his eyes, wondering

Alan Dean Foster

306
if

it

would make

you have

a difference.

to do, Fluff.

“Go

ahead and do what

”

There was no transition, no delay. He was back in the
lake, Pip alongside him. It was not v^hat he had expected.
Only this time he was not floating aimlessly. He was capable of movement. Experimentally he swam a few circles, Pip following. The transparent liquid did not pour
down his nostrils and lungs to choke him.
By the time he had turned the fourth circle, the lake
began to grow dark. He continued to swim and had the
feeling he was traveling at great speed, yet his body
hardly seemed to be moving at all. Hands and feet moved
lazily while the cosmos rushed past.
Transparency and sunlight gave way to streaks of crimson
and purple, as if his surroundings were Doppler-shifted to
the extreme. Stars and nebulas exploded toward him, only
to fade rapidly beneath his feet. An interesting illusion,
but no more.
Is this what it feels like to be a quasar? he thought
idly.

He would have

liked to

have lingered

to study individ-

ual stars and planets. Like electric sparks, images of
powerful races and immense galaxy -spanning civiliza-

on his consciousness and were
gone. All were new and unknown, alien and unsuspected.
His mind touched on theirs and then broke away, like a
wave rising and falling on the shore.
Past the last sapient thought and still racing outward,
now little more than a concept himself, a blemish on the
precepts of conventional physics. Not a particle to his
name, no more than an afterthought cast loose from the
tions impinged briefly

prison of the mind.

The stars were all gone by then, and the last of the
sapience, and he found himself in a region that should
not have existed. A place where vacuum was stained only
by forgotten wisps of interstellar hydrogen and the oc-

Flinx in Flux

307

casional burning star core gleamed like a candle in a

on an ocean of nothingness.
And something else.
Too big to be alive, and yet it lived. A roiling

bottle set afloat

nition of life

and

death,

good and

redefi-

evil.

Even as the force that propelled him onward tried to
thrust him into its midst, he found himself slowing, recoiling. Whole civilizations he had touched, whole galaxies he had comprehended, but this was too vast and
too terrible for his disembodied self to understand. He
glimpsed its shadow and turned away, turned inward and
ran, fighting his way back along the path he had taken.
Even as he fled, it became aware of him. He tried to
accelerate, the universe aflat wash of laser-bright color
around him. Sluggish but immense, it reached for the

— and missed. By a kilometer, a light-year, a galactic diameter — he would never know. All that mattered

intruder

was that it missed and left him untouched and unsullied
by what it was.
Back in upon himself he fled, at the last instant racing
past a great but confused mind that was more innocent
and ignorant even than the Ujurrians, an executor of still
greater potential. It was an expanding greenness, a pale
lime glazed on glass in which he saw himself and Clarity
and other humanity reflected. An emerald glue held it all
together. Then it was gone.
Replaced by still another, as different from its predecessor as he was from it. Swimming in another part of
the same lake. When it raced by and touched him briefly,
he felt a great sense of peace. This second sapience was
warm and friendly and even apologetic. It was there, and
then it was gone the way of the greenness.
Third and lightest touch of all from a consciousness he
finally recognized. A lonely calling. Not at all what one
would expect from an artificial intelligence. Far out past
the edge of the Commonwealth, in the Blight. A weapon
and an instrument all at once, waiting for him to return

Alan Dean Foster

308

blend with it, give purpose to its existence
even though all the old enemies were gone.
What now of enemies new? What of those who had
built the great warning network centered on Horsey e?
Whence had they gone and why? None knew. The Ujur-

and

direct

it,

rians wanted to know. So did Flinx.
It hit

him hard

then.

He was

needed. Because he was

an offshoot, a sport, a freak. One those who had built
the alarm could not have foreseen. Just as they could not
have foreseen the evolution of the greenness, the warmth,
and the Tar-Aiym engine of destruction that cried in its
loneliness. They had built the alarm to warn them of an
inconceivable threat on the farthest fringes of existence
and had probably fled because they had not been able to

find a way to deal with
But the unforeseen

it.

had followed them.

Life

emerged and evolved beyond what they might have

had

antic-

Or had they anticipated it, anticipated everything, and left the alarm to warn whatever, whoever might
come in after them? The green, the warm, and the
ipated.

weapon.
Only one thing they could not possibly have anticipated: a nineteen-year-old named Flinx.
It was possible that the Ujurrians had sensed this. How,
he could not imagine, but the ursinoids were capable of
much they themselves did not understand. Like Maybeso,
who could teleport when and wherever he wanted to but
would not do anything on request and was probably insane

to boot.

So much happening all at once, and himself in the middle of it all. There was responsibility here he could not
evade. Whatever threatened him threatened sapience everywhere. The great civilizations he had sensed in passing, the intelligences still fighting to emerge from the
primordial ooze, the greenness, the warmth, and the
weapon that sang. And the Commonwealth, his Commonwealth. Mankind, thranx, everyone and everything.
The vastness he had scraped with his sanity was be-

Flinx in Flux

309

move, though not for a long
while. Long in his time or galactic time ? He found he did
not know. It was something he was going to have to find

stirring itself. Preparing to

out.

Which made a great deal of sense. Was he not a student? He would have the help of the Ujurrians, and of
his old mentors if he could find them. And he would go
out again, beyond normal space, for additional looks.
He would go because he was the only one who could.
Something would have to be done about what he had
detected, if not in this lifetime, then in another.

who had constructed

the warning system

Those

had thought

so,

too.

When

he woke up, he was swimming in his own sweat.
Pip lay spraddled across his chest, wings spread and limp,
utterly exhausted. Four tired Ujurrians were staring concernedly down at him, along with one haggard human.
Clarity took his hand and pressed it to her chest, blinking away tears. Scrap still clung to her shoulder and neck.
As near as he could tell, he had not moved. But when
he tried to sit up, nothing happened. Every muscle, every
bone in his body ached.
“That was,’’ he whispered, “exhilarating. Also
frightening and informative.”
Clarity put down his hand to wipe at her eyes and nose.
“I thought you were dying. You lay there all peacefullike, this wonderful contented expression on your face,
and suddenly you started screaming.”
He frowned. “I don’t remember screaming.”
“You screamed,” she assured him, “and you arched
and twisted until I thought you were going to break your
arms. Your friends had to hold you down.”
“Not so easy,” Bluebright murmured. “Wouldn’t think

much

so

strength in teacher’s

“I was close
ing.

the

little

body.”

to it,” Flinx said suddenly,

remember-

“Too close.” He did not have to explain himself to
Ujurrians, who could see it in his mind, but Clarity

Alan Dean Foster

310

possessed no such perception. “There’s something out
there,” he told her calmly.

“Out where? Near Gorisa?”
“No. Out— there. Beyond the Commonwealth. Beyond
our galaxy. Beyond the beyond, I guess. I don’t know
how, but they”— He indicated the silently watching Ujurrians.— “and Pip combined to send part of me out past
the range of the best visual telescopes. But not the radio-

though the people reading
the data have no idea what they’re looking at. I’m not
sure what it was, either. Only that it’s dangerous. And
big. Beyond beyond, and beyond big.”
Fluff was somber. “No fun this. Serious game.”
“Yes, serious game,” Flinx agreed.
“What we do now, Flinx-friend-teacher? ” Moam
wondered.
“We try to learn more. There are others involved. Not
just me and you, but others none of us have suspected. I
have to find out about them, too. It’s going to take work
and time. I don’t mind the work. I hope we have the
time. I’m going to need your help.”
“Always, Flinx-friend.” The four spoke with a single
mental voice.
“I wish you’d talk out loud.”
He turned to Clarity, aware he had been engaging in
purely telepathic exchange with the Ujurrians. “I’ve
found out what I’m going to do with my life. I thought I
scopes.

I

think they’ve seen

was destined

it,

wander aimlessly, acquiring knowledge
without purpose. Now I have a purpose. Out there is an
empty place. By the laws that regulate the distribution of
matter in the universe, it shouldn’t exist. But it does, and
there’s something in the middle of it. Something evil. I’m
going to try to find a way to deal with it if it starts movto

ing in this direction. In the process

maybe

I’ll

become

a

complete human being.”
“You are a complete human being, dammit!”
He smiled gently. “Clarity, I’m nineteen. No nineteen-year-old is a complete human being.”

Flinx in Flux

311

“Are you making fun of me?”
“No, I’m not.” Softsmooth gave him

a hand up from

enough strength to cling to his
shoulder. Her pointed tongue hung limply from her
mouth.
“I need a drink. Something cold.” For the first time,
he noticed the empty room. “Where is everyone?”
“They woke up one at a time,” Clarity explained. She
nodded at the place on the floor where Dabis had been
lying. “That one came around before any of the others.
The first thing he saw was Bluebright holding his disassembled pistol.”
“They all left in a hurry,” Moam said. “We would
have talked with them, but their minds were confused
and full of fear.”

the bed. Pip had barely

“I bet they left in a hurry.” Flinx turned to
“What will you do now?”
“Go back to learning the civilization game.”

“Good.
I’ll

I’ll try to

learn

some of

the

new

rules.

Fluff.

Then

get in touch with you.”

paws together, filling the room with
boom. “Wonderful! We make a new game of it.

Fluff clapped his
a dull

Maybe

not so serious then.”

“We’ll try,” Flinx told him. “I have studying to do.
I have to learn, and to grow.”
“We’ll find you again when it’s time.” Softsmooth put
an arm around his shoulders that nearly hid him from
view and gave him an affectionate hug. The vertebrae in
his neck cracked softly. “Never lose track of Flinxfriend-teacher. Can always ask Maybeso to find you.”
“Yes. I wish Maybeso was here.”
As if on command, the fifth Ujurrian popped into
view. His perpetually sour expression had not changed.

“Here,” he grunted.
“Anything to add

asked him. He
knew he did not have to explain what he meant by ‘all
this.’ With Maybeso nothing needed to be explained.
to all this?” Flinx

“Later,” Maybeso said brusquely, and vanished.
)

Alan Dean Foster

312

“That

one strange being,’’ Flinx murmured admir-

is

ingly.

“Very
you, but

strange,’’

who can

Softsmooth agreed. “I think he like

tell?’’

Flinx glanced at the stairs. “I don’t think any of the

people

who were

here will be coming back.’’

Clarity had to smile.

big could

move

“We’ll talk

“You wouldn’t

think

men

that

that fast.’’

later, then.’’

The four Ujurrians formed a circle around him and put
their paws lightly on his hands. “Later,’’ they said in
unison.

They turned and jumped

into the hole in the

middle of

He

heard their minds bidding him farewell,
listened until the last had faded from his consciousness.
Several minutes passed. Then the ground heaved as if
the building had been kicked from below. Rock and dirt
oozed up into the pit. Flinx and Clarity raced for the
the floor.

stairs

and stayed there

“Filled

the

in

thing like that

He

to settle.

he observed

You don’t want to leave somestanding open for someone to fall into.’’
idea.

turned to Clarity.

take you with

began

tunnel behind them,’’

“Good

thoughtfully.

until the dust

me

you love me.’’
“I don’t think

“Now

you’re going to ask

me

to

wherever I’m going because you think
it,’’

she told him. “I

know

that

I

love

you.’’

He shook

head slowly. “Sorry, but I think I’ve got
it right. You think you love me. You’re intrigued by me,
and you might even find me attractive. But you must see
that you can’t come with me.’’
His rejection made her flinch. “You still don’t trust
me. That’s it, isn’t it? After what I did, I can’t blame
you. But that’s all over and behind us now. I see you the
way I first saw you, for what you really are.’’
“Do you? That’s very interesting, because / don’t see
me for what I really am. I spent a long time trying to
find out who my parents were. That didn’t turn out so
his



Maybe


have better luck finding out who I am.
But that’s not the reason you can’t come with me. I can’t
take you along because I don’t know what’s going to hapwell.

pen

to

me.

I’ll

Isn’t

it

strange, but

old Vandervort, after

“There

I

find

myself siding with

all.

are things at stake here that

make

individual

relationships pale into insignificance. I’m going to have

devote

my

time to understanding them. That
wouldn’t be fair to another person. Especially someone
like you. I guarantee that after spending a few years moving incognito from world to world, studying obscure references in files, and accumulating arcane knowledge,
you’d become deathly bored. I may myself, but I have no
choice. I have to do it. You don’t.
“There are other worlds to visit, other challenging jobs
in your own profession.’’
“I don’t care about that anymore.’’ She was trying
very hard not to cry, he saw.
“Maybe not right now you don’t, but you will. There
are other men out there, most of them more mature than
I. Probably better-looking, certainly less mentally burdened. You can be happy with one of them, or two, or
three, or however many men you eventually choose to
sample. Happier than you could ever be with me. I’m not
prescient, but I think I can promise you that much.’’ He
carefully wiped away the beginning tears.
“I think Scrap’s taken a permanent liking to you. He’ll
be a good companion, and he’ll certainly help you weed
to

all

out the better

men from

the rest.’’

He

grinned.

“The

independent woman’s ideal accessory. Protection and affection all rolled up in one scaly little package. Goodbye, Scrap.’’

He extended

a finger toward the minidrag. Scrap could

not understand the gesture, but he could feel the emotion

of the moment. His pointed tongue flicked out several
times to touch the warm human skin.

“We’re peculiar creatures, we humans. The builders
of the alarm didn’t predict us. There’s a lot out there they


didn’t foresee.

about

it

Some

of

now because

it I

saw.

don’t

I

myself. Evolution has a

I

can’t

tell

you any more

know any more

way of

than that

defeating the most ad-

vanced methods of predicting the future. In this case that
may be for the better.” He turned to go up the stairs.
“Flinx, wait! You can’t just leave me like this. You
can’t just leave me here .”
He hesitated. “You’re right. You have no place to go,
do you? No telling what kind of lies your ex-supervisor

going to spread about you as she tries to save her own
skin from the Scarpanians. Let’s see— you know she sold
out Coldstripe. I think the company’s backers would be
interested in that information. Might even have a job for
is

you somewhere else. You contact them and explain
things, and I’ll bet they keep you safe from Vandervort.
There are ways to check the truth of your statements—
and hers.” Suddenly he sounded wistful.
“It’s all part of the game, isn’t it? Civilization. We
spend our lives playing at it. I think what’s happened to

me

is

Keep

that I’ve just graduated to the next level.

at

your gengineering, Clarity, and maybe one day you’ll
even be able to help me understand me better.
He reached down to her, and she took his hand. Together they ascended the stairs.
“I’ll help in any way I can,” she told him when they
reached the deserted outer office. “I’ll do whatever you
’ ’

recommend.”
“Whatever you

do, do

it

for yourself, not for

me.” He

stood there, thinking to himself. “This, warning system
has been in place for more than a few years, and I think
we have a little time at least before the threat it’s monitoring requires our undivided attention. In order to un-

have to understand myself,
and in order to understand myself, I need to learn about
my own kind. I can’t promise you any kind of permanent
relationship, but now that I think about it, I don’t see
any reason why you can’t assist in my studies.” He hesderstand

itated.

it

properly,

“That

is, if

I

first

you’re interested.”

Flirt )t in

Flux

315

She stared at him for a long time before shaking her
head slowly. “Just when I think I’ve got you figured out,
I have to dump everything I think I’ve learned and start
in all

“If
ening

over again.’’

complicated for you, consider how frightit must be for me,’’ he told her somberly.
Clarity was delighted by his change of heart and content to stay with him for as long as he would allow, but
no matter how enjoyable their time together might be,
she knew she would never be able to put that last thought
out of her mind.
it’s that

