
Alan Dean Foster’s

DIRGE


Kairuna was

kneeling beside a flattened blue-brown bush
that rose no higher than his knee, watching half a dozen dull
yellow slugs with legs combine their efforts to spin a mutual

home out of what appeared to be cerise

The nature of the
instinct that impelled them to effortlessly meld their minuscule exertions would have to be identified by the xenologists.
Absolved by his work classification of the need to analyze or
classify, he was free to marvel and wonder at the intricate
beauty of the delicate alien phenomenon. He felt sorry for the
techs who were required to stop, stand, and interpret. Sometimes it was a lot better just to be able to look.
silk.

Straightening, he let his gaze rove over the endless forest.
Well, not literally endless. The Earthlike pseudo evergreens

only occupied the broad temperate belt that followed the
planet’s equator.
traveler journeying to north or south would
eventually run out of forest and into one of the great ice caps

A

dominated the surface of Argus V But since preliminary
surveys from orbit had indicated that the forest belt varied between two and three thousand miles in width, there was plenty
of room left between the brooding ice for trees.
And for ambulatory life, not all of which was as inconspicuous as silk-spinning slugs. In the two months they had
been exploring the planet the surveyors had encountered a
number of interesting and exotic larger life-forms. The local
carnivores were efficient but not especially impressive
nothing the team couldn’t deal with. Their presence added to
the ambience of what was proving to be a chilly but otherwise
that

hospitable world.


2

“Norway.” Idar came up behind Kairuna, puffing hard and
lugging her tripod-mounted census taker with her. “Western
Canada. Tasmania.” Slapping her gloved hands together, she
began to set up her instruments. Depending on how they were
calibrated, they could take an image of a chosen section of
ground together with an approximation of every kind and variety of life-form that dwelled therein.
“Kind of cold for me.” Kairuna came from and preferred
a warmer clime. The pristine atmosphere and the oxygen
infused into it by the untouched forest helped to compensate
for temperatures that, while remaining above freezing, precluded anyone but stoic fanatics from running around in
short pants. He was glad of his insulated jacket and boots.
“Won’t keep colonizers from coming.” Idar squinted into
an eyepiece, adjusted a readout, bent slightly to squint again.

“Some

folks

would call this paradise.”

always be one with limited horizons.” Kairuna
gazed northward. They were working about a thousand miles
south of the northern ice cap, but he still fancied he could see
“If so,

the glint

it’ll

from

its

leading edge sparkling on the sharp blue

horizon.

“So
it

it’s

not another New Riviera.

What would be? But so far

looks as good or better than Proycon, and people are clam-

oring to settle there.” Laboring behind her instrument, the census
taker shrugged. “There’s

still

plenty of room available for settle-

ment. Oceans are small because so
is

locked up in ice. People will like

much of the planet’s water

it

here.” Raising her head to

look over the top of the eyepiece, she grinned. “Should be

bonuses all around.”
Kairuna contemplated the possibility and found it warming.
The gruff voice that chose to dissent made him wince and
smile at the same time.

“Bonuses! Ha!

I

wouldn’t count on

it!”

Both techs turned a rueful, knowing smile in the direction
of the newcomer. Alwyn was a short, stocky, dyspeptic,
highly experienced

member of the

survey mission’s support

team. Able to raise a shelter, arrange for purified water, or fix

an enormous variety of instruments in the

field

with

little

DIRGE

3

more than a pocket repair kit, he was as valuable a member of
the expedition as he was personally irritating. Nobody on
board the Chagos liked him very much, not even his fellow
corps members. In addition to recovery and repair, his other
area of specialization seemed to be carping and bitching. He
did not even have the good grace to shut up

when he was

working, forcing whichever tech or scientist whose gear he
was rejuvenating to have to stand around and listen to his
complaining.

He was, however, very good at what he did.
“Why shouldn’t we?” The more argumentative
fronted the support specialist without hesitation.

years since anybody found a world that

Idar con“It’s

been

was even remotely

She gestured expansively at the forest. “Maybe
it’s only partly colonizable because of the ice caps, but the
rest of it, the upper temperate forest lands like this, will draw
settlers in droves. You know the rules: Everybody qualifies
for a share in the primary finding and exploration benefits.”
She chuckled. “Even you, unless you want to sign over your
presupposed nonexistent bonus to me.”
“Thanks,” the specialist muttered, “but I’ll hang onto the
designation, just in case I’m wrong and the government decides to play fair and honest with this one.”
“With this one?” Kairuna’s heavy black eyebrows arched.
“How many primes for colonizable worlds have you been on?”
“Well, none, actually.” The small, muscular form turned
Earthlike.”

away. “This

“This

is

is

my first.”

everybody’s

first.”

Kairuna mentioned the obvious

while Idar adjusted her instrumentation slightly in order to
take a new sighting. “There are a lot more ships out looking
than there are habitable worlds being found.”

“Right enough,” Alwyn agreed. “And half of those seem to
be full of giant bugs who’ve already laid claim to the place.”
Idar looked up from the eyepiece of her taker. “The thranx
are our friends.”

“Yeah, sure,” the tech groused. “The government keeps
trying to convince us of that. Trying too hard, if you ask me.

What about

that covert colony they set

up

in the

Reserva

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

4

Amazonia?

If

it

hadn’t been for that wandering street thug

stumbling into the place the rest of us

still

wouldn’t

know

about that!”

was part of a secret government project.” Kairuna
watched something slim and elegant soar across the clear
blue sky. At this distance he could not tell if its wings were
fashioned of feather, membrane, or some as yet unidentified
“It

organic substance.

Alwyn was nodding

vigorously. “Sure was.

It

was such a

government project even the government didn’t know
about it. You ever seen a thranx? I mean, in person?” he challenged the bigger man.
“No,” Kairuna confessed. “Only tridees.”
“They’re ugly little bastards. Like big crickets or mantids
with an extra set of limbs.” He shuddered. “I don’t care what
secret

the lovey-dovey we’re-all-sapients-together-in-this-galactic-

arm propagandists mew. You won’t catch me cuddling up
next to no goddamn giant bug. And there are plenty of people
who feel even stronger about it than I do. Me, if I ran into one,
I’d step

on it.”

“The thranx are a

little

big to step on,” Kairuna reminded

him. “Especially for someone your size.”
“And they might step back,” Idar added without looking up

from her work.

Alwyn

thrust his chin forward belligerently. “Exactly

my

The galaxy’s a vast, unfriendly, dangerous place.”
“The more reason to make friends with those who inhabit

point.

it

alongside us,” Kairuna argued.
Lively blue eyes stared back up at him. “The

to

be careful just

more reason

who we nestle up to.”

—

The discussion was interrupted not by the weather or the
indigenous wildlife, not by the need to continue working, but
by a reverberant, insistent howl. Standing on the little knoll
debating interstellar relationships while taking the measure
of the alien forest, they turned as one in the direction of the
wailing, sonorous bellow. It was unfamiliar to all of them.
“What the hell is that?” Alwyn had walked quickly to the
edge of the knoll to gaze with even more than his usual wariness

DIRGE

5

of the landing transport. Idar’s recording was
forgotten. Kairuna stood behind the two of them, staring over
their heads in the direction of the mournful, insistent howl.
in the direction

It

came not from

the vicinity of the landing transport but

from the vehicle itself.

It

was Kairuna who finally recognized it.

“That’s the general alert.”

“General alert?” The census taker frowned back

“What the hell’s a

‘general alert’?

I

stared

on

down

surface.”

him.

know all sorts of situation-

specific alarms, but I’ve never heard
cially not

at

of a general

alert.

Her expression was bemused

the hill in the direction of the

camp

Espeas she

that

had

sprung up around the landing field that had been cleared to
allow shuttle craft a safe place to set down.
“I told
trust a

you!” Alwyn was

irritatingly triumphant.

“You can’t

new world, no matter how benign a face it presents.”

In reference to faces, Kairuna wished the annoying service

would take his elsewhere. It did not matter that he
might be right: The botanist was tired of listening to the other
specialist

man’s ranting.

“Come

on,” he urged them.

“We’d better go and see what’s

happening.”

Nodding smugly, Alwyn joined them in
descending from the densely forested knob and retracing
“General

alert.”

knew it.”

their steps. “I

Surrounded by members of the Chagos's

staff,

staring intently at the tridee. Magnification

Burgess was

was

visual, not

schematic, so he was able to observe the craft that had just

joined them in orbit in

was an impressive
ship, at least twice the size of the Chagos. While the prevalent
configuration was similar to that of the Chagos and all other
all its

alien glory.

It

vessels equipped with the universal variant of the
its

KK drive,

design and execution differed in a multitude of significant

respects.

“Not

ours,”

one of the techs seated nearby murmured

unnecessarily.

“Not thranx,

either,” the first officer

added. “Unless they’ve

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

6

been hiding something from

us.

Could

it

be one of those

AAnn ships the thranx are always trying to warn us about?”
Burgess looked doubtful. “I’ve seen the AAnn schematics
the thranx have provided. This design

is

much

too sleek.

be Quillp?” Burgess longed for expertise in an area
his crew, through no fault of their own, did not possess.

Could

it

“I don’t think so, Captain.”
first officer felt

Though

far

from

positive, the

secure in hazarding a guess. If he was proved

wrong, he would be delighted to admit the mistake. He hoped
he was wrong. The inherent pacificity of the Quillp was well
known.
Looking sharply to his left, Burgess snapped a question.
“Any response to our queries, Tambri?”
The diminutive communications officer glanced over at
him and shook her head. Her dark eyes were very wide.
“Nothing, sir. I’m trying everything, from Terranglo through
High and Low Thranx to straight mathematical theorems.
They’re chattering noisily among themselves I can pick up

—

—

wash but they’re not talking to us.”
“They will. Keep trying.” Burgess turned back to the threedimensional image floating in the air of the ship’s bridge.
“Who are they and what the blazes do they want here?”
“Maybe they’ve already claimed this world.” The observation no one had wanted to voice came from the back of the
command section. “Maybe they’re here to inform us of a

the

claim of prior rights.”
“If that’s the case,” the

first

officer declared, “they’ve

been

mighty subtle about advertising any prior presence here.
There isn’t so much as an artifact on the planet, much less an
orbital transmitter. There’s nothing on either of the two small
moons, or anywhere else in the system.”
“That we’ve found yet, you mean.” Having stated a contention, the dissenter felt bound to defend it. “We’ve only
been here a couple of months.”
“Okay, okay,” Burgess muttered. “Let’s everybody keep
calm. Whatever the situation, we’ll deal with it. We didn’t expect to encounter sapience here, much less evidence of another space-traversing species. They’re probably taking our

DIRGE

7

measure as carefully as we are theirs.” But I wish they d respond to our communications, he thought tensely.
“Look there!” Someone in the growing crowd pointed.
A second, much smaller vessel was emerging from the side
of the first. Winged and ported, obviously designed for atmospheric travel, it began to recede swiftly from the flank of its
parent vessel. Its immediate purpose was self-evident. Anything else those aboard might intend could not be divined
from tracking its progress.
“Get on to Pranchavit and the rest of the landing party,”
Burgess barked at the communications officer. “Tell them
they’re probably going to have company.”
Once again the officer looked up from her instrumentation.
“They’ll want to know what kind of company, sir.”
Burgess glanced over at the tridee holo. “Maybe they can
tell

us.”

By

the time Kairuna and his

companions arrived at the
camp, it was alive with questions and concerns, anxiety and
contusion. No one seemed to know what was going on, including those who had recognized the audible signal for what
it

was.

Now

they troubled themselves with unsupported in-

ferences and paranoid suppositions. In such company, Alwyn

was

in his element.

Pushing and shoving their way into an already crowded
mess hall, the three late arrivals found themselves confined
to the narrow remaining open space next to the rear wall. Up
by the service door that led to the main stockroom, Jalen
Maroto was waving his arms for quiet. When that didn’t work,
he put a compact amplifier to his lips and simply shouted
everybody down.
“Shut up! If you’ll just shut up, I’ll tell you what’s going
on.” As the crowd noise subsided he added apologetically,
“Or at least, what we know.”
“I know!” Alwyn was not afraid to proclaim theories
where others were hesitant to venture facts. “Something
local’s finally showed up to cause trouble. What is it?” he demanded to know. “A herd of predators? A fast-mutating
plague?”

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

8

“There’s a plague,

all right,”

the

team leader declared

one we brought along with
us.” Delighted to take advantage of the emotional release, a
number of the assembled turned their laughter in the specialist’s direction. Unrepentant but temporarily subdued, he
tried to meet the ridicule of each and every one of them with a
defiant glare of his own.
“A ship has gone into orbit near the Chagos ,” Maroto informed scientists and support personnel alike. “We don’t
know where it’s from, what species built it, or what their intentions are. So far nobody on the Chagos including the
people who are supposed to know about such things, has been
able to pull a fact out of a big basket of ignorance.”
through the amplifier, “but

it’s

,

“They’re not thranx?” someone in the crowd wondered
loudly, referring to the intelligent insectoid race with

whom

humankind had been cautiously developing relations over the
past thirty years.

“We

don’t

know who

or what they are,” Maroto replied,

“because they’re not responding to the Chagos

s

'

repeated

queries to identify themselves. If they’re thranx, they’re

being mighty close-mouthed about

it.”

“The bugs may be ugly, but I’ve never heard of them going
mute,” Idar murmured

know what they

softly.

When no

one reacted to his latest
assertion of certitude, Alwyn assumed a plaintive tone. “Well?
Doesn’t anyone want to know what I know?”
“Nobody wants to know what you know, Alwyn, because
you never know half of what you claim to know.” Unlike his
companions Kairuna had the advantage of being able to see
over the heads ofjust about everyone in the crowd.
“Go ahead and mock.” Alwyn was confident as ever. “These
are the hostile, rampaging, bloodthirsty aliens we’ve always
feared encountering as we extend our sphere of influence.”
“I thought the AAnn were supposed to be the hostile
“I

are.”

aliens,” Idar pointed out.

“That’s what the thranx claim, but so far we’ve only the

bugs’ word for AAnn

hostility.

No, these

are something new.

DIRGE

New

and

9

he concluded with an assurance that regrettably was not born of proof.
“If they’re hostile,” a contrary Kairuna argued, “why are

we

still

hostile ,”

standing here talking?

Why haven’t they turned

this

and all of us to dust?”
“Just you wait.” Secure in his latent mistrust, the specialist
glanced knowingly skyward.
Aside from the fact that scattering into the trees could be
misinterpreted by those aboard the rapidly descending alien
shuttle as a hostile gesture, there was
the feelings of a certain suspicious support specialist aside
no overwhelming
reason to do so. The parent ship continued to swing in low
orbit within viewing distance of the Chagos, moving neither
toward nor away from the human vessel, its communicators
silent, the identity of its occupants still a mystery. No one on
board the Chagos was surprised when the alien shuttle braked
atmosphere and began a swift, calculated curve that would
put it on the surface directly in the midst of the survey team’s
encampment. Indeed, given the ongoing proximity of the two
KK-drive craft, Burgess and his fellow staff officers would
have been perplexed had the alien shuttle chosen to set down
anywhere else.
“No component of the landing team is properly trained to
handle a first contact,” the Chagos s second officer felt comsite

—

—

'

pelled to point out.

“Pranchavit has good people working for him,” Burgess

reminded the officer. “And Maroto’s had offworld experience. Between our support personnel and the scientific complement I’m sure relations will develop in an orderly and
prudent manner we can all be proud of.”
“What if they can’t communicate?” the first officer
wondered. “Even the best intentions can go awry if
misinterpreted.”

“We

don’t have any choice.” Burgess’s expression

solemn. “I can’t

The

tell

was

Pranchavit and Maroto to ignore the

of us will just have to maintain the alert and
hope nothing untoward happens down below.” Seeing the apprehension on the faces of his staff he added, “Look, there’s
aliens.

rest

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

10

team has
been back on board for weeks because we didn’t find any sentients on the surface in our first month here. Nobody could
imagine that they’d show up later. It’s never happened before.”
“There must be something we can do,” someone shouted
wistfully from across the room.
“There is,” the captain admitted. “Prayer would not be out of
order. All of you please feel free to invoke whatever deities enjoin your affection.” He turned back to the tridee. “Especially
on behalf of those of us who are stuck down on the surface until
nothing

we can do from up

here. Zdanko’s contact

this situation resolves itself.”

Idar and

Alwyn

stood beside Kairuna as they had been in-

assembled with the rest of the survey team between
the cleared landing field and the trees ready to greet the arriving aliens. Argusian vertebrates soared high above the open
grassland, scanning the surface for prey or seeds according to
preference. A cool breeze kept the somber proceedings from
becoming stiff, making it necessary for the anxious assembled
structed:

keep moving in order to stay warm.
“I don’t get it.” Both arms wrapped across her chest, Idar
watched her breath congeal in the afternoon air. “What are
we doing here? Not that I’m not as curious as the next person,
but I don’t see why our presence is necessary. We’re not part
of any formal first-contact squad.”
“Neither is anyone else.” Kairuna gestured skyward, once.
“The official contact team is stuck up on the Chagos. So the
job, and the burden, not to mention the responsibility, has
been dumped on Pranchavit and Maroto.” He gazed across
the bobbing heads in the direction of the field, where the
leaders of the survey team’s scientific and support contingents stood side by side, watching the northern horizon and
waiting for something to happen. “Better them than you or I.”
“I could do a better job than any of ’em,” Alwyn avowed.
“At least I wouldn’t be standing out there with my ass exposed to the four winds and no gun.”
“You heard the appraisal from the experts on board the
Chagos ,” Kairuna admonished him. “If these aliens intended
hostilities they would already have attacked the ship.”
to

DIRGE
“Not

if they’re still sizing

strength,”

Alwyn

shot back.

11

us up and trying to gauge our

“Or waiting

to see if we’re

good

to eat.”

“What

you doing

anyway?” Idar challenged him
angrily. “If you’re so worried about malicious aliens, what
possessed you to apply for a position on a deep-space exploare

here,

ration run?”

“Let

me

guess.” Kairuna responded before the other

man

could reply. “Money.”

“Good guess.” Alwyn tugged the brim of his warming cap
down over his forehead, trying to shut out the wind. “But
that’s

not the only reason. Earth was getting too dangerous.

Too many people crammed into too many big cities. That’s
what the colonies are all about. Room to move around and
keep clear of the crazies.”
“So why didn’t you apply to move to one of the Centaurus
worlds, or New Riviera?” Idar wondered aloud. “With your
technical qualifications you could have emigrated anywhere.”
“It’s the same there as on Earth,” he responded without
hesitation. “Too many lunatics. The only difference between
Earth and the colonies is that the more adventurous nuts apply
for emigration.”

safer bet.

He nodded skyward. “Deep space seemed the

At the time.”

Kairuna exuded quiet assurance. “I think you’re
going to be surprised. I think we’re all going to be surprised.”
“Yeah, we’ll be surprised, all right,” the specialist muttered. “That’s why I’m standing back here, as far away from
“It still is.”

the designated greeting point as possible. Closer to the forest
that way.

At

least in the

woods we’ll have a chance.”

“You’ll have a chance.” Idar did not try to hide her distaste.

“The rest of us aren’t going anywhere. I’ve got work to do,
and as soon as this formality is concluded. I’m going right
back to it.”
Not deigning to respond, Alwyn turned to his other com-

“What about you, Kai? You with me?”
“Only as far as dinner.” The big man taunted him gently.
“Why wait for disaster to strike, Alwyn? Why not make a
panion.

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

12

break for the forest now, before the unspeakably horrid alien
invaders arrive?”

“Because I’d have my pay docked for disobeying a general
directive, and you know it. Go ahead and laugh. We’ll see
which one of us snickers last, and which of us is still able to
do so.”
“Hush!” Idar was staring to the north, where the first snowcovered mountains rose above miscolored alien trees. “I
think it’s coming.”
At first nothing more than a distant point of light sifting
down through an azure sky, the alien landing craft grew
rapidly in size and dimension until its descending silhouette
differentiated sharply from the framing clouds. Assembled
between field and forest, fewer than a hundred human faces
strained to make out the lines and design of the unknown
vessel.

As

drew nearer still they saw that it boasted a peculiar arrangement of wheels instead of the familiar, all-purpose struts
that extended from the underside of similar human and thranx
craft. Half a dozen wings protruded from its flanks, running
from the nose all the way back to the tail. This extravagance of
lifting surfaces was counterbalanced by an absence of any
it

weapons. Tinted bright yellow, the sides
and undercarriage of the alien superstructure were flecked
with unfamiliar and indecipherable mauve hieroglyphs.
The landing was smooth and almost silent, as if the pilots
had been practicing on similar open fields for years. As the
whine of multiple engines became tolerable, hands fell from
ears to shade eyes as the craft turned to approach the crowd.
There being no need for ceremony while engaged in survey,
Pranchavit and Maroto were reduced to greeting the visitors
in clean duty clothes. Kairuna smiled to himself. The prim
head of the Argus scientific team, at least, was no doubt regretting the absence of his fancy dress uniform.
There was a stirring as the landing craft maintained speed
during its turn, and a few of those gathered in front found
themselves wondering if perhaps their desire for a good view
of the proceedings might not be misplaced. But the manyvisible antennae or

DIRGE
winged

alien lander pivoted neatly

13

on

its

double set of nose

wheels and lined up parallel to the crowd. Those in front relaxed. Nothing of an overtly offensive nature was in evidence.
Kairuna knew of several researchers and techs who had armed
themselves in defiance of directives. Pistols remained concealed by multiple layers of cold-weather clothing and bulky
jackets.

Eagerness filled the air like a cool fog. What would the
aliens look like? Would they be atavistically alarming like the
thranx? Elegantly handsome and yet vaguely sinister like
the AAnn? Or quaintly charming like the Quillp? Humankind
had yet to voyage sufficiently far, had still to encounter
enough intelligent species, to be blase at the prospect of
meeting still another.
Perhaps they would look like nothing the smooth-skinned
simians in their glistening new KK-drive starships had yet
met. They might be towering horrors or diminutive pacifists.
Or diminutive horrors or towering pacifists. No one knew.
The aliens had failed to respond to interrogatives from the
Chagos either verbally or visually. Kairuna and the rest of
the survey team would be the first to gaze upon these new,
previously unencountered alien countenances. He and his associates were acutely conscious of the singular privilege that
was being accorded them.
,

Everyone had been thoroughly, if hastily, briefed. No
matter what the aliens looked like, no matter how repulsive or
absurd or disconcerting or surprising, all reaction was to be
kept to a minimum. There was to be no cheering lest sudden
loud noises upset the

visitors.

No wrinkling of faces, no dis-

torted expressions that might be misinterpreted in the event

the visitors

communicated by

similar means.

gestures in case they asserted themselves in a

No

expansive

manner akin to

the highly gesticulatory thranx. Response to any overtures

and all expressions of greeting would be made by Pranchavit
and Maroto. Everyone else was welcome to watch, but in
stillness and silence.
That did not prevent Idar from nudging Kairuna in the side
as an opaque cylinder slowly and silently descended from the

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

14

looked as if a particularly sleek bird
was laying an oblong egg. Nearby, a grim-faced Alwyn patted

belly of the alien craft.

It

his side.

“Not

to worry.

I’m carrying a regulation sideshot with a

full clip.”

won’t be of much use to you in the brig,” Idar hissed
at him.
“Both of you, be quiet.” Kairuna nodded. “They’re coming
out. Or something is.” The possibility that the aliens might
choose to make first contact through intermediaries such as
mechanicals could not be discounted.
There were no mechanicals, however. The aliens had
chosen to greet the tightly packed crowd of anxious bipeds in
person. There were three of them. Nitrox breathers themselves, they were clad only in lightweight clothing of some
unfamiliar fabric that shimmered in the bright, cold air, and
“It

no helmets or other headgear whatsoever.
The reaction to their appearance was a uniform gasp on the
part of the assembled humans. Kairuna was unaware that his
lower jaw dropped slightly, leaving him standing in full defiance of orders with a mock stupid expression on his face. Idar
stood wide-eyed but with more presence of mind as well as
person. Alwyn, whose left hand had been hovering in the
vicinity of his concealed weapon, was moved to comment,
but mindful of the general directive to keep quiet, he held his
peace.

was a good thing he had the forbearance to keep from
drawing the gun. The aliens might not have reacted immediately to its emergence, but his fellow humans surely would
have. It was not that his naturally suspicious nature was in
any way mollified by the aliens’ utterly unexpected and novel
appearance, only that he was for once no less shocked than
It

his companions.

2

he reaction on Earth to the announcement that yet another
intelligent space-faring species had been discovered no
longer dominated the news portion of the general media.
People were more interested in the progress of the new settlements being opened in the Centaurus group, the results of the
lottery to determine who would be granted emigration visas
for New Riviera, the latest DNA-HGH gene splicing scandal
involving the parents of would-be sports superstars, whether
a new wholly artificial fat-free chocolate was safe for human
consumption, and possible ballot fixing involving the two runoff candidates for world council representative from Oceania.
As far as relations with nonhuman species were concerned,
the vote on the possible expansion of the thranx colony in the
Reserva Amazonia and a series of trade overtures from the
I

AAnn

Empire drew far more attention than anything
might have happened on far-distant Argus V

that

Therefore officials were mildly surprised but hardly shocked

when

Chagos materialized from the arcane torquing of
space-plus into Mars orbit and commenced the far more gradual
and easily monitored arc sunward toward Earth. On board was a
the

contingent of officers from the survey and exploration party

had been exploring the Argus system. A sufficiently large,
self-sustaining team had been left on the fifth planet of that benign, inviting sun, now named Treetrunk by its investigators, to
continue the work of preparing it for an expanded series of
studies and the possibility of eventual colonization.
The principal concern of Earth-based authority had been
allayed when it was learned that the representatives of the
that

15

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

16
Pitar, as their

name

not native to Argus

were
but came from another nearby system

for themselves

V

was

transcribed,

did they, according to admittedly preliminary
discussions, have any claim on that particular world, nor
any other in the Argus system. Out exploring on their own,
entirely

Nor

they had picked up quantified radiation from the vicinity of
only to discover that it emanated from another ship.
Argus

V

Contact had been made, initiated by the Pitar themselves. In
this instance of interspecies coming together it was humankind that had been discovered, and not humans who had done
the discovering.

Shrouded in procedure and safe from the glare of sensationseeking publicity, the appropriate personnel were designated
and gathered to prepare for the arrival of the representatives
of the latest in a series of recently encountered nonhuman
species. By now a routine had been developed, rehearsed, and
refined. Formal greetings and processing would take place on
the island of Bali, a sufficiently isolated yet well-developed
site that

had been used

ously. In addition to

made

its

for such purposes several times previ-

physical beauty, the island and

its

man-

were situated near the equator, thus
allowing for the easiest and most economical lift-offs into
orbit. Facilities for the elaboration of contact were already in
place, and government operatives who knew how to best facilitate relations would be ready and waiting for the arrival of the
incoming visitors.
Those on board the Chagos had yet to transmit pictures of
the newly contacted creatures, but no one in the government
contact offices on Bali or the reception facility that had been
established on the nearby island of Lombok nor anyone else
on Earth was in any particular hurry. The media could wait to
image tridees in person provided it was a slow newsday.
The physical appearance of intelligent aliens had ceased to be
an especially newsworthy event nearly a hundred years ago.
So while interested but far from agitated staff waited on
Bali and Lombok for the arrival of the new aliens, the Chagos
was directed into a parking orbit that would keep it isolated
from other ships, shuttles, and orbiting stations until the apshuttle landing strip

—

DIRGE
propriate authorities informed those

17

on board that it was time

of the Pitar to be received. Quarantine
and related biomedical canvassing had already been performed on the ship while it was traveling through space-plus
and prior to orbit insertion. If such procedures had not been
carried out in the safety of deep space, the Chagos would
not have been permitted to take up orbit around Earth, much
less disembark its esteemed passengers. As a craft equipped
with the latest technology for carrying out survey and exploration, the facilities on board were the qualitative if not
quantitative equal of anything available at any Earth-based
medical agency. Had the tiniest indication of a possibly danfor the representatives

gerous bacterium, virus, or other potentially infectious ele-

ment been detected abiding on or within the Pitar, the Chagos
would have been stopped in lunar instead of terran orbit,
where additional, more intensive tests could have been performed in perfect safety.
According to the exploration vessel’s accomplished and
experienced medical staff, the Pitar on board carried nothing
harmful to humans individually or as a group. The aliens had
been completely cooperative with their human hosts, readily
acceding to any and all requests for blood, tissue samples, or
scans by assorted instrumentation. In fact, they were as interested in the results of such procedures as the men and women
who carried them out. To the irritation of their landed colleagues, the Chagos s techs had chosen not to release any information via relay. Like their appearance, the biology of the
Pitar remained confined to the storage facilities of the ship.
Only enough information was transmitted to reassure the
relevant departments in Zurich, Gauteng, and elsewhere that
these dozen representatives of a new intelligence posed no
medical threat to humankind.
Not only had they been cooperative where biological
testing was concerned, the twelve Pitar who had been delegated to represent their civilization had shown no hesitation at leaving their friends and shipmates behind while
entrusting their lives and futures to their new human acquaintances. Following a succession of polite, formal farewells,
'

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

18
their

own craft had departed for home to announce the mutual
Though

had been plenty of volunteers from
among the Chagos’s crew to travel with them, as the dozen
chosen Pitar had elected to do in the company of their human
discovery.

there

counterparts, the Pitar preferred to proceed in a different
fashion, according to their

own

traditions.

Human

travelers

and ambassadors would be more than welcome in the very
near future, Pranchavit and his superiors on the Chagos had
been assured. The Pitar they were conveying to Earth would
establish formal relations and commence arrangements for
the exchange of diplomatic personnel.
Events were proceeding so smoothly and the declarations
from the Chagos were so reassuring that after its first day in
orbit no one thought it necessary to further monitor the newly
arrived KK-drive craft. So it was that the release of a shuttlecraft from the starship’s hold was not noticed until it was skimming the upper levels of the atmosphere, and was not remarked
upon until an insecure watcher aboard one of the two nearby orbiting stations tentatively brought the matter of the unscheduled
and unannounced trajectory to a superior. That individual
regarded the confirming readout in puzzled and then stunned
silence before demanding re-reconfirmation. When this was
provided, a controlled state of all-hell-breaking-loose promptly
went into effect on both stations.
When the situation was communicated to the surface, the
relevant authorities had more than a little difficulty accepting
the evidence. Ground-based instrumentation confirmed not
only the existence of the unauthorized shuttle descent but its
path and velocity. No one panicked no matter what was on
board the vessel, it could not be terribly threatening. The
shuttle was not large, was not disrupting normal atmospheric
traffic patterns, and had promptly put itself in touch with and
under the guidance of Denpasar authority. It had begun an
unannounced descent but had subsequently taken time to
carefully clear its final approach with ground control.
The contact personnel who were hastily summoned from
downtime and off-duty to configure an appropriate reception
team were bemused and in certain cases angry, but none of

—

DIRGE
them were
regularly.

19

The shuttle was approaching openly, if irThere was as yet no evidence of malice on the part
fearful.

of its crew: only a kind of ceremonious irreverence.
By the time the shuttle appeared beneath the low-hanging,
moisture-heavy clouds, a proper if irritated greeting party had
managed to assemble in the reception foyer that had been specifically designed to put first-time arrivals to Earth at ease.
Several high-level executives were frantically checking each
other’s uniforms while lower-level functionaries busied themselves with more mundane preparations. Behind them, facilities for the unobtrusive scanning and recording of the visitors’
shape, habits, and actions were being activated. Everyone wanted
another hour, another half day, to ensure that everything was
in order.

them

As that was obviously not to be forthcoming, many of

substituted grumbling

and muttering for the time they

were not to be granted.
Guided in by both land-based and onboard instrumentation, the shuttle performed a near-perfect final approach and
touchdown. As it did so, the morning cloud layer began to
clear, dropping the humidity level somewhat and alleviating
the discomfort the diplomatic staff felt in their hastily donned
dress uniforms. After slowing, the shuttle turned at the far

end of the

runway and taxied slowly over
bypassing the main terminal.

artificial

ception hall,

As soon

as

it

to the re-

stopped, several of the senior diplomats

strode forward to await disembarkation.

They were dressed

no wish to overpower the traditionally disoriented visitors with an overabundance of personal color and light. They wore no arms, nor was any sort of
neatly but not flashily, having

formal military color guard in evidence. Everything about
the ceremony had been designed to put cautious, hesitant
visitors at ease while impressing upon them the friendliness
as well as the determination of the united peoples of Earth.

The forward door opened, and a disembarkation ramp was
lowered. The diplomats waited expectantly, naturally curious
but far from anxious. After

all,

the explorers had already

communicated

the fact that the aliens were unaggressive ni-

trox breathers.

Shape and

size

and the

style

of visible organs

20

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

of perception were no longer a novelty to the team of experienced professionals.
No one was prepared for what they saw, and the shock that
ran through the small cluster of official greeters was almost
palpable enough to set the seismographs located at the base
of Mount Agung to stuttering. Despite intensive training, despite the presence of men and women who were experienced
as well as highly qualified, despite the cushion of written pro-

cedure and the absence of a need to improvise for virtually
any conceivable situation, for a long, long moment no one in
the clutch of official greeters and welcomers had anything to

was extraordinary. It was unprecedented.
Most remarkably of all, the temporary paralysis extended
even to the perpetually jaded representatives of the media
who were on hand for the occasion.
Siringh Pranchavit, the leader of the survey team that had
been exploring Argus V, led the way, accompanied by several
of his top aides. Not all were present, a number having been
chosen to remain behind to continue the work on that promising new world. Accompanying the scientists and researchers
were officers of the Chagos itself. Behind them and in advance of representative members of the ship’s crew were the
aliens. As attested, there were twelve of them. Half were
male, the other half female. It could have been otherwise, of
course, but among the diplomats and media reps present none
would have bet half a credit on the separation of alien genders
being anything other than what it appeared.
The Pitar were gorgeous. Drop-dead, overpoweringly, stunningly gorgeous. As beautiful as they were human. More
properly, they were humanoid, but none present, least of all
among the media reps who were now frantically scrambling to
make certain their equipment was functioning properly, was
prepared to bring up that distinction.
The males were magnificent. Without exception they were
say. It

though not intimidatingly so, with finely finessed lean
musculature and faces that were devoid of blemish or whisker.
Their countenances demanded revision of all previous de-

tall,

DIRGE
scriptions of “chiseled” features.

the

21

They were,

human men and women present were

as far as both

concerned, visually

perfect.

As

for the Pitarian females, the females

were

.

.

.

The

rep-

media competed among themselves in a
desperate search for superlatives that were neither jejune nor

resentatives of the

overworked.
Neither Pitarian gender manifested visible discomfort,
though a certain understandable nervousness was reflected in

comments. After all, despite the reaction of the
greeting team, they were participating in initial representations with a newly contacted space-traveling species, physical
similarities notwithstanding. The warmth of the greeting that
followed as soon as the dumfounded diplomats and their associates recovered their senses soon put the visitors at ease.
Their skin was a homogenous, unvarying bronze hue, made
all the more striking by the extreme variance in hair and eye
color that the Chagos’s scientists assured the members of the
receiving team was natural. Blue hair and violet eyes were not
uncommon. There were combinations of white and yellow,
green and red, lavender and pink that would have seemed
shocking on a human but which on the entirely perfect Pitar
their initial

appeared utterly natural. Their voices, hastily trained in basic
Terranglo during the space-plus journey from Argus, were
uniformly resonant and mellifluous. They moved with the
easy, pantherish grace of natural athletes and politely tolerated the wide-eyed stares of media and diplomatic personnel

Only occasional indications of nervousness betrayed
what otherwise would have been a confrontation between two
alike.

species completely at ease with one another.

As

wore off, the visitors were escorted into the
receiving area. While stunned personnel took over and began
processing the Pitarian representatives, Pranchavit and the
senior members of his team were quickly drawn aside and
hurried into a small conference room whose atmosphere
was filled with disbelief mixed wildly with speculation. Kept
outside, the desire of certain media reps to gain admittance
bordered on the hysterical. Through it all the chief of the
the shock

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

22

Chagos’s scientific complement maintained a calm, though
clearly amused, composure.
“What kind of a joke is this?” As an assistant general secretary specializing in human-alien protocol, Dosei Anchpura

more weight than her slight frame suggested. Presently she had parked her diplomatic skills just inside the door.
Immediately behind her, on the other side of the soundproof
barrier, media representatives fought to aim their pickup
lenses over the shoulders of immovable security personnel.
carried

“Joke?” Smiling absently, Pranchavit considered her question rhetorically. “What joke?” Next to him Werther Baumgartner, a sober xenologist pushing an active seventy, smirked

and nudged his companion. “There is no joke.”
“This is impossible!” Anchpura looked to her colleagues
those people out there being
for support. “These Pitar
guided through the processing lines aren’t aliens. They’re
human. Where ’d you pick them up? From a live show on one
of the orbiting stations before you came down? Without
clearance, I might add, and here instead of across the strait at
Lombok, where you belong. Although now that I see the joke,
I understand your reasons, if not your motivation.”
“Aye,” Colin Brookstone put in. “What’s come over you?
It’s a fine joke, I admit, but you’ll soon have to call a halt to it.”
“Siringh is telling you the truth.” Smirk gone, Baumgartner was all serious now, and all scientist. “Believe me, the
first time we set eyes on them our reaction was, if anything,

—

more

—

disbelieving than yours.”

who until now had been
“But how can this be? They are

Ambassador-at-large al-Namqiz,
silent,

sputtered a response.

human

you or

anyone in this room.” His attention
shifted to the tightly packed horde of frantic media representatives who were still fighting to gain entrance to the meeting
room. “More human.”
Lionel Harris-Ferrolk, Baumgartner’s companion in subdued mirth, was the possessor of a reputation that exceeded
even that of his two nominal superiors. “Remarkable how
after all these years of contact with sapient extraterrestrials
we are still hostage to the superficiality of appearance.” His
as

as

I,

as

DIRGE

23

reconstructed eyes, small but penetrating, swept over the

diplomats assembled in the room. “You are
are all wrong.

They

are

human to

and you
and
a remarkable degree
all right,

—

Not quite.”
Al-Namqiz sighed as he took a seat. What had promised to

yet not.

be a traditionally impressive yet routine meet-and-greet had
turned into something extraordinary. Eventually he was
going to have to face the media. He was not a man, after
thirty-four years in the diplomatic service, who desired to do
so without answers.
As his two slightly senior colleagues appeared willing to
let him do the explaining, Harris-Ferrolk continued. “What
we have in the Pitar is either the most remarkable instance of
convergent evolution ever encountered, much less demonstrated, or else possible proof of the old theory that the dispersal of the origins of at least certain kinds of life throughout
the galaxy, if not the universe, was by some form of seeds or
spores, whether aboard meteorites, comets, or some as yet
unidentified vector. The Pitar have been very cooperative. I
ask you to keep in mind that despite the astonishing physical
similarities, which I might add include internal as well as external features, preliminary studies reveal significant differ-

DNA. As

ences in

well, there are other factors at

would never permit a
matter a

Pitar to pass for

work

human, or

that

for that

human as Pitar.”

From the back of the tense, crowded room, a terse question. “What about interbreeding?”
When Harris-Ferrolk looked nonplussed, the more relaxed
Pranchavit spoke up. “That

is

a question

I

would have ex-

come from a representative of the general media, not
a member of the diplomatic corps. However, since it has been
asked, based on our studies to date we do not believe that

pected to

would be

possible.

quires nothing

coupling,
his

is

The mere

act of intercourse,

which

re-

more biologically complex than crude physical

another matter.” For confirmation he glanced

at

two colleagues, who both nodded.

“Physiological similarities extending beyond physical sym-

metry and external features suggest the

latter

should be

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

24

As we have explained, the Pitar have been most cooperative.” He added drily, “You understand this is specula-

possible.

tion only. There has

been no experimental confirmation of

any of this.”

“They seem very subdued,” someone else ventured.
“They are not demonstrative by nature. Certainly less so
than a comparable group of humans would be,” Pranchavit
replied. “We do not know if this is a representative social trait
or if they are simply being restrained in our presence.
tell

you

that this

is

I

can

not a function of their isolation here on a

manner was identical on Argus V, when
they were in the company of their own people. Do not make
the mistake of confusing their appearance with that of comparable human counterparts.” The researcher shrugged. “Perhaps they are simply quiet by nature. Personally, I find it
strange world. Their

refreshing.”

someone

wondered aloud.
Pranchavit did not miss a beat. “From what we have told
and been able to glean, they are more long-lived than humans.
Perhaps on the order of ten to fifteen percent.”
“This may not be a properly framed scientific or diplomatic query,” inquired one of the younger staff members restlessly, “but
do they all look like that?”
Baumgartner nodded somberly. “This group could be
taken as typical, yes.” In the back, someone whistled softly.
The others could indulge their curiosity. Al-Namqiz, charged
with officially welcoming these unexpectedly attractive representatives of an alien species to Earth, was compelled to
consider more practical concerns.
“What do they want? Have you talked with them about
“Life spans?”

else

—

such things?”

“Good relations with us and everyone
may meet. Beyond that we did not much go. Cul-

Pranchavit nodded.
else they

tural exchanges, tourism,

leagues and

I felt that

economic cooperation

—my

col-

these specific concerns did not fall

within our purview to discuss.”

Then he had not been

cut out of the loop.

Al-Namqiz

felt

DIRGE

much

better. “I take

it

25

these are not formally accredited

am-

bassadors, and therefore they cannot speak for their govern-

ment on such matters.”
“Only informally,” Harris-Ferrolk admitted. “Remember
that they were as surprised to encounter us at Argus as we were
to see them. They no more had diplomats on board their vessel
than we did on board the Chagos. Both our ship and theirs were
on journeys of exploration. But it was felt by them that contact
would be expedited if some of their people returned with us to
present themselves to the rest of humankind.”
“Expedited isn’t the word.” Al-Namqiz gestured in the
direction of the door, against which the representatives of
the media continued to throw themselves like seals heaving
themselves up onto a beach. “As soon as they are presented
on the tridee, there’s going to be a frenzy of volunteers to go
and ‘visit’ Pitar. Or accommodate their representatives here.”
“We know.” Pranchavit smiled thinly. “Most of our waking hours may be devoted to our research and the rest of
our work, but my colleagues and I are not strangers to the human condition. We have been just as affected by their appearance as you all were when they stepped down from the
shuttle. They are forthright and accommodating, but somewhat shy. They are willing to cooperate in mutual studies and
learning, but only via formal, academic, accredited channels.

They have no
us to do so

desire to stroll casually

among them. At

was explained

among

us, or to allow

least, that is the situation as

it

Whether it will change in the future
a firm and unalterable expression of the

to us.

or whether that

is

Pitarian social ethos

it is

much too early to

say.”

“When can you introduce us to them?” The face of the youngest member of the diplomatic team was alert and anxious.
In lieu of Pranchavit ’s sigh, Harris-Ferrolk responded. “We
understand your eagerness. Following the usual

final

medical

checks they must be officially welcomed and then queried.
All this they have readily agreed to.” He eyed the junior staff
member sternly. “We must insist that they be treated no differently than the representatives of any other sapient species,
such as the Quillp or the thranx.”

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

26

“The thranx!” Someone

in the

back hooted

in a reflexively

derisive manner.

“Sure,” another staff

member murmured.

“I’ll treat

them

would a thranx. Especially the one with the turquoise hair and the
“Quiet, all of you!” Turning in his seat, al-Namqiz glared
at his clustered staff. “Difficult as it may be, we will do exactly as Mr. Harris-Ferrolk says. You are all of you professionals. Or at least, I have been given to believe that is the
case. A position in a different service can readily be found for
anyone who prefers to demonstrate otherwise.” For the first
time since the visiting scientist-explorers had arrived, there
was complete silence in the conference room.
“That’s better.” The ambassador turned back to the grateful
researchers. “If there is anything we need to know before
commencing official interaction, however disagreeable or
difficult it might be, I will rely on you to inform us and we
will deal with it accordingly. Your work must be the foundation upon which we build our relations with these people.
Thranx or Pitar, Quillp or anything else, the government of
Earth and its colonies treats equally with all other intelligences.” For the second time he glared at his staff. “Anyone
here have a problem with that?” A single strained, uneasy
cough was the only response. “Thank you.”
Rising from his seat, he smiled at the three scientists and
gestured toward the door. “Gentlemen and lady, if you will
lead the way, we will make an attempt to deal with what I expect is by now a rapidly swelling and frenziedly impatient
clutch of representatives of the world and off-world media.
Meanwhile the immigration and medical people will have a
chance to complete their work, and then you may introduce
me to our newest interstellar friends. I would appreciate any
additional information you can give me that might aid in my
dealing with the media, not to mention the government, and
that might facilitate the subsequent exchanges between myself, my staff, and our visitors.”
It was not easy. While the ambassador took the podium and

just like

I

—

parceled out answers, the junior

members of the diplomatic

DIRGE

27

team and the crew of the Chagos were assailed by media reps
promising ever-ballooning rewards for any information on
the Pitar. Names, statistics, histories, preferences, dislikes,
interviews, recorded images
small and then large fortunes
were promised to those staff members who could provide
them. On an exclusive basis, of course. Bidding reached a
fever pitch when it was disclosed by one harried member of
the starship’s crew that at least a few of the Pitar had mastered
a minimum of Terranglo on the journey out from Argus. The

—

prospect of a

first

interview with one of the magnificent hu-

manoids who could actually respond to questions sent the
media reps into a veritable feeding frenzy.
Despite their best efforts and their most enticing blandishments, nothing came of their desperate entreaties. The aliens
remained isolated and in media quarantine until such time as
ambassador-at-large al-Namqiz and his staff felt they would
be ready to meet the general public. Having been placed
under the strictest of injunctions, none of the other members
of the Chagos s crew would talk, and the diplomatic staff had
'

hard information to dispense. As they learned more
about their visitors, and with their permission, tiny dribbles
little

of information were passed on to the salivating media.
Not everyone was instantly welcoming. There existed
among the population of Earth a sizable minority whose
opinion of intelligent aliens could best be described as cautiously paranoid and a smaller segment that was openly and
vociferously xenophobic. The revelation years earlier of the
secret thranx colony-base in the Reserva Amazonia had not
hurt their cause, and they railed continuously and loudly in
the media and in the hallways of government against forming
anything like a close relationship with any alien species.
But even they were hard-pressed to find much mud to sling
at the Pitar. Superficial it might be, but physical appearance
went a long way toward swaying public opinion. In that respect
humankind had changed little since the dawn of civilization.
Rightly or not, it was much easier for people sitting before

welcoming a Pitar into their home than
a thranx whose appearance might well put them in mind of a
their tridee to envision

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

28

cockroach or a giant ant. Still, there was commendable caution and a desire to proceed slowly and carefully among members of all pertinent scientific and governmental agencies.
Then the two Pitar who had become the most fluent of their
brethren in Terranglo appeared on the global tridee. As soon
as the first one smiled in response to a question, and before he
could even answer, systematic caution and scientific restraint
was overwhelmed by an outpouring of popular interest that
would brook no further interference from any mere official
source.

The government tried to keep matters under control but
was overwhelmed. Against such a tsunamic outpouring of
emotion from its constituents, confronted by an unprecedented outpouring of goodwill and even love, the inherent
caution of elected representatives could not stand. The public
wanted access to these beauteous, wondrous Pitar, and they

wanted

now.
Some of the more
it

critical

representatives thought
this

down to an

who had contact with the Pitarian

them

standoffish, but the majority put

inherent shyness

made

all

the

more charming

by their irresistible attractiveness. While not forthcoming, neither were they especially insular. Restricted despite the clamor
for their presence to the official contact sites on Bali/Lombok
and Zurich, they were quite willing to meet and speak with any

humans who desired to pursue personal contact.
Permission to do so was highly sought after, and not only
by researchers and professional xenologists. Members of the
lay public proffered all sorts of blandishments to those in

charge,

who were hard put to turn down bribes for access that

were often as inventive as they were compelling. But the authorities in charge of interspecies relations were admirably
adamant. The Pitar could not be permitted to journey freely

among humankind

for at least a year, until formal relations

had been cemented and all appropriate medical and scientific
tests had been carried out. In this the Pitar themselves concurred, for if anything they were even more demanding and
insistent that their own procedures be rigorously followed.
Through the world and off-world media humankind was

DIRGE

29

of the aliens. A craze
for all things Pitarian swept the globe and spread rapidly to
the colonies. Clothing, attitudes, gestures, words, phrases,
hair colors
a host of Pitar imitations and imitators made
their presence felt culturally. As for scientific advances the
Pitar apparently had little to offer that was not already known
to their hosts, though they were eager, in their formal and restrained fashion, to learn from humankind.
It would be fair to say that while humans became obsessed
with their new acquaintances, the progress of interspecies relations with other intelligences suffered. The thranx in particular were neglected. Perhaps it was understandable that
xenologists and specialists found it hard to find the time or
enthusiasm to study chest-high bug-eyed antennae-waving
insectoids when they could examine in detail physically perfect mammalian males and females instead. Similar sentiments were manifest among the general public.
While tens of thousands of requests for Pitarian attendance
at innumerable social occasions poured into contact headquarters on Bali, not one asked for a date with a thranx
not
even to talk. It was left to the professionals to maintain the
minimum necessary contacts and to assuage hurt insectoid
treated to daily updates

on the

activities

—

—

feelings.

Unfortunately, in order to

know how

to

do

that properly,

considerable further human-thranx interaction was necessary. It

was not immediately forthcoming.

3

I

lathvupredek stood

among

the carefully tended jungle

plants that thrived in the rich soil that overlay the subterranean,

unseen colony and reflected on the alien world around her. She
did not fear being seen. Ever since the premature but fortunately conciliatory revelation of the colony’s existence some
twenty human years previous, it had been possible for those
dwelling in the hive below to walk freely on the surface of

dominant species egocentrically called Earth
within carefully prescribed parameters, of course. The councilor availed herself of the chance at every opportunity.
It was not Hivehom or Willow-Wane, but it was a beautiful
world whose densest and least-disturbed tropical regions
were reasonably close in general feel and appearance to that
of home. Her ovipositors twitched as she settled herself down
on a bench disguised to look like a fallen log, all six legs
the world

its

straddling the supportive cylinder.

In the undergrowth on her left a small, stealthy presence

made itself known via a pungency that dominated everything
Her antennae dipped in its direction as she
smelled the margay before she saw it. The secretive j ungle cat
dipped its head, eyes wide, as it took the measure of some-

in

its vicinity.

thing too large and alien to eat. Like a puff of mottled yellow-

smoke, it evaporated into the surrounding verdure.
She did not turn as the organic crackle of crunching leaves
and other forest detritus grew louder behind her. The voice was
familiar, as was the gently brooding tone. A recent visitor to the
colony, Adjami was a world representative from northern
Africa. Fascinated by the thranx, he had chosen to linger be30

DIRGE

31

yond his designated time frame. In that time, he and the thranx
senior councilor had struck up a more than professional
acquaintance.

Eschewing ceremony, he sat down beside her, crossing his
legs and heedless of the plant matter beneath that might stain
his cool-suit. The heat did not trouble him, but he was thankful for the thermosensitive attire that relieved

some of

the

onerous burden of the constant humidity.
They remained that way for some time: resting, soaking in
the unspoken pleasure of one another’s company, contemplating the surrounding undisturbed rain forest. Then Hathvupredek gestured and clicked a greeting with her mandibles
and turned to look down at her companion of the moment.
She did not have to hesitate or search for words or sounds,
having reason to be proud of her fluency in Terranglo.

“What news

for the hive

from Bali?”

Reaching up, Adjami stroked his neatly trimmed black
beard. His reply was peppered with clicks and whistles acquired from intense study of High Thranx. Many humans in
the diplomatic service now utilized such thranx vocalizations,
certain sounds providing efficacious shortcuts to specific
phrases and intentions. Uncharted and largely unnoticed, a
joint manner of speaking was evolving between the two

among those individuals whose work placed
them in close contact with one another. A human diplomat
whose hobby was linguistics had even proposed a name for it:
Symbospeech. Begun as a game, a diversion, it was maturing
into something much more significant. For the most part, the
species, or at least

general population of both species remained unaware of

its

existence.

Especially since the advent of the Pitar.

“The proposed commerce treaty is still under discussion,
with the usual adherents champing at the bit and the predictable opponents raining their suspicion on the slightest
proposal.”

He

flicked an inch-long ant off his left boot.

Gnashing its jaws furiously, it landed in the leaves with an audible plunk before righting itself and scrambling away. “Two
more cultural exchanges have been agreed upon, and there is

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

32

some progress on the question of allowing the colony
here to expand.” That was the delicate matter that had brought
him to the Reserva Amazonia in the first place.
“These individual humans who object to the details of
the commerce treaty,” she asked, “why are they so angry at
finally

us? Such exchanges can only benefit both our respective

economies”
“As you know, the colonies are more enthusiastic ” His sarcastic bent, never very far below the surface of his personality, singed the remembrance. “Swap all the painters and
sculptors, poets and musicians you want and no one will say
much against it. But when money is involved, tempers
emerge and blood pressure rises.”
“Our blood pressure does not fluctuate as wildly as yours,”
Hathvupredek murmured. “It can’t, or we would blow up.”
“Some of us do.” Adjami sighed. “Politics can be such a
disagreeable business. There are so many times when I wish I
had followed my heart and studied archeology instead.”
“I can sympathize. Myself, I wanted to be a pinHsterV

He

blinked uncertainly. “That

is

a term

I

am not

familiar

with.”

“Someone who grows edible plants in an aesthetic manner.
It

combines your functions of farmer and

sculptor. Easier to

nurture a covenant with vegetables than with people. Plants

do not argue.”

Adjami grunted. “The ones in my homeland do. They grow
reluctantly if at all. The ground there is obstinate.” Reaching
down, he dug through the leaf litter to raise up a fistful of dirt.
“Not like here, where a little spit will bring forth all kinds of
surprising growth.”

“Perhaps
relations.”

we should expectorate more on behalf of mutual

Hathvupredek was not one to miss the opportunity

to prod.

Adjami did not miss the gentle nudge. “I am impatient as
well. Formalities should be moving along much faster. So
they would be, if not for this recent distraction.”
He did not need to elaborate. Ever since the discovery and

DIRGE

33

subsequent arrival on Earth of the representatives of the
species that called itself the Pitar, the expansion of

human-

thranx relations had been placed on a slow track. The govern-

ment was devoting
matters to the

the majority of

new visitors,

as

its

its

attention in off-world

constituents demanded. Re-

were cast by the wayside, contact delegated to lower-ranking functionaries such as Adjami. Who
wanted to meet with bugs when they could sit across the negotiating table from the shimmering, incredibly glamorous
Slyl-Wett and her handsome corepresentative Coub-Baku?
Too polite to raise a ruckus, too stratified in their conduct
to insist that the humans pay more attention to the development of relations, the thranx ground their mandibles in silence and tried to content themselves with what progress
continued to be made. And there was progress, albeit at a
glacial pace. Alliances and affiliations that the thranx felt
should have been formalized in months now looked set to
take years, perhaps decades. There was nothing they could do
about it. They were trapped by the admiration humankind felt
for the Pitar. Cause trouble, make noise, demand the attention
and respect they deserved, and they would only be giving ammunition to their xenophobic enemies within the human
community. Naturally patient, their limits were being tested.
They had no choice not if they wanted relations to continue to progress and improve. Meanwhile, influential thranx
who felt humankind wasn’t worth the time and trouble were
agitating the Grand Council on Hivehom to break off all attempts at multiplying and enhancing relations in favor of
maintaining only the loosest and most formal of associations.
Who needed the humans, anyway? Yes, they were a numerous
and powerful expanding species, but space was vast and there
were others, like the Quillp, who were not so easily distracted.
Against this background of measured indifference from
the human government and active opposition from the malcontents of both species, concerned individuals like Hathvupredek and Adjami struggled to sustain and strengthen the
tenuous bonds between the two intelligences.
lations with the thranx

—

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

34

Adjami was rubbing a recently fallen leaf between his fingers, wondering what wondrous esoteric pharmaceuticals it might contain. “What do your people think
about the Pitar? Officially they’ve been very reticent on the
subject, but I’ve spent enough time in the company of your
kind to recognize that more is being discussed in private than
is being said openly.” He smiled, showing a number of ceramic teeth. “Though short the requisite number of limbs, I
have managed to acquire a small vocabulary of gestures.”
She whistled softly, matching his amusement. “I have seen
you watching. Many humans watch but do not see. Many see
“Tell me.”

but do not learn.

Many

learn but easily forget.” Truhands

“There is no general consensus on the Pitar. The
Grand Council continues to receive and absorb information.
As you well know, this new intelligence is reluctant to disclose much about themselves. This invariably makes some of
us suspicious.”
Adjami looked away. Atop a dead tree, an oropendula was
flashed.

warbling.

“Who

“It’s

said they are shy.”

Her tone was sharper than she intended;
while more controlled than any human, neither were the thranx
devoid of emotion. To calm herself, she recited one of the fiftyfive mantras of Desvendapur. “Not the Pitar. To them their reticence to discuss and deal with many subjects is normal. It is the
human media who have branded them bashful.” Antennae
coiled.

says this?”

“Humans evidently find such racial coyness becoming.

My people are of a different mind.”
some of you find their ongoing restraint suspicious.” Adjami gazed curiously into unfathomable, golden,
compound eyes. “In what way?”
As would any thranx caught out by a direct question,
Hathvupredek first considered what was known and then
what was suspected before replying.
“You

said

“We realize that despite appearances, the Pitar are not you.

We are hardly experts in the analysis of mammalian behavior,
much of which we

regard as impulsive and indicative of an
intelligence that occasionally veers into the retrograde. It is

not even that we suspect the Pitar of hiding something.”

DIRGE

35

“What could they hide?” Adjami added. “They immediately provided us with the coordinates for their twin homeworlds, which have subsequently been verified. I know of at
least two KK-drive ships that have already made passing
visits to both. They encountered nothing untoward at either
stop, and were greeted in the same cordial, curious, restrained manner that the Pitar have demonstrated during their
stay on Earth. There was no ambush, no indication of enormous fleets of armed vessels lying in wait or hiding to avoid
discovery.

It

must be accepted that the

Pitar are simply a reti-

cent folk.”

“So are the thranx.” Despite the human’s persuasive reasoning, the councilor knew that her superiors were far from
ready to concede the Pitar’s benevolence. “It is not that we are
distrustful or even especially suspicious. We are simply more
cautious in our dealings with other species.” She shifted her
position on the log bench. “This

Some of it

is

not only a racial character-

from our delicate dance of
disharmony with the AAnn that has been ongoing now for
more than three hundred and fifty of your years.”
Adjami could not resist a dig. “We’ve been dealing with
the AAnn for less than a hundred years and we’ve managed to
get along. Sure, there have been occasional misunderstandings and minor confrontations, but we’ve always managed to
smooth things over.”
“The AAnn are spontaneous. In that they are far more like
you than us. But when it suits their needs and aims they can
istic.

also

show

certainly arises

patience.

They

are like a recurring virus that will

not go away.” All four hands gestured simultaneously.

make

“We

you have not encountered a species that is even more patient than the AAnn.”
“A nicely diplomatic oblique damnation.” Bending forward, Adjami picked up a long, thin leaf and chewed experimentally on the stem. It had a slight minty flavor characteristic
of many of the alkaloid-laden plants that grew in the vicinity
desire only to

certain that in the Pitar

of the colony. “We’re being careful.”
“No you are not.” Hathvupredek’s atypical bluntness caught
the visiting diplomat by surprise. “You are overcome by these

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

36
Pitar,

who

so nearly resemble physically idealized visions of

yourselves.

You

are dazzled.

We

more

are

analytical,

more

systematic in our appraisal of other intelligences.”

Adjami spoke around the stem of the leaf that protruded
from between his teeth. “So you’re saying we’re being naive.”
The councilor’s ovipositors flattened slightly, the lowermost curl pressing against the back of her abdomen. “We
think you are too welcoming. An engaging trait, but a dangerous one.”

Adjami laughed gently. “We’re not as ingenuous as you
seem to believe. Sure, we’ve received the Pitar readily, even
enthusiastically. But that doesn’t mean they’ve been given the
run of the planet or the colonies, or that the appropriate agen-

an eye on them.”
Hathvupredek’s antennae abruptly snapped

cies aren’t keeping

“We hope
forward.

so.”

“What is that?”

Adjami allowed

his gaze to

be led by the councilor’s. “I

don’t see anything.”

companion of the morning admitted,
“but I smell it. Humans, coming this way. Many of them.”
Scanning the trees, Adjami found himself unable to sup“Neither do

I,”

his

press a smile. “You’re sure they’re not Pitar?”

Hathvupredek missed the sarcasm. Or perhaps the councilor simply chose to overlook it. “Your bodily odors differ
significantly. That of humans is much
stronger.”
“Yes,” Adjami confessed a bit reluctantly. “The variance
has been noted.” He continued to gaze into the forest. “I
wonder what a large group is doing here? I’d think that researchers interested in the Reserva’s wildlife would avoid the
.

.

.

now that they know it’s here.”
“They do.” Compound eyes and weaving antennae

colony

site,

con-

tinued to take the measure of whatever was approaching. “As

you are aware, visitation to the colony is strictly monitored
and is restricted to accredited representatives of your governmental and scientific agencies. Random tourism is neither
permitted nor encouraged.”
Detecting a rising rustle of leaf litter being crushed under-

DIRGE
foot,

Adjami rose from his cross-legged

37
seat.

“Then I wonder

who these could be?”

Man and thranx found out together when the band of perhaps thirty men and women emerged from the trees. The
grim, focused expression on each camouflage-painted face

was not encouraging, nor was the especially wild-eyed look
worn by more than one. Their jungle clothing was in keeping
with their obvious desire to blend into the rain forest background. While unsettling, none of this alarmed Adjami. The

weapons they carried did.
“Praise be unto Him, what the hell is this?” His startled attention flicked swiftly between implacable, uncompromising
countenances. “Who are you people, and how dare you infringe on a species sanctuary! Do you have any idea where
you’re trespassing?”

A

middle-aged man wearing a loose, floppy camouflage
hat turned and strode belligerently over to the diplomat. His
tone was grindingly cold.

“We know exactly where we are, bug lover.”
These people were well equipped, Adjami saw. Were they
sufficiently well equipped to steal through the automatic sentries and security apparatus that protected the colony? Any
unsanctioned intrusion might logically be expected to come
from the air. How well was the colony prepared to protect itself from unauthorized encroachment on the ground?
“If you want to insult me you’ll have to do better than that.”
Behind him, Adjami noted that Hathvupredek had quietly
slipped off her bench and had begun to edge backward,
toward the portal that led down into the hive.
Grunting an expletive, the armed intruder roughly shoved
Adjami aside. The diplomat stumbled but managed to maintain his balance. Several of the trespassing humans had already hurried on ahead to cut off the councilor’s retreat.
Adjami ’s eyes grew wide as the full implications of what he
was seeing sunk in.
“What do you think you’re doing? This is a restricted, controlled area. I

am Adjami

L’Hafira, an elected representative

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

38

world council! Leave at once before you force me to
summon Reserva Security.”
Looking him up and down, the man grinned unpleasantly.
“With what? I don’t see a communicator.” With the muzzle of
his rifle he gestured in Hathvupredek’s direction. “You’re just
out for a morning stroll with your favorite roach, ain’t you?
to the

Dirty bug lover. Traitor.”

These were the most extreme
representatives of the sizable xenophobic contingent that was
opposed to any human-thranx rapprochement. Every political group spawned its fringe element. Here before him
were the most radical of that radical band.
“What are you going to do?” he heard himself stammering.
He cursed himself for the fear that shook in his voice.
A calm reply can never overcome the wildness of a madman’s expression. “Drive them out. Get them off our planet.
Send them back to where they belong.” The gun muzzle
twitched. “We had too many bugs before they came here and
we’ll have too many after they’ve packed up and left, but at
least we won’t be expected to share our lives and homes and
Fanatics,

Adjami

realized.

resources with them.”

Adjami was not sure why he found himself backing up. It
was not instinct. That would have dictated that he try to run,
in which case they might ignore him. He was not their target,
after

all.

As an experienced politician he could have

tried ar-

guing with them, if only to stall for time until local security
became aware of the breach in its perimeter. Instead, he
backed up, stumbled over and through the forest litter until he
was standing in front of the thranx councilor. He could feel
hard chitin bumping against his back, and his nostrils were
filled with the sweet fragrance of blooming amaryllis.
“I ... I won’t permit this. If you people leave now, if you
renew any complaints you may have through the proper channels, I will personally see to it that your views receive a
hearing.”

“We’re done with hearings,” snapped a short, frail woman
who looked to be drowning in her bulky camouflage gear. To
Adjami it appeared that the gun she was cradling was much

DIRGE

39

too big for her. “Half the planetary government

of shortsighted

up

idiots

who

is

composed

don’t see what these filthy crea-

and the other half has sold out in return for
commerce we don’t need and promises of shared technology
that haven’t materialized. What’s needed is for real humans to
stand up and make a statement.” With one hand she stroked
the inside of her rifle, and in response several telltales sprang

tures are

to,

“A loud statement.”
“Get out of the way,” someone else said. Inside himself,
Adjami shuddered. The voice that had spoken was neither hot
nor cold, but something far worse. It was dead inside, the

to life within the barrel.

sound of a soul

that

had already committed ritual suicide and

was prepared for death.
Nevertheless, the politician in
dealt with difficult people all his
fanatics there

him would not quit. He had
life. Even when coping with

was often room to compromise.

“You’ve already made a strong statement simply by showing up here like this and successfully penetrating hive security.” He gestured with a shake of his head. “Go on then;
go further. Set off some noisy explosions and make a lot of
smoke. The media will lap it up and be all over you for your
opinions. There might be

some fines assessed for trespassing,

but you’ll get your views splashed

body will get
you say?”

all

over the tridee, and no-

hurt.” Silence greeted his proposal.

“What do

group had a leader, and such fringe organizations usually did, that personage chose not to manifest at that time. The
middle-aged man who had spoken first provided a response.
“I say that we’ll still have just as many bugs to deal with,
and we won’t tolerate being fined for ‘trespassing’ on our
own soil.” Using his rifle, he directed Adjami to move out of
the line of fire. “You’re a putrid, contaminated bug lover, but
you’re still human. Get out of the way.”
One of the most overlooked components of true heroism is
an abiding stubbornness in the face of danger. Lifting his
arms out from his sides, Adjami held his ground. As with
many accidental heroes, who are the most honest kind, if he
If the

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

40

had taken the time to consider what he was doing he probably
would not have done it.
“No. I won’t let you do this.” The shakiness had vanished
from his voice.
“You can’t stop us,” a voice in the armed crowd declared.
“And you cannot do this,” he replied firmly.
“Sure we can.” Raising her weapon, the frail woman with
the too-large eyes fired.

Adjami looked down

at

himself in disbelief. The old-

weapon had produced a
small hole in his shirt. The stain that was spreading from it resembled the rapidly expanding penumbra of a sunspot. It did
not hurt in the way the representative believed it might. There
was no stabbing pain, no overwhelming throb. Instead, the
wound burned as if he had been jabbed with a hot fireplace
fashioned but

still

effective projectile

poker.

Weakness overcame him, and he fell to his knees. Behind
him a mellow, calm voice was murmuring in Terranglo.
“Thank you for trying, my friend. Intelligence knows no
shape. Neither does compassion. Tchikua! re!iq .”

The

of what Hathvupredek the councilor said was lost
in the ensuing staccato of gunfire. When it was over the two
bodies, one mammalian, the other insectoid, lay on the ground.

The

rest

intruders

resumed

their advance, stepping over

and

ignoring them both.

There were no weapons in the hive. As guests of an indecisive planetary government representing a mistrustful species,
it would have been impolite to stockpile anything that could
have been construed as offensive. No one foresaw a need for
guns or their presence on what was presumed to be hospitable
ground.

Breaking in through one of the lightly barred surface entrances that had been constructed subsequent to official
recognition of the colony’s existence, the wrathful intruders

met

little

resistance. Distributing grenades

and

bullets at

every opportunity, they rampaged through the stunned hive
firing indiscriminately at

everyone and everything in their

DIRGE
path,

making no

distinction

41

between thranx “invaders” and

human “traitors.”
Peaceful though they were, thranx history was a litany of
battle,

cently,

of hive striving for supremacy over hive. More rethey had been forced to deal with a frustrating, seem-

ingly endless confrontation with the

more

So the species was not unfamiliar with

militaristic

AAnn.

conflict, either

on an

individual or racial scale.

As soon as the scope and ferocity of the
known,

internal barriers

movement of the

were closed

aggressors.

incursion

became

to restrict the range

Arming themselves with

and

tools

and kitchen implements, lines of silent, determined thranx
converged on the invaders. There was no question of waiting for help from the human authorities, who in response to
the distress call from the colony were already on their way
to the Reserva. The hive was in danger, and the hive had to be
defended.

Many more thranx perished in repeated attempts to staunch
the mindless slaughter. So too did several humans who were
working or studying in the confines of the hive. The fanatics
had come armed and ready to fight. But despite their determination and their murderous weaponry, they were not trained
soldiers. The close confines of the hive, whose details were

known to its inhabitants but foreign to the attackers, was likewise a detriment to their barbarous cause.
By the time the Reserva rangers arrived, many of the invaders were already deceased or dying, surrounded by small

mountains of thranx dead.

When the first soldiers disembarked

from a transport hastily ordered inland from the nearest military base at Recife, it was nearly all over.
Acclaimed as martyrs by their fellow fanatics and accorded grudging admiration in less demonstrative quarters
by their “civilized” xenophobic supporters, the ravagers of
the Amazon hive achieved the media exposure the brave,
luckless

Adjami had foreseen

for them. Fortunately, the re-

sponse of the majority of the population was embarrassment

and apology. Reparations proposed by a guilty government

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

42

were refused with the explanation

that the thranx did not be-

of sorrow. On the other
hand, the many letters and expressions of regret from ordinary citizens were received thankfully and with elaborate
lieve in materialistic expressions

gestures of gratitude.

Not even such a catastrophe could obscure
Pitar,

who

the effect the

considerately offered condolences of their

own to

were having on human society.
A pair (they never traveled alone) even visited the devastated
hive to investigate the tragedy and offer commiseration on
behalf of their government. Their compassionate presence
was duly noted and monitored by the planetary media, who
managed to give greater play to the mission of the Pitar than
to the suffering of the hive’s inhabitants, many of whom had
lost friends, coworkers, and even relatives in the debacle.
While the media focused on the origins of the small but
lethal fraternity of fanatics and strove to trace their sponsors,
and the government representatives assigned to study the disaster tried to piece together evidence that might lead to proof
of conspiracy and complicity beyond what was readily apparent, a meeting took place immediately after the confrontation that was to have much more far-reaching consequences
for human-thranx relations than the aftermath of the savage
raid itself. None present could have foreseen the results. Certainly none could have predicted the direction they would
eventually take. In retrospect this was not surprising.
Who could have suspected that greater things would arise
from dealing with the ftiture of the dead than the future of the
their fellow visitors to Earth,

living?

4

Father Pyreau picked up the gun without thinking. Here, in
the depths of the alien hive, he was having difficulty breathing. He was mildly claustrophobic, and wide-open spaces
and lofty cathedrals were his preferred venue. Deep beneath
the surface of the Amazonian earth, lost in a warren of hightech thranx tunnels, he had long ago loosened his collar.
Lately there were many times, too many times, when he

wanted

to forget

it

altogether, to resign his position in the

clergy and seek elsewhere the fulfillment that the church

no longer gave him. He had been preparing for the regular
Sunday service at the base when the emergency call had
sounded. Swept up in the uncharacteristic alarm that followed, he had found himself on the transport rocketing inland
before he knew what was going on. A superior officer had
spotted

him

and, despite his initial protests, requisitioned his

presence.

have a feeling your services are liable to be in demand.
Padre.” The major had not been very informative, but Pyreau
could hardly disobey.
Before he knew what was happening they had descended
rapidly into seemingly unbroken rain forest, only to find themselves welcomed into a subterranean flight hangar by a milling
mass of whistling, clicking, frantically chattering insects. No,
not insects, he’d reminded himself. The exotic, visiting thranx
were insectlike.
He had never received a full explanation of the proceedings, not even when he’d found himself thrust forward and
carried along with the rest of the hastily organized strike
“I

43

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

44

him had seemed to know
little more than he, but gradually the word trickled back that a

team. The soldiers surrounding

small but fanatical band of xenophobes had infiltrated the

colony and were killing every thranx in sight as well as any
visiting

spree.

humans who

tried to interfere

with their bloodthirsty

A visiting diplomat and several esteemed researchers

had been among the earliest casualties.
Swept into the depths, he had found himself caught
ditions that

more

in con-

closely resembled the traditional biblical

he had ever experienced before. A professional life that had previously been confined to conferring
communion and counseling soldiers stationed at a peaceful
tropical military base exploded in a succession of corridorconstricted concussions, flying body parts, the screams and
shouts and whistles and clicks of the wounded and dying.
Covered in blood both alien and human he had made his
stunned, dazed way through the tunnels of death, bestowing
what comfort he could on the injured and last rites on the deceased. This he had done in a spirit of faith and desperation
regardless of the actual convictions of the departed. Atheists,
agnostics, and true believers had received equal attention,
there being no time to run dead soldiers’ personal identity
chits through his chaplain’s scanner to ascertain the specifics
of individual beliefs. Swirling, acrid smoke and the pungent
stink of death had been his companions, and no angels had
stepped out of the fiery gloom to assist his ministrations or
hell than anything

ease his personal pain.

He had

not run out of bodies

when he suddenly

realized

he had run out of companions. He was alone except for
the righteous dead. Alone, and lost.
No, not quite lost. Another figure was stumbling down the
that

was human, male, its
clothes tom and its exposed skin scarred. Dark blood smeared
fume-filled corridor toward him.

its

It

face and arms, mixing with greasy camouflage paint. Against

this grisly,

dark smutch the whites of the man’s eyes stood out

like sculpted marbles.

He

carried a large, battered rifle and

wore camouflage gear but no uniform.

DIRGE

45

He was not a soldier.
Espying the figure of the padre kneeling beside an inert
thranx and a dead corporal, the half-mad, half-dead xeno-

phobe drew his own conclusion. “Dirty bug lover! You’re all
gonna die! We’re gonna kill every one of you egg mother
suckers!” The muzzle of the rifle started to come up.
!” Pyreau began. He did not finish the
“I was only
thought. It would do no good. Whatever reason the raving lunatic before him might once have possessed had been abandoned on the surface prior to his homicidal entry into the
hive. It flared in his eyes and resounded in his voice.
.

.

.

All chaplains receive basic military training as a matter of
course.

green

At Pyreau’s

telltale

right

pulsing in

its

hand

lay a neuronic pistol.

handle showed that

it still

The

held a

half charge. Whatever guided his fingers might have been di-

vine intervention or simply the most basic, primitive need to

up the pistol, he raised it as something loud
and concussive echoed in his ears. A hot blade bit into the
flesh of his left shoulder. Aiming more from reflex than
survive. Picking

training,

he

fired.

xenophobe shuddered even as the madman got off a second shot. It missed Pyreau entirely, slamming into the corridor wall behind him and to his left. Nerves
paralyzed, his assailant went down in a heap, the rifle tumbling from his fingers. Silence roared. Once again, Father
Pyreau was the only one alive in the tunnel.
Mouth open in shock, he put the pistol down and thought
to examine his shoulder. Blood leaked from what was no
worse than a graze. Trying to rise, he found that his muscles
had turned to rubber, his bones to putty. He could not stand.
Then hands were levering him to his feet, and they were
not human. The voice that accompanied the helping digits
was firm but soft, almost whispery, the consonants oddly mu-

The

figure of the

vowels separately enunciated only with difficulty.
What he remembered most of all later was a piquancy redolent of damp honeysuckle.
“Please try to use your legs. I cannot lift you by myself.”
Admonished brain activated muscles, and Pyreau found
sical, the

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

46

himself erect amidst Armageddon. Stepping back, the thranx

looked him up and down. “You wear the uniform of a soldier.”
“I ...

I

am

a soldier, but a chaplain.

Do you know what

that is?”

Antennae searched in opposing directions to parse as
much of the acrid atmosphere as possible. “I’m afraid not.
You are with the rescue team that arrived promptly but too
late.”

“Yes.” Pyreau nodded. “I’m sorry about that.
as fast as
“I

am

We

got here

we could.”
certain that

you

did.”

A

truhand gestured

at the

quiescent carnage surrounding them: waves of dead flesh

frozen in midcollapse. “There will be trouble over

this.

Loud

whistling and clicking and abundant recriminations to go

compound eyes rose to meet the padre’s.
“Enough for both species. What does a chaplain do?”
Pyreau gestured helplessly at the massed bodies, the maaround.” Golden

of which were thranx.

one of humankind’s
principal religions and, when necessary, all of them. I provide
spiritual counsel to the men and women of the unit I happen
to be assigned to, lead them in prayer on certain traditional
days and also in private, minister to the sick at heart, and perform specific ceremonies that have religious overtones, such
as the burying of the dead.”
A truhand and foothand rose to gesture in the direction of
the fanatic Pyreau had just shot. “You certainly ministered to

jority

“I represent

him.”

—

Pyreau did not look back not because he was incapable
of it, but because he did not want to. “I had no choice. It was
him or me. Although I believe in a life after death, I’m in no
hurry to trade this one for the other. It will come in its proper
sequence, as

“An

it

does to

all

of us.”

interesting assertion of belief.”

Reaching up and

across with a foothand, the thranx tapped his

own

right

manner of thranx body
decoration, a small, glistening black circle was inlaid in the
hard blue-green chitin. Even in the dim light of the damaged
shoulder with

all

four fingers. In the

DIRGE
corridor

it

shimmered with

iridescence.

47

“Do you know what

this insignia signifies?”

“I’m afraid I

don’t.”

The young priest badly wanted a drink

of water. “I haven’t paid much attention to the details of contact between your kina and mine. There hasn’t been much

new information available.”
“I know.” The thranx made

a gesture that the good father

did not recognize for the expression of resignation that

it

About them
you want to know everything.” This observation was quietly
stated and in no way accusing, but Pyreau felt oddly embarwas. “Your people are preoccupied with the

Pitar.

rassed just the same.
“It’s

not my job to decide what appears on the tridee.

I

have

nothing to do with the media. If it means anything, I’d like to
know more about both species.” To prove that he’d been listening, he nodded slightly in the direction of the black inlay.

“What does

it

This time

signify?”

all

four hands

wove a quick but complex pattern

means that we are colleagues.”
“Excuse me?”

in the

air. “It

am ...

do not have an exact translation that would fit a
Terranglo term with which I am familiar. You might call me
a consulting physicist of the soul. I am also a counselor. It is a
traditional calling that was in place even in pretechnological
times. When a member of the hive has a question that cannot
be answered by anyone else, by a specialist or teacher or
artist, they come to such as myself. We attempt to comprehend the incomprehensible, to understand that which has no
explanation, and to provide some solace in the absence of
cognition. We are the last resort when reason and logic fail, a
repository of compassion in the face of a cold and indifferent
universe.” He ambled forward on four legs to examine the
body of the xenophobe Pyreau had just killed. “Of course, we
make a lot of it up as we go along, but in searching there
is truth, and sometimes, even to our own astonishment, we
manage to get something right.”
“You you’re a priest?” Pyreau struggled to recall what
was known about the thranx, or at least what he himself
“I

—

I

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

48

had studied.

“I didn’t think

.

.

.

didn’t

know you people had

even know you had religion.”
“That by any other name, as one of your famous writers
once avowed.” With its largely fixed, inflexible countenance
the thranx could not smile, but Pyreau had the impression of
gentle amusement nonetheless. “Semantics are irrelevant in
the face of the spirit.”
“Do you believe in God?” Pyreau asked without thinking.
“In your sense, no. In ours
This is not a question easily
or casually answered. Do you find it so?” The valentineshaped head cocked sideways.
“Some of my superiors do. I don’t. I was taught to believe,
priests. I didn’t

.

but

I

was also taught to

.

.

question.”

“Ah, crrUkk, those eternal antagonists. Always making existence more difficult and complicated than we would like it
to be. But no one asked us, did they? My name is Shanvordesep.”

The

you going to

grew suddenly alarmed. “Are
consciousness? You do not look so good.”

soft alien voice

lose

am Cirey Pyreau.”

Pyreau muttered the
response as he looked past the thranx and down the corridor,
wondering when someone would find him. He had completely lost contact with the rest of his unit.
“As opposed to ultimate questions of divinity and existence, that much is easily remedied.” Reaching back with a
truhand, the thranx drew a cylinder of some shiny spun material from the pouch slung across his thorax and held it out to
Pyreau, who eyed it uncertainly. The coiled drinking spout
“Just

.

.

.

thirsty. I

was unfamiliar to him.
“Like this.” The thranx demonstrated
ing the cylinder back to the padre.

briefly before pass-

Pyreau took it shakily. Probably he ought to have first
smelled of the contents, but he was too tired and thirsty to
care. Besides, there were times when a man had to take the
word and judgment of another on faith, even if the individual
in question came equipped with one too many pair of limbs.
The water was cold, fresh, and tasted better than the finest
Chardonnay. Despite his desperate thirst he was mindful not
to drink all of it, making sure to hand it back to its owner at

DIRGE

49

With his right forearm he wiped the back of his
mouth. The blood on the sleeve had already dried.
“What do we do now?” he wondered aloud.
Although the blue-green body remained facing him, the
head swiveled an astonishing amount, enabling the thranx to
look almost directly back over its shoulder. “I suppose we
wait. I could go for help, but in the confusion I’m not sure
your comrades would respond readily to my entreaties. If they
least half full.

are proper soldiers they will be following the orders of their
superiors. In such a situation they are unlikely to listen to

Antennae twitched and mandibles
clicked. “I am sure someone will find us before long.”
Without pause or obvious attempt to change the subject,
Shanvordesep crouched to examine the body of the nearest
thranx. Curled tightly, all eight limbs had been drawn up against
the body. Its head was missing, blown to bits by an explosive
shell, nerves and longitudinal supportive muscle protruding
from the open neck.
“I am given to understand that you recycle your dead differently from us.”
Pyreau was appalled, though he was careful to control his
expression in the event the thranx might comprehend it. “We
don’t recycle our dead. We give them, in most cases, a proper
and dignified burial.”
Still investigating the corpse, Shanvordesep looked back
and up at the human. “You bury them in the ground. Then
what happens to them?”
“They rest there.” Pyreau wondered why he was being
asked to explain the obvious.
“And then what happens to them? Later?”
Pyreau shrugged. “Unless special preservative techniques
or coffins have been employed, they remain so until their containers break down. After that, their bodies are
“Recycled,” the thranx finished for him. “There are only
small differences in our approach, primarily in the matter of
enclosure. We choose to recycle immediately, your kind over
time. It has always been thus in the hive. Admittedly, there are
details that do demarcate certain specific differences, but

someone such

as myself.”

—

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

50

taken as a whole our traditions are not so very different.”
straightened, his

head coming just up

He

to the priest’s chest.

might usefully be
explored.” A truhand gestured toward a section of corridor
comparatively free of corpses. “Would you like to discuss
them? It seems that for the foreseeable future we have nothing
“I believe there are other similarities that

if not time.”

Debate religion with an alien? One that reminded him
more of the large mantids he had seen delicately poised beneath the eaves of the buildings back at the base than a fellow
seminarian? Why not? As Shanvordesep sensibly pointed
out, the only thing they had to kill now was time.
The last thing he expected was for a bug-eyed, eight-limbed
alien insectoid to reinforce his faltering faith, but that

exactly what happened. For his part, he

was able

was

to enlighten

the intensely curious thranx on matters of human spirituality.

developed in the course of their conversation that Shanvordesep was less than satisfied with the present organization
of the ancient order to which he belonged and from which he
It

drew his

calling. It

had not kept pace with the

culture,

he

felt,

or with such unanticipated revelations as the existence of
other intelligent species elsewhere in the cosmos.

The longer they
here, beneath his

more Father Pyreau felt that
gleaming exoskeleton, was a fellow spirit.
talked, the

thoughts of trying to convert the thranx, if
such a thing were even acceptable or possible, gave way to an

Initial half-serious

open mutual exchange of beliefs and disbeliefs, of certitudes
and unanswered queries, of a desire to understand the great
mysteries while carrying out useful and practical work in the
only reality they knew.

They were alone together

in the corridor for a long time.

When the first patrolling triad of hive gleaners found them,
man and thranx were locked in animated conversation. Rewho had thought him lost, Pyreau was accorded a hero’s welcome. He did his best to demur in the face

turned to troops

of all the accolades, pointing out that he had done little more
than survive and wait for rescue. But his comrades would
have none of it. He was recommended for several citations.

DIRGE

As

51

a matter of course and though chaplains rarely wore such

was awarded the same battle ribbon as was
the hastily engaged infantry who had fought to save the hive:
crossed antennae on a field of blue-green. He found the ornate medal altogether too embarrassing and kept it hidden
away in its sealed presentation box.
When he requested a leave of absence from duty it was
readily granted. Given what he had been through, it was understandable to his superiors that he might require some rest
and relaxation. Subjected to combat conditions, even a chapdecorations, he

lain could suffer the

contemporary high-tech equivalent of

shell shock.

was an assessment Father Pyreau made no effort to confirm or deny. All that mattered was that he be set free to resume his dialogue with the thranx advisor Shanvordesep. For
his part, the thranx readily welcomed his new friend into the
hive. Together they plunged into weeks of intense discussion
It

of matters

spiritual,

studying one another’s beliefs, learning

their histories, discovering

how representatives of both species

perceived the same eternal conundrums.

Months

later,

they had done

much more

than exchange

views and acquire wisdom. They had ascertained possibilities and identified solutions. They had determined how best
to apply insubstantialties to reality and resolve contradictions. They were ready to act.
All they needed now was a sponsor.

“Found a new church? Are you both crazy?” Martine Herzalt
Lorengau sat upright and stiff in a chair as she regarded the
pair of unlikely visitors. “I’m assuming that blatant insanity

among the thranx, of course.”
“I can assure you that we are not mad.” The insectoid gestured casually, in a manner the gangly, pinch-faced human
manifests itself similarly

might recognize. “Only hopeful.”
Beside him, Father Pyreau hastened to support and reaffirm his friend. “We came to you because we have been
turned down everywhere else.”
A hint of a smile struggled with the comers of Lorengau ’s

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

52

mouth but could not break through. The barriers were too
great. “As a businesswoman of some repute, let me tell you
an opening for a request for investment as I have ever heard. Nothing like starting out by telling
me that everyone else you’ve talked to thinks that you’re
that is about as piss-poor

fools.”

be an investment in people, and the future.”
Pyreau met the woman’s unnervingly deep-set, large eyes
without flinching and tried not to squirm in his chair. He
ought to be used to this by now, he told himself. The milieu as
well as the rejection. Nevertheless, he persevered. What else
could he do?
“Even if I wanted to waste money on such a ludicrous enterprise, why would I choose to support one that purports, according to your proposal, to spiritually link humans with
thranx? Why not humans with Pitar? In that, at least, I could
“This

is

to

some possible return.”
“The return from such an investment would not be mone-

see

Pyreau replied earnestly.
“With the Pitar involved, it might be.” Her voice falling, she
grumbled under her breath. “Missed the boat on that one. But
we’re catching up.” Leaning forward slightly, the high, black
leather back of the expensive chair rising behind her like a
throne, she regarded each of them in turn. “I’m still not sure
how you managed to secure an appointment with me. My time
tary,”

is

valuable.”

meeting, and

Her tone darkened.
I fail

to see

“If nothing

comes of

how it can, someone else

is

this

going to

end up paying for it.”
“There are those who do sympathize with our aspirations.”
Shanvordesep concluded his reply with a soft, descending
whistle.

The industrialist’s demeanor remained unencouraging. “If
you did any research at all before coming here you should

know that I am an atheist.”
Pyreau nodded. “We know. Our proposed
would be open to

religious

venue

all.”

This time the smile emerged.

It

was a smile that had on more

DIRGE

53

than one occasion struck terror into the heart of a competitor.

“Now you
time.”

are simply being asinine and worse, wasting

my

A hand moved toward a row of tactile perceivers.

“We mean to do this thing.

If we

can establish a congregation capable of accommodating the beliefs and feelings of

two

entirely different species,

making room

for the different

beliefs inherent in

one species will be simple by comparison.”

The dismissive

fingers that terminated in perfect nails hes-

itated. “It

won’t include me.

I

don’t believe in anything.”

“But you do,” Pyreau argued energetically. “Everyone believes in something. If you don’t believe in a supreme deity,
then you are convinced of its nonexistence. Conviction is
founded on dogma, which is supported by belief.”
Martine Lorengau blinked. “I am a businesswoman, not a
philosopher. I have neither the time nor the inclination to
waste on theology or metaphysics.”
“You have a soul,” Pyreau assured her softly.
This time she laughed, a sound that contrasted startlingly
with her speaking voice. “I could cite you hundreds of people

who would disagree.”
“That which

lies

within every sapient being and cannot be

wove a complex pattern in the air before the intimidating desk. Knowing
that the female human comprehended not a single wave of finquantified needs feeding.” Truhands reflexively

gers or hands complicated Shanvordesep’s response. Trying to

communicate without gestures was akin to speaking with only
half the words at one’s command. Nevertheless, he tried.
“I assure you,” she replied, smiling, “that

I

am fully fed. All

of my psychological needs are well taken care of.”
“Then you have completely recovered from and are entirely
over the unfortunate deaths of your husband and daughter,”
Pyreau said.
Jaws slightly parted, Lorengau turned to
unblinkingly at the unrepentant priest.

stare sharply

and

When next she spoke,

her tone was icy and dangerous.

“How dare you. How dare you mention that in my presence.”
This time Pyreau was not intimidated. “One who stands

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

54

every day naked before

God

can dare anything.” Simultane-

ously relentless and compassionate, he continued. “The acci-

dent was eleven years ago.

One of your company planes was

returning to Gauteng from Harare. To this day no one

why

it

went down

into the

is

sure

Zambezi. Everyone on board was

killed.”

“I

know what happened.” Slumping

great leather chair, Lorengau suddenly

slowly back in the

seemed

in danger of

of becoming even thinner, until she
disappeared into one of the supple ebony tucks. “I wasn’t
much of a believer before that. Afterward .” Her gaze rose.
being swallowed by

it,

.

.

“I’m curious. What sort of colossal personal arrogance makes
you think your proposed denomination has anything to offer

someone

“We

like

me?”

can’t say for certain that

it

would,” Pyreau replied

“We can be certain that nothing else does.
Who knows what revelations may manifest themselves in the

without hesitation.

commingling of the beliefs of two entirely different species?
Different ways of thinking, of looking at the universe, of both
approaching and answering abstruse questions.”
“There will be no restrictions, no constricting internal laws
requiring adherence to unprovable dogmas,” Shanvordesep
added. “It will be open to all. Not only humans and thranx,
but members of any other species who wish to join. It will remain resolutely apolitical, a noted concern of your kind, and
as equally accommodating of traditional thranx hierarchical
concerns, an interest of my people.”
There was silence in the room. “What do you hope to
achieve with this?” Lorengau finally asked. “Power, wealth?
Inner peace? Acclamation within your own vocations?”
Pyreau looked over at his companion and saw Shanvordesep gesture encouragingly.

A

not sure.

who

“We

don’t know. That

place where individuals

who

are in

is,

we’re

need but

by other ideologies can come for succor
and assistance. A refuge capable of offering more than words.
feel unsatisfied

We know
church

is

that regardless

of the beliefs

it

propounds, every

ultimately accountable to a secular bottom line.”

He

DIRGE

55

indicated his companion. “Shanvordesep has experience in

such matters, far more so than I.”
Lorengau pursed her lips. “So not only am I being asked to
support this dubious, unfocused enterprise, I am also supposed to turn over control of a large sum of credit to an alien.

Not even a Pitar,

at that.”

wonderful thing about mathematics that it responds
with equanimity to skilled manipulation regardless of shape.”
The thranx calmly ignored the slight.
If the industrialist was testing him, he evidently passed.
“This is a waste of time and money. In that my opinion obviously does not differ from that of everyone else you have con“It is a

tacted in search of support.

However

.

be accounted in one word. Father
Pyreau thought, the woman seated grandly before them had
If a divine blessing could

just intoned
“I

it.

have no time to waste

—but

I

do have a

lot

of money. As

you are aware, after the accident I never remarried. Mwithi
was the finest man I ever met, and the only one who never expressed the slightest interest in my money. I’ve been looking
for someone like him ever since. So far I have been griev.” She did not
ously disappointed. As for my daughter
.

.

choke, Pyreau noted, but she did pause ever so briefly
to gather herself. “You have your angels; I have mine. So,

you want

my money?

To underwrite

this

numinous

folly

of

yours?”

“We do, crrUkkr Shanvordesep acknowledged.
suppose you’ll want to lease or build a headquarters, or
temple, or whatever kind of specialized structure you end up
“I

conceptualizing.”

intend to keep our facilities as modest as our goals,”
Pyreau assured her. “I have always been doubtful of vast
cathedrals and temples and mosques and the like. If God, or

“We

some

name to
what

we cannot yet give a
is truly within us, then I don’t see why it matters that

great

or whatever

it is

that

without be constructed on such a grand scale. All
have wondered about preachers who shout, as if God

lies

my life I

spirit,

were deaf.”

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

56
“All

I

know

is

that

when

that plane

went down he didn’t

me,” she snapped. “But that’s in the past.”

listen to

“Then you

will support us?”

Unable

to sit in a

human

Shanvordesep had been forced to stand the entire time
on all six legs. Now he rose, sitting back on four, the better to
see eye to eye with the industrialist.
chair,

your foolishness, yes. For as long as it
continues to amuse me.” Adopting a mocking tone, one slim
“I will underwrite

hand

“Who knows? I might
now and again, just to see how you are

fluttered diffidently in the

even pay you a visit
wasting my money.”

air.

Shanvordesep fumbled with his thorax pouch.
to

become

self-supporting within the

first

“We

intend

year.”

“Indeed?” She waved off his efforts to find whatever it was
that he was searching for. “No, no. Don’t show me any projections,

any

figures.

I’ll

them and disremain insular or it becomes

just spot the holes in

courage you. Madness needs to
hostage to reality and loses its charm. I’m not doing this because I think you’re going to make money, or even repay me.
I’m doing it for a diversion. As an amusement.”

Having accomplished what they had come for, Pyreau
knew they ought to depart. Shanvordesep was gesturing precisely that. But the good father had never been one to leave
well enough alone. If that had been the case he would not
have found himself in his present circumstances, sharing a
hypothesized future with an alien bug while begging money

from the contemptuous and cynical

“We

don’t consider the undertaking amusing. Despite

what you may think,
being

affluent.

this is not farce.

We see a need that is not

fulfilled.”

For a horrible

he had abused

moment he

feared he had gone too

far, that

powerful woman’s hospitality to the point
where she would withdraw her offer. Then she laughed for a
second time, and he relaxed.
this

“If you’re not in the business of amusing, then

enjoying this so

comical?”

much?

why am

I

Why do I find the whole endeavor so

DIRGE
“Perhaps,” ventured Shanvordesep quietly, “because

57
it

has

satisfied a need.”

She turned on him. “A need? I don’t have any ‘need.’ What
need?”
“One that you have yet to identify, obviously” The thranx
bowed slightly and began to back away from the desk. “You
never cease to be amazed at your
ability to pretend things that exist do not, and to ignore logic
are a fascinating species.

I

and reason in favor of what you would like to believe.”
Lorengau shrugged slightly. “So our nature is more whimsical than that of the thranx. Whose wouldn’t be?” Activating
a screen set into her desk that was shielded from their view,
she manipulated controls with the fingers of one hand. “I’ll
want my husband and daughter’s names prominently displayed on the list of contributors, of course, as well as on the
front of your first tabernacle, or whatever you end up calling
your places of gathering.”
Pyreau glanced at his eight-limbed colleague. “We don’t
plan to do that sort of thing. This is to be a refuge from the realities of the world, not a reminder of them. I have always
found that the prominent placement of contributors’ names
on the outside of structures intended for religious purposes
only reminds those who are unable to do likewise of their
comparative insignificance,
tual way.

if

only in a temporal, nonspiri-

We are trying to get away from such things.”

“But we will find a way to acknowledge your gift,” Shanvordesep put in quickly. “One that I believe will more than
satisfy your wishes.”
Shaking her head slowly, Lorengau’s speculative gaze
passed from human to thranx. “I can’t make up my mind if
you two are truly dedicated or just arrogant.” She sighed
softly. “People are going to find out about this, you know.”
“We intend that they should,” Shanvordesep declared.
“There’s going to be a lot more amusement, much of it directed my way. Not to my face, of course. But people will
laugh at me.”

“Someday they will bless you.” Pyreau made the assurance
with as

much feeling as he could muster.

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

58

“Oh, I’m sure,” she muttered sardonically. “What name
have you picked for this creed of yours, anyway?”
That much, at least, he and Shanvordesep had worked out
beforehand, Pyreau thought with relief. “Nothing complex.
Nothing overbearing or intimidating. We were thinking of
calling it the United Church.”
“How original. And yourselves?” She eyed him with some
interest. “Will you still be a priest, Father Pyreau?”
“I think so, though that is still to be worked out.”
“And your many-legged, golden-eyed friend?”
Pyreau turned to the thranx, and this time it was the solemnvisaged pastor who smiled. “In a

difficult

moment early in our

encounter Shanvordesep once referred to himself as the

‘last

of his
flock is not quite the right word, but it will do.
And that is what he will be once we begin: the last resort.”
resort’

.

.

5

As

had for thousands of years, Mount Agung was steaming softly. The thranx who were strolling along the beach
hardly glanced in its direction. They had never questioned
why humankind had chosen to situate one of the two original
sites for greeting and processing visitors to their world in the
midst of a necklace of islands noted for their exceptional volcanic activity. Perhaps this question had occurred to their
hosts, who had on more than one occasion alluded to the possibility of moving the facility to the large land mass that lay to
it

the south.

There were three thranx: Nilwengerex, a specialist in human
culture; Joshumabad, recently arrived from Hivehom; and
Yeicurpilal, the second-highest-ranking representative of her
species on Earth. In the company of the two younger males
she made her way along the shore, careful to keep well away
from the water. The protection from large, potentially deadly
waves afforded by the offshore reef was not adequate to completely reassure any thranx.
Joshumabad would not, and perhaps could not, let go of
the theme that prevented him as well as his companions from
enjoying their morning stroll beneath the warm equatorial
sun. It was understandable. The concern he continued to express was the reason for his being there.
“Those on the Grand Council feel like they are caught at
the terminus of a dead-end tunnel with a starving memnUtoct
at the open end. They do not know whether to run, estivate, or
start digging.”

Yeicurpilal’s six

unshod

feet left multiple impressions in

59

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

60
the slightly

damp

A warm

sand.

tropical breeze whispered

through her ovipositors. Though past the age suitable for procreation and unable to vent any more eggs, she was still
straight and sturdy of limb. The delicate lavender tint maturity had imparted to her exoskeleton was highlighted by the
angle taken by the rays of the still rising sun, and her com-

pound eyes

“Why
hand

glistened with intelligence.

are they so upset?” Yeicurpilal gestured with a tru-

of the island of Bali that lay just across
the deep, swift body of water known as the Selat Lombok.
“Our relations with the humans are good. Negotiations are
proceeding on a host of mutually important matters, from
trade and commerce to exchanges in the arts. I realize that
agreements are not being finalized as rapidly as some might
like,

in the direction

but neither are they at a standstill.”

Less comfortable in the alien surroundings than his companions, the recently arrived Joshumabad kept much of his
attention focused on the ground beneath his feet. He was
careful to avoid anything that hinted of the organic. While he
had confidence in the greater experience of his associates,
neither of them were experts on local life-forms. Though the
likelihood of them encountering anything that could prove
toxic to their offworld biologies was small, he was not the type
to take chances.

“Everyone

is

nervous.

Not only those on

the council, but

who are assigned to many of the advisory committees.
These mammals are aggressive, intelligent, and technologically advanced. The council very much wants them as a coun-

those

terweight, if not as formal allies, in this part of the
restrain the adventurism

Arm

to

of the AAnn.”

“We are on course to achieve that.” Yeicurpilal bent to pick
up a piece of driftwood. It had a lovely grain. Swinging it
back and forth in the manner of strolling humans she had observed, she caused the nervous Joshumabad to put more distance between them. Disturbed at the pleasure she felt as a
consequence of the result she had produced, she flung the
stick aside. It landed in the water and began to drift away on
the slight current. Was the same likely to happen to thranx

DIRGE
hopes for

this

world and

its

61

peculiar, frustrating,

sometimes

maddening inhabitants?

“What

is

the council afraid of?” she asked

disposed of the

when she had

stick.

“Being preempted by these Pitar. We have perused all the
reports. It has been noted how the humans are far more comfortable in the presence of the Pitar than they are with us.”
“They are not more comfortable,” Nilwengerex declared
firmly, speaking for the first time. “They are infatuated. I
have some limited experience in intraspecies contact, with the
Quillp as well as the AAnn, and I have never seen anything
like this.

It is

not so

Pitar say, or take all

much
of

it

that they believe everything the

at face value, as the fact that

they

want so desperately to believe their own perceptions. These
are, as you know, colored by the external appearance of the
Pitar, who according to what my human colleagues have told

me

in response to

my

inquiries represent everything that

physically perfect in the

is

human imagination.”

Joshumabad considered. A bird, one of this fecund world’s
many acrobatic aerial life-forms, momentarily distracted him
as it flew by overhead. He would have had even a harder time
concentrating had he known that the sea eagle was evaluating
him as a potential meal.

“How

can they be so accepting? Physical appearance has
nothing to do with the trustworthiness and dependability of
another. It does not matter if one is speaking of an individual
or, as in this instance, an entire species. Even a hou!p knows
to look deeper.”

mesmerized by the superficiality of external
beauty as embodied in these visitors.” Nilwengerex was a
staid, humorless male, Yeicurpilal mused, but ruthlessly good
at his work. She ranked him near the bottom of potential
companions and at the very top as an advisor. Whether he
was aware of her opinion she did not know. Males did not

“They

are

challenge senior females in matters of personality.

and was content with it.
do not understand.” Joshumabad executed a complex

his position within the hive
“I

He knew

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

62

gesture indicative of internal confusion.

“They are mani-

festly intelligent, fast learners, enthusiastic explorers. Yet in

the presence of these Pitar they slough off several hundred

years of social maturity. If

we were

to encounter a sapient

species that resembled the thranx ideal

we would be

wel-

.”
coming, but not
“Sappy.” Nilwengerex picked up a shell and began to ex.

amine the
usual, the

.

intricate, brightly tinted

humans have

a

word

for

calcareous whorls. “As

it,

even

if that is

one they

themselves would not apply to their present condition.
ever, nothing prevents

How-

me from using it.” He handed the shell

Joshumabad, who extended a truhand to accept it reluctantly. To have refused would have constituted a small but into

escapable

insult.

“Interestingly,” the culture specialist continued, “they are

own insupportable reaction. At
least, the more intelligent among them are. The great fevered

very

much aware of

their

mass of humankind seems largely oblivious. They wish only
to expand and enhance contact with their new friends. Deeper
consequences do not concern them.”
“What about the reception accorded our delegation by
these Pitar?” The representative of the Grand Council was
not at all comfortable with the information he was receiving.
“Formal and polite,” Yeicurpilal told him. “Insofar as we
have been able to determine by cross-referencing with our
human friends, these new aliens are treating us no differently than they are their

are displaying

human hosts.

In that respect they

more diplomatic maturity than

the

humans

themselves.”

“What

Joshumabad
matched her stride for stride while Nilwengerex wandered off
to inspect the gelatinous mass of some tentacled creature that
the sea had regurgitated onto the shore.
“Inconclusive. Contact is too recent and infrequent to
reach any formal conclusions.” She glanced sideways at him.
“The council has been kept fully informed by space-minus
communications. They know all this. Why are you asking
questions to which answers have already been given?”
is

the opinion of our perceivers?”

DIRGE

63

Joshumabad found himself longing for the
low-lying clouds of Hivehom. “I wanted to hear it directly
from you. Oftentimes official reports inadvertently leave out
the most significant particulars. Even visual transcripts can
Feeling a

chill,

neglect information that

is

inherent in person-to-person ges-

and glances.” He turned his attention back to the cultural specialist, who had concluded his examination of the
dying jellyfish and hurried to rejoin them.
“I am interested in your informal opinion, Nilwengerex.
What do you, personally, think of these Pitar? Beyond what
you have contributed to the official reports.”
Nilwengerex pondered a reply. The sky was very blue, and
beyond it, Hivehom very far away. Yet he did not feel as estranged on this world as he had on Trix, for example, or even at
his first posting, on the benign globe known as Willow- Wane.
“I haven’t made up my mind. Nor have any of my colleagues. We felt that we were just beginning to comprehend
these humans, to come to some understanding of how their
very different minds work, when one of their deep-space exploration teams returned with these Pitar in tow. Their unannounced appearance was as much of a shock to us as it was to
the rest of humankind. So we have been forced to adjust our
work and reallocate our resources to study not one but two
new alien, mammalian species. It has been something of a
strain. Under such circumstances, you and the council will
have to learn to be patient. We are learning as much as we can

tures

as fast as

we can.

“Unfortunately, access to the Pitar

More than

is restricted.

restricted: It is virtually unattainable. Constantly attended

and surrounded as they are by ardent humans,

it is

almost im-

possible to procure unescorted contact with them.”

“They

are willing

enough to

“but reluctant to insist
it is

their

lest

world on which

they

we

talk to us,” Yeicurpilal put in,
irritate the

all

humans. After all,

are visitors.

A polite

guest

does not make demands that might displease their hosts.”
“I know that the Pitar claim to occupy only two worlds, in
conjoining orbits in the same system. Though they possess
vessels capable ofjourneying in space-plus they are not eager

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

64
colonizers.

By way of contrast, we have

to date settled five

worlds and the humans seven. Population disparities aside,
do you think they are dangerous, these Pitar?” It was a question

Joshumabad had put off asking

until

he

felt

more com-

fortable in the cultural specialist’s presence.

A sharp, high whistle sounded from Nilwengerex. Startled
by the unnatural alien sound, several small, rainbow-colored
lorikeets burst from the cover of nearby brush and took wing.
When the whistling laughter finally died down, the smallest
of the three strolling thranx readily replied.
“We do not know enough about them to say, but one thing
I do know: They can’t be any more dangerous than these
humans.”
It was not the kind of response Joshumabad had expected,
and his responsive gestures showed clearly that he was taken
aback. “How can you avow such a thing? We have not only
many representatives on this world, but an expanding, functioning colony. If what you say now is true, then there are
lives at risk.”

The dour attache appeared engrossed in
the pale blue sea, as though he had a death wish of his own.
Joshumabad did not like him very much, but he respected the
other male’s knowledge. “Yet each day I spend on this world I
find myself liking these humans more and more.”
Joshumabad halted abruptly, the sand warm beneath his
“I

feet.

do not deny

it.”

“Now I am thoroughly confused. Which is it? Which ob-

servation do

I

convey

to

my

superiors

when

I

return to

Hivehom to make my report in person? Are these bipeds dangerous or not?”

He might have expected clarification from the senior
diplomat among them. Instead, Yeicurpilal only succeeded in
muddying the waters further. “That’s it exactly.”
Joshumabad held firm. “That cannot be it exactly. Either
these humans are a threat to us or they are not.”
Yeicurpilal was not swayed by the visiting representative’s
determination to secure a straight answer. “They are warlike
and peaceful, brutal and

sensitive, ignorant

ing. This planet is a big ball

and understand-

of raging contradictions. And the

DIRGE
worst of

65

while they recognize these inconsistencies
within themselves, they seem powerless to do anything about
it

is,

them”
“You have

me

something more,” Joshumabad
pleaded. “I can’t present myself to the Grand Council with
to give

conclusions like that!”

of all,” Nilwengerex assured him, “they are only observations, not conclusions. I can tell you that my colleagues
and I who have been studying these people do not believe
.”
they pose any direct threat to the thranx
“
Crrilkk that’s something, anyway.” Joshumabad was
“First

visibly relieved.
“I said

no

‘direct’ threat,” the attache

reminded him. “Their

makes their future actions unpredictable. We
have been making progress in many areas of cooperation,
most notably in the matter of commercial and scientific exchanges. The greatest difficulty we are being forced to try to
overcome is the fact that in shape we so nearly resemble the

racial volatility

dominant
life-form on this world, and with whom humans have been
engaged in a battle for survival since the dawn of their own
evolution. As you must know by now, they attach an enormous and irrational importance to physical appearance.” His
tone had turned even drier than usual. “Witness their immediate and unwarranted attraction to these Pitar. Through no
fault of their own, these newly contacted bipeds are inadversmall arthropods that are, numerically at

tently responsible for the

relations with the

least, the

marked setback

in our developing

humans.”

The council representative was silent for a while as the
three resumed their stroll. Much more at home on the alien
beach, Yeicurpilal and Nilwengerex reviewed every plant and

animal they encountered, striving to identify them according
to the taxonomy that had been supplied by human scientists.
“Then I am to inform the council that relations continue to
advance successfully, but at a slower pace than previously?”
Yeicurpilal gestured concurrence. “That is what I would
report.”

“And when might they be expected to accelerate again?”

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

66

Yeicurpilal looked to Nilwengerex for a considered re-

sponse.

The

attache

difficult to say.

was

reluctant to

commit

himself. “It

is

My own personal opinion, based on observa-

and the small knowledge I have gained of these people, is
that it will not happen until the novelty of the Pitars’ appearance has run its course. Unfortunately, it shows no signs of
relenting. The humans are as entranced by their newfound
near-duplicates today as they were when first they were
tion

brought here.”
“Is there nothing

we can do

to regain appropriate atten-

was new and confusing, as
unprecedented in Joshumabad’s experience as it was in
everyone else’s. They had not had such trouble relating to the
tion?”

The unexpected

situation

Quillp, or even to the AAnn.

“If

we

are too forceful in our demands,” Yeicurpilal in-

humans

umbrage at our
attempts, thus rendering the situation even more awkward
than it is now. It is my recommendation and Eint Gowenformed him,

“I fear that the

will take

—

dormet,

who

is

chief of our mission here, concurs

—

that

we

proceed according to our standard plan of contact while
waiting for the ferment surrounding the discovery of the Pitar
to run its course.”
Joshumabad brooded on this. “The council will not be
pleased. The desire to fully engage a strong species such as
this as a counterweight to the endless adventurism of the

AAnn is resolute.”
Yeicurpilal gestured powerlessness. “It cannot be helped.

my

have learned a number of
things about our hosts. One is that they cannot be pushed,
shoved, forced, or cajoled into doing something that does not
originate with them, even if it is manifestly to their benefit. It
is better to hint and suggest and let them believe that the idea
originates with them. When dealing with humans, patience is
not merely to be advocated, it is imperative. There is no other
way to work with them.”
“I am sorry,” Nilwengerex added, “but that is the way of
things here. If these Pitar had not revealed themselves to a
human exploration team, maturation of our mutual relations

During

sojourn on this world

I

DIRGE

67

would be on schedule. You cannot imagine the exceptional
forbearance we are required to show in our daily dealings
with them. Whatever its wishes and needs, the Grand Council
must learn to do the same.”
A visibly unhappy Joshumabad indicated understanding.
“And our tentative connection with the Pitar? We of course
must seek to establish formal relations with them as well.
Though it does not fall within your purview, I presume your
staff has taken the necessary preliminary steps forced upon
them by circumstance?”
Yeicurpilal replied thoughtfully.
priate overtures.

It is

not so

as that the Pitar have

“We have made the appro-

much that they have been rebulfed

no time

They seem

be as ensnared by the humans as the humans are by them, though for
the Pitar this fascination is reflected in a more intense and subdued attitude. Unable to study them firsthand, our specialists
are reduced to speculating on their motivations. It cannot
be determined if they are reclusive, wary, secretive, guarded,
paranoid, fearful, all of the aforementioned, or simply shy.
Without more intimate contact their racial psychology cannot
be resolved. It is hoped time will provide us with access.”
Joshumabad considered. “What is your personal opinion
of them? Aside from the knowledge that has been compiled
by such as this one.” He indicated Nilwengerex, who took no
offense at being referred to obliquely.
Antennae twitched meaningfully. “I don’t like them.”
“
The representative of the council gestured tersely. CrriUkk
that is concise, anyway. Why not?”
Yeicurpilal looked away. “You asked for an opinion not
based on known fact. That is my opinion.”
“Foolish,” Nilwengerex proclaimed. “Xenologically impertinent. Even an opinion must be founded on a base of
knowledge.” He inclined both antennae in Joshumabad’s direction. “I have no fear of these Pitar, nor love of them. I feel
the same about the humans. My reactions and published convictions are based on factual material.”
“There is room here for maneuver.” In his mind Joshumabad was already compiling the report he would make to the
for us.

to

;

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

68

Grand Council. “We will continue on course with the humans
without forcing the issue of closer relations. These must develop as a consequence of natural processes. As for the Pitar,
you will maintain contact with their representatives here
on Earth until we can make arrangements to have a separate
delegation received on Hivehom. Separated from humans,
relations between us will advance at an acceptable pace.”
seagull defecated nearby, and he observed the process with

A

interest.

“Meanwhile, the

current

pace

of diplomacy

is

not

acceptable.”
Yeicurpilal looked at

—

him

sharply.

“But we have just told

you that

does not matter.” Joshumabad’s interruption conveyed
the importance of what he was saying far more than mere
words and gestures could have. “The council is not satisfied.”
He used all four hands for emphasis. “If you cannot accelerate the signing of agreements with humankind, the council
is perfectly willing to appoint others to your present positions
in the hopes they may do better. This is not a threat, but
“It

merely a communication to be taken under advisement.”
“I’m so glad it’s not a threat.” Even when he appeared to
be ignoring his companions, Nilwengerex heard everything.
“It does not matter. According to what you have been telling
us, the council wants us to stay the course, not force matters
but speed things up. I am sorry that does not strike you as a
contradiction.”

does not matter what I think.” Being possessed of a
highly amenable and easygoing personality, Joshumabad was
noticeably unhappy at the direction the conversation had
“It

Not that he had any choice. His mandate called for him
to visit, learn, report, and deliver instructions. This he had
done and would continue to do, no matter how unpleasantly
he was received.
taken.

between the two, conversationally as well as physically. “Nilwengerex is right. We are
doing our best here. All the wishes of the council will not
make the humans move any faster.”
Yeicurpilal hastened to intervene

DIRGE
“Not even as

fast as that larva.”

gerex pointed off to his

69

With a foothand, Nilwen-

left.

who was

running out of the palm trees and down
onto the beach could not have been more than eight or nine.
Even when inclined fully forward to make use of all six legs,
the three thranx were taller. Leaning back on trulegs only, they
would tower over her. She was as brown as the scattered pieces
of shattered driftwood that studded the shore like so many

The

girl

gypsy hieroglyphs, with straight dark hair and dancing eyes
the color of small black shells. Laughing and giggling, she
bent to pick up a stick and throw it toward Sulawesi. It did not
quite reach the water.

Turning slightly and bending in quest of another missile,
she caught sight of the thranx. Having halted at her unscheduled intrusion, the aliens stood watching quietly. Joshumabad

once captivated and repelled. From his
preflight studies he knew what very young humans looked
like, but this was the first time he had seen one in the flesh. The
unexpected encounter left him only momentarily speechless.
“Is ... is it dangerous?”
“Not usually.” Nilwengerex responded in his usual dry,
clipped tones. “Not one this small. The adolescents are potentially lethal. Unlike us, their bodies assume adult form and
bulk preposterously in advance of their minds. But one such
as this should be quite harmless, though even infants are capable of surprising violence.”
Straightening, the little girl came toward them. She was
in particular

was

at

wide-eyed and unafraid.
“What should we do?” Joshumabad fought hard to sup-

was rising within him.
“Nothing,” Yeicurpilal informed him. “Remain

press the panic that

as

you

are.

come to us.”
Not without some concern, Joshumabad did as he was told.

Let the larva

The

girl

halted a couple of arm’s lengths away, one finger

pressing against her lower

lip.

“Hello, bugs.

What

are

you

doing here?”

“What are you doing here?” Nilwengerex asked her in Terranglo so fluent that Joshumabad was startled. He knew the

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

70

was competent in the local language, but he’d had
no idea he was so skilled. “This is a restricted area. Only authorized adult humans are supposed to have access.” He
looked beyond her. “How did you get in?”
specialist

“Hole

“Maman

in

the

fence,”

she replied without hesitation.

says the big storm last

week made

it.”

She glanced

back over a shoulder, though not to the degree a thranx could
manage, and gestured importantly with one finger. “We’re
having a picnic.”
Nilwengerex looked to his superior.

“We must

report this

violation.”

Yeicurpilal indicated resignation.
will be

“Of course. The humans

most upset.”

any kind of reaction we can get from
them would be welcome. The council’s official impatience
notwithstanding ” He arched his antennae significantly in
Joshumabad’s direction. “ I look forward to the resumption
of proper negotiations and exchanges.” So saying, he stepped
“At

this point

—

—

toward the child.
Joshumabad’s instinctive reaction was to restrain the other
male. Aware that Nilwengerex was the specialist in thranxhuman interaction and he only a recently arrived newcomer,

he held back. Lowering his head, Nilwengerex extended a
truhand in an odd fashion.
“I am Nilwengerex. These are my friends, Yeicurpilal and
Joshumabad. We are pleased to meet you.”
“Hi. I’m Tomea.” Reaching out, she took the extended truhand and shook it up and down. Joshumabad was impressed
at how readily and easily Nilwengerex flowed with the gesture, which the representative quickly recognized as the most
common human method of greeting. “It’s nice to meet you.
I’ve heard Maman and her friends talking about you.” The
doubly perforated organ located in the center of her face expanded and contracted several times. Following this, the corners of the flexible mouth curved upward and the jaws parted,
exposing white teeth.

“You smell nice.”

DIRGE

71

“Tomea!” The voice was deeper than the girl’s, the tone agi?”
tated. “Tomea, where are y
A subjective peroration split the air, startling Joshumabad
who instinctively retreated several body lengths. Yeicurpilal
did likewise, but Nilwengerex released the girl’s fingers and
stepped back only reluctantly. Chances to study human larvae
were rare. He had yet to encounter one that readily accepted

—

contact.

The female who came running down the beach was not
very large. The thin, loose folds of her single garment fluttered like bird wings around her slim body. Reaching the

girl,

she clutched her by the shoulder with a severity that stunned

Joshumabad. Turning her away, the mature female lectured
her offspring as they walked back the way they had come.
Occasionally the adult human glanced back at the three
motionless thranx as
not be sure, but

it

Joshumabad could
him that the larva was protest-

if fearing pursuit.

appeared to

ing the intervention.

“Do

they always treat their progeny so roughly?” The vis-

watched the adult human march her
young off the sand and back into the trees.
“Frequently.” Nilwengerex did not turn away until the two
humans had been swallowed up by the palm grove. “It is a
component of the naturally aggressive nature of the adults
that is passed down to their brood. From my studies, it is clear
iting representative

to

me

that the

humans themselves have

little

idea

why

they

such a fashion, except that they always have.”
“It may be a reflection of the fact that among mammals the
young do not go through a pupal stage where all they can do
is passively listen and learn.” Yeicurpilal had evidently done
ample reading and research on her own into the habits of
act in

these peculiar creatures.

must be reported so

can be repaired.” Nilwengerex glanced again at the representative of
the Grand Council. “Not to keep us from wandering beyond
the restricted area, but to keep curious and potentially dangerous humans out. No one wants a repetition of the Amazon

“The break

hive incident.”

in the fence

it

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

72

Joshumabad agreed with feeling. He
turned back. “It is growing late, and I would rather not be
caught outside the compound after dark. You two may be com“Certainly not

I,”

of this world, but I am not.” Reflecting his
agitation, his antennae bobbed and weaved aimlessly. “Yet despite such revelations, all reports indicate that those of you
stationed here enjoy your contact with these humans.”
“They are all right,” Nilwengerex conceded. “They simply
have a surplus of energy that they have never been able to
channel properly. When our relations have become sufficiently close, it is hypothesized by those specialists concerned with such matters that we may be able to offer them
some assistance in such matters.”
“If our relations become sufficiently close,” a brooding
Joshumabad reminded him. “Too much energy, you say?”
“Not I,” Nilwengerex corrected him. “Our students of alien
fortable in the night

Though I would not dispute their assessment.”
ChrrUk, at least it has done them well. They have ad-

psychology.
“

vanced rapidly.”
Yeicurpilal had been silent for a while. Now she spoke
anew. “Only technologically.”
Joshumabad eyed her curiously. “Your words are straightforward, but your gestures are circumspect. What else do you

mean to

say?”

The Grand Council’s second-in-command on Earth regarded the visitor evenly. “You saw the reaction of the adult to
our interaction with the larva. It does not matter if juveniles
are involved or not, or only adults, or specialists, or even
those who seek to help us bond with their kind. Beneath
every interaction, whether successful or a failure, hopeful or
uncertain, enthusiastic or rote, the undertones are the same.
Sometimes they are subtle, sometimes blatant, but they are
almost never absent.”
Indicating confusion,
for clarification.

Joshumabad turned

to

Nilwengerex

“What is she talking about?”

“These humans,” the

informed him. “They are
indeed technologically advanced. Even a cursory study of
their history shows that they have overcome extraordinary
specialist

DIRGE

73

odds and exceptional difficulties to reach the place where
they are today, having successfully preserved their own world
while settling many others. In spite of this, what the senior female says is indisputable. One does not have to be a qualified
xenologist to see

it.”

“See what?” Joshumabad demanded impatiently.
Nilwengerex regarded the visitor quietly. “That they are
not happy.”

6

was not nervous about meeting his
Having on occasion dealt with the emi-

l\/l inister Saluafata
Pitarian counterpart.

nently reasonable yet harrowingly grotesque-looking thranx,

he anticipated no difficulty in sitting down at the table with
one or more nonhumans who resembled tridee luminaries
more than visiting aliens. He looked forward to the forth-

coming interaction. Only the outcome concerned him.
This was to be no ordinary meeting. Much more was at stake
today than superficial agreements on cultural exchange or
travel rights. Such matters could be, and were being, handled
by assistant ministers and second-echelon diplomats. Only for
something as important as this was someone of Saluafata’s
stature personally involved.

That stature extended to his physical as well as mental proportions.

Though not

particularly rangy, the minister

was

A

legacy of his chiefly forefathers, he was almost as
wide as he was tall, and very little of it was fat.
walking

huge.

A

door plug, some of his colleagues and underlings had called
him. More adept at plugging crises than doorways, Saluafata
was used to disarming initially intimidated adversaries with a
smile as wide as the lagoon that framed his island home.
When that failed to soothe nervous opposites, a song or two
sung in his startlingly accomplished falsetto inevitably produced grins and delighted laughter.
Like a whale that had been subjected to reverse evolution
and had reclaimed its hind legs, he settled himself into the
chair at one end of the table. His personal secretary Ymir sat
down on his left while the prim and always correct second un74

DIRGE
dersecretary for Extraterrestrial Affairs,

assumed the empty
were positioned in

on

75

Mandan HoOdam,

of chilled water
front of the delegates, along with small
cobalt crystal bowls of assorted nuts. The Pitarians, it had
been learned, had developed a liking for such terrestrial food.
A guard stood at either end of the room. Neither of them
carried visible weapons
the operative word, Saluafata knew,
being visible. The meeting place was a cheerful hemisphere
with a single wide window that overlooked the placid tropical sea beyond. Set high on a Balinese hillside, the carefree
beaches of Sanur were visible in the distance. They were filled
with visitors cavorting in the warm waters, none of whom
were aware of the somber significance of the meeting that was
about to take place. All but a few were employed by the planetary government in the service of extraterrestrial relations.
Overdeveloped Bali had long since ceased to be a stopping
seat

his right. Carafes

—

point for gallivanting tourists.

The entire facility needed to be moved, Saluafata mused.
With the increase in deep space exploration and expansion, it
had outgrown the available site. Nor did he suspect that he
was the only diplomat or worker who felt uneasy laboring in
the shadow of the periodically active volcanoes that dominated the island and this part of the world. Already, bureaus
and agencies in need of additional room were being shifted
southward, to the east coast of the southern continent. There

was a surplus of flat, empty land there, and an enormous
shuttleport was being built to service the increasing volume
of offworld travel.

HoOdam murmured while scanning the privatized contents
of her reader. An invisible beam from the reader periodically
bounced off her retinas and back to the device, indicating that
the individual gazing down at it was lawfully entitled to do so.
If that proved not to be the case, the print on the screen would
have remained as invisible as the security beam.
“What do you think, Api? Will they be difficult?”
He shrugged, and the movement took measurable time to
travel from his columnar neck all the way down his enormous
shoulders to his upper arms. “There’s no way to tell in advance,

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

76

Mandy. So

far

it’s

our government that has been doing most of

been more than friendly; they’ve
proven themselves amenable. But this is the first time we’ve
proposed anything on this scale.” Reaching forward, he poured
himself a glass of water. Since there was no established protocol for dealing with the Pitar, he had no basis to fear that his
simple gesture might be breaking it.
“What if they refuse?” Recorder at the ready, Ymir was
running a hand repeatedly through his short, blonde hair.
the giving.

The

Pitar have

Saluafata recognized the nervous habit but did not point

it

Everyone was edgy, and it was a harmless enough release. The Pitar were not like the thranx, who saw every gesture, no matter how inconsequential, as the equivalent of a
verbal comment. When dealing with the insectoids, a person
had to be conscious of his every movement lest unexpected
confusion or, worse, unintended offense be given. The Pitar
did use their hands occasionally, but not as a component of
interpersonal communication. That a hardworking handful
of them had already become fluent in Terranglo only added to
the ease of interchange. They were much better at it than the
out.

thranx.

Of
tus

course, he reminded himself, their speaking appara-

was

far better suited to the task. Technically, the higher

compliments were due the thranx

who had mastered human

when compared to the Pitar, the insectoids
came off looking bad. But who wouldn’t, the minister mused?
speech.

As

always,

Alongside the

Pitar,

everyone tended to appear ungainly and

graceless.

He had resolved that the conference would not be affected
by such

of aspect. Personalities would not become involved. The forthcoming talks were too important,
the matter at hand too consequential, to founder in a sea of
perfunctory perception. He would not allow himself to be
distracted. Besides, if not as attractive as the Pitar, he could
be much more charming.
A soft musical tone chimed twice. Pushing back the specially ordered oversized chair, he and his colleagues rose as
the Pitarian delegation entered. He recognized Urin-Delm
superficialities

DIRGE

77

and Jpar-Vhet from previous encounters. Both males were
tall, muscular, perfectly formed, and wore the familiar blank
Pitarian expression of noncommittal. They were clad in
simple gray jumpsuits unadorned except for embroidered insignia that identified them as to both name and function. They
flanked a mature female who
They flanked
The minister swallowed hard as humans and Pitar alike
took their seats more or less simultaneously. To his secretary
he whispered, “Close your mouth.”
Even by Pitarian standards of beauty the female was extraordinary. Hair the hue of turquoise framed her face like the
ultimate expression of the Zuni silversmith’s art. Her eyes
were a deep royal purple. Lips that did not belong in any
species’ diplomatic service were lightly parted, and the molecules of air that rode in and out of that exquisite mouth were
repeatedly blessed. As for the rest of her, perfection was too
mild a word to serve as an adequate description. In a space of
.

.

.

.

.

less than a minute,

Apileaa Saluafata, minister for Extraterrestrial Affairs, virtually forgot who he was.
A nudge in his capacious side rudely induced his fall from
heaven. Though much taken by the appearance of all three
Pitar, Undersecretary HoOdam had retained a semblance of
self-control.

“You’re staring, Api.

And we have business to do.”

Indeed, having taken their seats, the three Pitar were ob-

serving their

human

counterparts in expectant silence.

One

had already begun sorting through the salted nuts on the table
in front of him.
Unable to meet the ameythstine eyes of the alien seated
across from him, a disconcerted Saluafata removed his own
reader from its case and scrolled down the list of items that
had been placed on the agenda. The cool, detached print
helped him to regain his personal and professional equilibrium. But it was not easy. Every time he looked up, the purple
eyes of his counterpart were there, gazing across the conference table in his direction. They made him want to think of
anything except business. It did not help when she spoke first.
“The Dominion of the Twin Worlds extends its greetings to

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

78

on this congenial day.
whatever you have to say.”

the people of Earth
listening to

We look forward to

Diplomats should not have voices like that, the minister
felt. It conferred an unfair advantage on the speaker that had
nothing whatsoever to do with the issues under discussion. It
made him think of somnolent days on deserted beaches, of
hammocks caressed by emollient breezes, and cold, tangy
fruit drinks placed close at hand. It made him think of
“We receive the representatives of the Dominion,” he
heard himself responding, “in friendship and with high hopes
for a mutually agreeable and successful culmination of our
discussions. I presume that you have all had an opportunity to
examine the formal proposal that was conveyed to your
equivalent agency or department?”
To Saluafata’s disappointment, it was the male seated
across from Ymir who next spoke. As for himself, he wanted
only to sit and listen to the female speak, to have her words
nuzzle his ears like the lingering warmth of a perfect sunset
on the eyes. Not that there was anything wrong with the male’s
voice, as the first cracks in HoOdam’s armor of diplomatic
distance showed.
“The matter has been studied,” the irresponsibly handsome
male responded. “You wish our permission to begin settling
your people on the world you have chosen to call Argus Five,
.

.

also Treetrunk.”

Saluafata nodded.

Flanking him, Ymir and

HoOdam

struggled to present a businesslike demeanor. That did not

keep them from stealing surreptitious glances at the radiant
comeliness of the three Pitar. If the visitors noticed this unprofessional attention or took exception to it they gave no sign.
Presumably, the minister thought, they were used to it by now.
“That is correct.” The special chair provided enough room
for him to shift importantly on the reinforced seat. “Naturally, we understand that you may have hesitations. Let me assure you that my government is prepared to compensate or
negotiate further on any particular objectionable aspects of
this proposal, no matter how numerous. We are willing to
work with you on this for as long as may be necessary to en-

DIRGE

79

sure that both sides are completely comfortable with the ulti”
mate resolution of the matter. We can offer you
.

.

“There are no hesitations.” The female cut him off softly.
“There are no objections. The Dominion of the Twin Worlds
does not object to the settlement of the world known as
Treetrunk by the people of Earth.”
Having prepared himself and his staff for lengthy, difficult
negotiations, for an extended period of give-and-take, for argument and dissention, the minister was more than a little
taken aback by the unexpected and to all intents and purposes
unqualified grant of rights. He stalled for a few moments to
gather his swirling thoughts.
“I

need

to

make

certain

we understand one

another.”

He

addressed the female. For him her companions had ceased to
exist, though not for Ymir or HoOdam. “You are saying that

you grant us permission to settle as many colonists as we
wish on the one habitable world of the system in question,
without restriction or covenant?”
The male on the left of the woman with the look of a
shallow sea replied. “Without restriction or covenant, yes.
You may begin whenever you wish. We will not interfere.”
“I don’t understand.”

HoOdam felt compelled to speak up.

“The extremes for favorable existence of your species fall
within the same tolerances as ours. You could settle Argus
Five as readily as we. Furthermore,

it

lies

much

nearer your

homeworlds than does Earth or any of its developed colonies.
Why are you leaving it to us?”

As they so often did, the three Pitar put their heads close together and conferred in whispers that were even softer than
their usual speech. When they moved apart again, the woman

middle explained.
“We explore, as your first ship to visit Treetrunk discovered. But we do not settle. We do not colonize.” She smiled,
and her countenance far outshone the light from the overhead
glowstrips. “Our population is stable and has been so for
some time. Believing as we do that the Twin Worlds are the
in the

most perfect of all habitable places in this galaxy, or at least
in this part of this arm, we see no reason to stray from them.

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

80

None of our people would willingly do so, even if our government was to offer incentives. They are quite happy where they
and know that their offspring will be as content there as
are they. We do not seek to spread ourselves more widely
are,

throughout the firmament.”

home to dangerous, uncouth, uncivilized creatures. We wish to know they
are there so we can defend against any that might prove hostile. Among those we have met only yours suits our limited
The other male spoke

up.

desire for offworld contact.

with the others.”

He

“The

stars are

We want as little as possible to do

shivered visibly. “Such as these over-

bearing AAnn and hideous thranx

.”

Frowning, Ymir piped up. “The thranx aren’t so hid
umphr Turning a hurt face to Saluafata, the secretary used
the bottom of one foot to rub the other where the minister’s
heavy shoe had descended. Discarding laborious diplomatic
niceties in favor of alacrity, Saluafata had cut the secretary

mid objection.
Let them find every space-going

off in

homo

sapient species except

sapiens abhorrent, the minister mused. Unreasonable

and xenophobic such an attitude might be, but it only increased humankind’s leverage in relations and negotiations.
Still, he could hardly believe his good fortune. Not only would
the council be delighted, such an astoundingly successful arrangement could only enhance his personal prospects for
advancement.
Still, he could not escape the feeling that he was overlooking something significant. He sought certitude.
“Though colonizable space on Treetrunk is limited due to
the conditions that prevail over much of the northern and
southern portions of the planet, there is room for settlement
by more than one species. You are certain your people do not
want to share? We already have such an arrangement with the
thranx, both here on Earth and elsewhere.”
“No thank you,” replied the female evenly. “In addition to
the reasons I have already given, we find Treetrunk both too
cold and too barren to be enticing. Also, our present thrust of
exploration lies in the direction of the galactic center, away

DIRGE

81

from your Earth as well as the Argus system. Even if we
sought it, there is no reason for potential conflict.”
“Better for you to concern yourselves with the expansionist
AAnn, thranx, and other aggressive colonizing species than
with us,” the male on the right proclaimed. “Bearing such considerations in mind, you would do well to begin your settlement of Treetrunk as quickly as possible.”
“I’m sure that when I convey the results of this conference
to my government it will want to do just that,” the minister assured the Pitar. “Local climatic considerations on Treetrunk
will keep the pace of development below that of such worlds
as Amropolous and New Riviera, but I know that as a first
step the scientific outpost that is there now will be expanded
as rapidly as possible.” Putting both massive hands together,
he leaned forward and rested them on the table.
“Now that I have your most gracious concession on the
principal matter at hand, we can proceed to a discussion of
congruous minutiae. Specifically, how much and what sort of
compensation does your government want in return for allowing us unrestricted settlement privileges on Treetrunk? I
would imagine that trade credits would prove the most
amenable, provided we have anything you want. If there is
something else you wish that is within my government’s
power to grant, I have the authority to recommend that it be
given to you.”

For a second time the three Pitar conferred, giving Saluafata and his cohorts the opportunity to gaze long and lingeringly at their fetching alien counterparts.
“I

am not sure we understand,” the female finally declared.

“We want nothing from you.”
“Nothing?”

HoOdam

blurted.

“No compensation

at all?”

So stupefied was she by the response that bordered on the ingenuous that she did not even notice Saluafata’s disapproving
glower.

“How

can we claim compensation?” The female concluded with one of the few, restrained Pitarian body gestures.
Saluafata recognized it and enjoyed it. “Treetrunk is not ours
to give. It is an empty world. We wish only to see you, our

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

82
friends

and close

The coincidence of
claim to

and enjoy and populate it.
proximity grants us no special

relations, settle
stellar

it.”

Saluafata took the risk of pointing out something

now in the

hopes of avoiding disagreement or confusion later. Everything said at the conference was being recorded. Neither he
nor the council wanted the Pitar or anyone else coming back
years later insisting that a certain right had not been granted,
that specific permissions had not been obtained.
“By galactic standards the Argus system lies much nearer
the Twin Worlds than it does to Earth or any of its colonies.
Members of the scientific team that you encountered there
were told that your people had visited Treetrunk previously. To
our way of thinking, that does give you the right of prior claim.
Yet you wish to waive this privilege without recompense?”
“Quite,” the male on the right stated. “We have no use for
the place. We are certain your people will find much success
there, will multiply and fill the narrow ecological niche that is
suited to mammals. We encourage you in this.”
“After all,” the other male added with an inviting smile,
“why waste it? You want the place; we do not. Take it and welcome, and in friendship.”
“We will of course make periodic visits to monitor your
progress.”

The female’s

smile,

aimed exclusively

at Saluafata,

melted any lingering concerns. “It should be interesting to
observe how your people spread themselves across a new
world, since it is something we do not do and have never done
ourselves.”

The minister found himself beaming back. “Naturally your
people will always be welcome on the world you have so generously yielded to us, as well as here on Earth.”
” The Pitarian
“Then if there is nothing more to discuss
.

.

representative left the implication dangling.

“Your people are fond of markings on documents,” one of
the two males pointed out.
Saluafata would rather have spent the next hour staring
into the amethyst windows that were the female’s eyes, but
while he might be feeling like a love-struck schoolboy, he

DIRGE
was not one. With
and

sat

back

83

he broke the hypnotic connection
The buttressed chair groaned as he

regret,

in his seat.

shifted his weight.

“Yes, I’m afraid

it’s

a tradition even a contemporary gov-

ernment adheres to. If you do not object, that is,” he added
hastily, wondering what he would do if they did.
“We do not,” the female replied, to the minister’s relief.
“We only find it a curious but harmless anachronism.” Again
the supple smile that could melt lead. “We will be happy to
put the written equivalent of our names to any material of
your choosing.”
The official signing of the settlement agreement took place
in the rooftop assembly chamber, a dome of iridescent, polarized glass that provided a much more dramatic backdrop
to the ceremonies than the tiny conference room in which
the unexpectedly meteoric negotiations had taken place two
weeks previously. Given the presence of not one but several
of the glamorous Pitar there was no shortage of media coverage and attention.
Though outranked by several more prominent signees,
a restrained Saluafata dominated the proceedings with his
sheer presence, his royal dimensions invariably singled out
for comment by the tridee commentators. And when senior
representatives of the world government returned to their
homes and offices in distant Zurich, Washington, Beijing,
and Delhi, it was the minister who remained behind to conclude the ceremonies and to see to the ultimate satisfaction of
the visiting aliens. This appeared to be as much to their liking
as to his.

Much as he luxuriated in the presence of the seductive Pitar,
was not all pleasure. There was business to be conducted.
There had to be, or the aliens would have ignored him. Frivolity and fun did not seem to be part of their interspecies lexicon. Polite, pleasant, ingratiating even, they drew the line at
convivial intimacy. It was a wall that the immensely gregarious minister was determined to break down. Within the
it

government, subordinates and superiors alike were fond of remarking that Saluafata’s girth was exceeded only by his

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

84

charm. The contrast between sharp mind and boyish charisma
struck everyone who came in contact with him, if one could
call a man who weighed nearly two hundred kilos “boyish.”
Yet his most sincere efforts to break down their inherent reserve resulted in nothing more than courteous smiles from
the Pitar.

tempts,

Masking

all

his disappointment,

he persisted in his

at-

the while conducting the people’s business.

This was difficult to do on a beach, where accompanied by
Ymir he met four of the Pitar for an informal discussion on issues of mutual interest.

It

was

difficult

because one of them

who had

presided over the negotiations that
gave rights of colonization of Argus to the people of Earth.
Slightly more hot natured than the average human, the Pitar
enjoyed relaxing if not stiffly basking in the tropical sun. This

was

the female

V

they normally did in the absence of clothes. Even though the
beach lay within the diplomatic compound and was screened

and guarded, they had reluctantly agreed to make concessions
to the inexplicable vagaries of contemporary human culture.
Swimsuits had been provided for all four. The most they
would tolerate were small swimsuits. Very small. Guards and
privacy screens notwithstanding, the utter absence of these
strategic strips of fabric might well have provoked a riot

among the ever-hungry media.
Focusing on the business of diplomacy, or anything else
for that matter, in the presence of the gem-eyed, statuesque
female was not easy. Despite the envy others might feel at his
perceived good fortune, Saluafata actually worked harder
at such times to earn his stipend than he did in more formal
surroundings.

As they sat in folding beach chairs that were the property of
the

government and gazed

at the unruffled silken surface

the lagoon, the minister confined his

comments

of

to matters

of mutual interest. He did not try to make small talk. The Pitar
did not engage in small talk, a characteristic that had been
noted and remarked upon as early as their initial contact with
the crew of the Chagos. But that did not mean that a speaker as
voluble as Saluafata could not insinuate casual queries into an
otherwise formal diplomatic conversation.

DIRGE

85

Noting that Ymir was cavorting in the water with a pair of
support personnel from Administration, the minister leaned
into the sun shadow of the female Pitar’s shape. “The water
here is safe and warm, but I don’t see any of your people enjoying

it.”

Piercing eyes turned to meet his, and she smiled at him: the

standard polite, noncommittal Pitarian smile.
as a resource. There
for harvesting

no other reason

to enter

them except

and development.”

To someone
middle of the

is

“We see oceans

like Saluafata, raised

on an island

in the

such an opinion constituted a kind of
heresy. Or would have, had it come from a human. Still, he
found it hard to believe that the oh-so-similar Pitar did not
even indulge in recreational bathing. It was an observation,
however, that allowed him to segue to a minor but curious
point of diplomatic contention.
“You know that my government has now made more than
several appeals to allow some of our representatives to visit
the Twin Worlds.” Though his smile was far more open and
Pacific,

genuine than hers, it won him no response. “Reciprocal cultural exchanges are a useful way of building and cementing
long-term friendships.”
“We have no objection to such exchanges,” she reminded
him. As she shifted in the seat, her barely covered golden alien
backside only centimeters above the hot sand, he struggled to
keep his thoughts focused on the current business. “We have
already concluded numerous agreements permitting such
contact.”

of them call for Pitarian cultural groups to
visit Earth, or one of the colonies. No permission has yet
been granted allowing the equivalent human organizations
access to either of the Twin Worlds.”
“It is just a matter of time.” This time when she smiled, it
struck him as just a smidgen more genuine and less academic. Or was he reading into her expression that which he
wanted to be there? “Your people have to understand. Minister Saluafata, that the natural reticence and shyness of my
kind far exceeds their own. Confined as we are to the two
“Yes, but

all

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

86

homeworlds of our

origin,

we

are intimidated

by races

that

have spread themselves to other worlds, other star systems.
This feeling is not restricted to humankind. We have yet to
allow the thranx or any other newly contacted species access
to the Twin Worlds.” Still speaking, she turned away from

him to face the lagoon.
“I am sure it will come with time. But your government has
to understand that access to the ancestral home of the Dominion is for us a most sensitive matter. Your people must be
patient and not try to force the issue, especially when relabetween us are maturing at such a satisfactory pace.”
Reaching over, she touched the side of his forearm with long,
lissome fingers. Though manifestly casual and anything but
overtly erotic, the contact sent a shock through his entire ex-

tions

pansive frame.
“It’s

just that

we

don’t see any reason for your hesitation.”

Despite his pleasurable unease, he refused to be distracted.
.”
“If true friendship is to be extended across the parsecs
She touched him again, and this time her fingers ran down
.

.

exposed skin from elbow to wrist. “Please, Minister Saluafata. It is very much such a pleasant day, and so good to
how is it said? take a break from the relentlessness of duty.
Do not spoil it by pressing me or my colleagues for a response we are not authorized to give. I can only reiterate that
your people must have some patience with us.” This time he
chose to believe that the scintillating smile came from the
heart. “After all, we have not even been aware of one another’s existence for but a short time. Allow us our privacy.”
He grinned back. “It’s not for me to take away. I’m just
doing my job by conveying the petitions of my superiors. Myself, I don’t care if your people choose to keep your homeworlds cloistered forever, so long as you come and visit us
once in a while and we maintain amicable relations.”
“You are a gracious and understanding representative of
your kind. Minister Saluafata. I can see why your people appointed you to such a significant position.”
“I’ve seen how your kind favor formality in interspecies
relations.” He gestured amiably in the direction of the sand.
his

—

DIRGE

87

and the tropical sky. “But just here, just now, couldn’t
you break with your tradition for a few hours? Long enough
to call me ‘Api’? It would please me.” His grin widened irresistibly. “Think of it as a diplomatic concession to improved
the sea,

relations.”

“

‘Api.’ ”

She considered him thoughtfully. “A small name
for so large an individual.”
“It’s

a

common

trait

among my

particular,

very small

tribe.”

“You are a tribe all by yourself, Api.”
It was the first time he, or perhaps anyone
representative of the Pitar

had heard a
make a joke. He was encouraged
else,

beyond reason.
“I’m not involved with the extensive studies that have been
undertaken and are still ongoing in attempts to resolve our re-

—

have read the reports at least, the
informal ones. I have neither the time nor the training to
delve into the scientific literature. One thing I believe we’ve
had some trouble resolving is the matter of aging. You seem
to do it so much better than us.”
She executed a Pitarian gesture of understanding. “It is not
something we work at. Biology is what it is. It does not play
favorites. Believe me, there are aspects to it where your abilispective biologies, but

I

exceed ours.”
“There are millions of humans who, after seeing you,
would disagree. Take yourself, for example. Unlike with most
human females, it’s impossible to tell if you’ve had or have not
ties far

had children.”

The look she turned on him was so sharp and sudden it
shocked him. “What makes you ask that?”
He hastened to recover. “Nothing particular. I was just
making conversation.” His smile seemed to settle her. “I did

mean to intrude, or to violate any social taboos. Remember, we are still learning about each other.”
“That is true. You should excuse me. I should not have
reacted the way that I did.”
not

But she had, Saluafata reflected, and he could not help
wondering why. He proceeded gently. “Then if I’m not

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

88

probing an area that’s restricted or off-limits, may I ask if you
have had children?”
“No, I have not given birth to any offspring.” She smiled as
she said it, but to the perceptive Saluafata she still seemed
sensitive about the matter.

about to investigate further when she suddenly
turned to him and once more placed a hand on his arm. The
difference was that this time, she did not remove it.
“As long as you have brought forth the subject of mutually

He was

investigative biology,” she

murmured

was as
“you must know

in a voice that

unchanged as it was inherently seductive,
that it has been theorized that sexual relations between Pitar
and human are regarded as physically possible. All preliminary studies of the relevant architecture would seem to favor
it. There can of course be no issue as a consequence of such
contact. All that is wanting for confirmed results to

mulgated

is

a sufficiency of experimental data.”

“I actually wasn’t

done

be pro-

to resolve the

much of anything had been
conjectures.” He swallowed with some
aware that

“Such matters are reserved for study by the scientific community and do not fall within the ken of the diplomatic ministry.” Glancing up the beach, he saw that the other
three Pitar had wandered offby themselves. Frolicking in the
shallow water, Ymir and the two administrative assistants had
difficulty.

moved far away.
The alien was very close to him now, and the sun and sand
were very warm. “We have more latitude in such matters.” As
she whispered to him, her hand moved from his arm. “As a

am always ready to add
to the growing body of scientific and cultural knowledge my
dedicated servant of the Dominion,

I

people are accumulating about your kind. Experiments in the
field need not always be officially authorized.”

There were questions he wanted to ask her, elucidations he
sought, but as her hand moved he forgot all about them.

7

H

eather

Wixom

struggled triumphantly to the top of the

She could have taken a lifter there and had herself
dropped off, but that would have denied her the sense of accomplishment she felt from having made the time-consuming
ascent on her own. Technically, it had been easy: dense but
navigable native forest; pauses to examine the indigenous
wildlife while it hesitated long enough to stare at the slim,
alien, human intrusion; and at the top, tolerant slopes that
were kind to her booted feet.
From one of the larger boles directly below her rose the
dirge of a gnarter. The tree itself put her in mind of a spruce
with a skin problem, many of the evergreens that gave Treetrunk its popular name tending to shed copious amounts of
ridge.

bark

at the slightest shift in the weather.

As

for the gnarter,

it

was a lumpy, eight-legged mass of slow-moving brown and
dark blue

fiir

that lived in selected tree hollows while re-

garding the world out of large, mournful eyes dominated by
hourglass-shaped blue pupils. It had been suggested that it
looked like the product of a union between a cuttlefish, a
koala, and a caterpillar.
forests,
It

it

was

A

prolific inhabitant

of the boreal

did not often stray this far south.

luxuriating in the

“warm”

weather,

Wixom decided

as she tugged the sealfast of her insulating coat tighter around

her neck. Treetrunk had rapidly revealed to
tants

were.

how fecund

new

inhabi-

the frigid northern and far southern climes

The temperate zone

was home
of which the

that tracked the equator

to a correspondingly greater variety

gnarter was by no

its

of

life,

means the most outlandish example.
89

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

90

Another was the hoat, a puma-sized predator that impaled
its prey on spikelike teeth that grew horizontally from its expansive mouth and flattened jaws. Alone on the hilltop, she
kept a careful eye out for it and its less imposing relations.
Treetrunk was far from being tamed, its indigenous life-forms
anything but domesticated. That was one of the great joys of
settling a new world, she knew. It was one of the reasons that,
restless and unmarried, she had traded a comfortable and predictable life as an up-and-coming urban planner on New
Riviera for the incertitude of laying out new communities
from scratch on Argus V
The weight of the shocker in her left pocket made her grin
to herself. No need for quite so potent a weapon of selfdefense on placid, easygoing, semitropical New Riviera. There,
unwelcome advances could usually be discouraged by the
judicious application of a few sharp words.

Unlimbering her backpack, she unfolded the extensible
stabilizing pod and attached the siter to the clip on top. Activated, the unit provided a heads-up display that allowed her to
place buildings and infrastructure wherever she wished, creating a virtual community anywhere the unit’s viewfinder
was aimed. Warehouses, shuttleport, access roads, communications, water and sewerage, power transmission pylons
everything could be constructed with the touch of a few
controls, could be sized to fit and arranged as she preferred
without a single spadeful of dirt having to be overturned.
As she began to lay out the access routes from the growing
town of Rajput to the proposed suburban extension, she made
adjustments for the terrain, utilizing the unit to banish rock
and earth that was in the wrong place and move it to where it
was needed. As many trees as possible would be spared, but it
was not really a major concern. Between the tundra lines,
Treetrunk was a solid belt of native forest, and provisions had
already been made to preserve the bulk of it in reserves. A renewable resource if properly looked after, its woods would
provide income to the colonists in the form of everything
from exotic furniture to tourism.

As

she contrived the

new town the unit recorded those

de-

DIRGE

91

cisions that she wished to convey to the planning board. In so

doing she allowed herself room to maneuver, occasionally indulging in personal fancies that she knew the board would
disavow.

It

was a game: She did

as she pleased, the board re-

monstrated with her, and they compromised. In the end she
got what she wanted while permitting the board members to
believe that they had prevailed in every matter. The ego involved in the repetitive confrontations meant nothing to her:

was the

Her psychological skills had
contributed as much to her success on New Riviera as had her

It

results that mattered.

and planning.
The board would want the power distribution center to go
there, she suspected. She moved it six blocks east. After due
debate, she would concede the point, thereby allowing herself room to place the observation and restaurant complex exactly where she wanted it. That mattered. She didn’t give two
gnarter moans about the location of the power center.
talent for organizing

“You are very intense.”
The comment did not cause her to jump out of her skin, but
her heart certainly thumped momentarily harder. Whirling,
she prepared to unload a choice selection of suitably modi-

on the head of whoever had snuck up behind
her. Thinking she was alone and concentrating on the work at
hand, she had been doubly oblivious to her immediate surroundings. The surprise had been total, and someone was
fied expletives

going to pay.

The

instant she caught sight of her soft-footed visitor, the

flood of insults she

From

was ready

to deliver caught in her throat.

past experience ruefully familiar with their propen-

sity for elaborate gags,

she was expecting one or more of her

colleagues from Rajput.

What she got instead was an alien.

To be precise, a Pitar.
She was better prepared to deal with a marauding hoat.
He gazed down at her with interest, his expression noncommittal, his mouth set in a thin, inscrutable line. The heavy coldweather attire he wore obscured most of the famed Olympian
alien torso, but she could see enough to tell that from the neck
downward his build did not differ significantly from the

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

92

bronzed Greek-god proportions that were the Pitarian norm.
She knew they often visited Treetrunk to offer their quiet assistance and to monitor, out of curiosity, the progress of the
colony’s development. Since they laid claim to nothing, and in

were effusive in offering their help to the small but steady
stream of arriving settlers, the government saw no reason why
they should not be granted unrestricted access to the burfact

geoning, energetic

new communities.

Wixom knew

of several occasions where the aliens’ assistance had been vital in helping small new municipalities
overcome difficult local conditions. How the Pitar knew when
an outlying hamlet was in trouble no one knew, but when it was
they invariably appeared in their sleek shuttles, providing aid

and support without having to be asked.

No thranx vessel ever

did anything like that, she reflected, shuddering a

little at

the

thought of the giant, grotesque bugs running freely through
the colony. Admittedly, the nearest thranx system lay a re-

spectable distance from Treetrunk while the Twin Worlds of the

Dominion were near neighbors in terms of space-plus travel.
Nor was it that the thranx were indifferent or standoffish. They
simply preferred to follow procedure in

all

things, including

matters of aid and assistance. In this as in everything else

humans were impulsive.
fall somewhere in-between.

they were methodical where

Pitarian

methodology appeared to
In any event, she relaxed as soon as she identified her
visitor. He had steel-gray eyes and pale orange hair that put
her in mind of ripening tangerines. Framed by a soft, protective hood, his features were predictably perfect. As he stood
there on the windswept rock slope she grew aware that he was
waiting for her to say something. The fact that she had never
met a Pitar and knew nothing of their language was a poor excuse for her continued nonresponsiveness, but it was all that
she had. Quick-witted, sharp-tongued, and completely at ease

was among members of the opposite gender of her own
kind, in the presence of this minor male mammalian divinity,
she stood as if struck dumb, completely at a loss for movement as well as for words.
Apparently detecting that something was amiss, the visitor
as she

DIRGE

93

spoke again. “I seem to have startled you. Such was not my
intent. Do you require medical attention?”
I am not going to swoon, she told herself firmly. Women of
my experience and education do not swoon. Besides which,
swooning is an atavistic reaction more properly applicable to
the proper ladies of the nineteenth century. This facile forensic
explication, however, did nothing to reconcile the physical
and emotional insurrection that was raging within her.
The Pitarian male helped. He helped by moving: by bending and picking up a rock. He examined it before tossing it
casually aside. It clattered against the scree, and the sound
and motion served to jolt her out of her trance. Forging an effort of will, she turned away from him and back to her work.
Her mind, however, was not intent on laying out accessways,
waterlines, or communication lines-of-sight.
The alien was very close to her. She wanted to tell him

—

him to move away, but for some reason her
brain seemed to have lost contact with her vocal apparatus.
All she could say was “Yes, I’m an intense person, both in my
work and in the rest of my life.”
no, to order

“Intensity

is

good.” Leaning close, the Pitar tried to resolve

her heads-up display. This put his head very near to her own.

She could smell the flat but not unpleasant alien scent, could
feel the gossamer caress of inhuman breath. Her fingers on
the controls of the siter started to tremble, and she angrily
thrust them down at her side.
“What are you doing here?” I sound inane, she thought angrily. An inane twelve-year-old; that’s what I’ve become.
Conscious of the fact that she was bringing no credit either to
herself or to her species, she fought to reestablish the kind of
control that the alien’s unexpected appearance had shattered.
“Only having a quiet look around, as you humans say.”
Just as she was starting to recover some equilibrium, he
smiled at her, and she found that she had to begin all over
again.

“As you know, we are fascinated by the entire concept of
leaving the comforting confines of a homeworld to settle upon
another. It is a concept entirely foreign to us. But we want to

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

94

on Treetrunk. So in order to learn how
to be of better assistance, we travel and we observe.” His expression flattened once again. “You do not mind if I observe
you?”
see

you succeed

here,

“Suit yourself,” she replied indifferently. Within, she

was

yearning for him to observe her for a good, long time. Oh,
how she wanted him to observe her! She had heard stories,
they had

all

heard

stories,

about the

.

.

.

relationships that

under just the right circumstances could develop between individual humans and Pitar. There were those who insisted
these were nothing more than that just stories. Rumors fed
and fueled by the perversely imaginative. Though looking at
this Pitar, tall and straight and so obviously muscular beneath
his cold- weather gear, she could well believe that
Stop it, she told herself! Male he may be, but he’s also an
alien. Don’t ignore him, but don’t trade your dignity' and selfrespect for some unsupportable foolish flight of fancy. Respond to his questions, and to nothing else.
“You are doing what?” he inquired politely, and the slight
grammatical deviation helped to remind her of who and what
he was. She returned her attention to her instrumentation.
“I work for the planetary planning agency. It’s my job to
search out and recommend the best locations for the individual components of a new development, as well as to design and suggest overall schematics. It’s a task that does
require some intensity of purpose, as you observed.”
“I am very impressed,” the Pitar told her, and for utterly inexplicable reasons this perfunctory comment caused her
breathing to accelerate. “I am only a simple observer and

—

.

.

could never manage the complex interdisciplinary tools necessary to perform such a task.”
“It’s

not that difficult,” she responded. “Having a new,

state-of-the-art siter helps a lot. Here,

I’ll

show you.”

Step-

ping aside, she allowed him to peer directly into the eyepiece
that queued the heads-up display.

The

Pitar asked several questions, struggling with his

command of Terranglo,
be a very

before stepping back. “It appears to

efficient device.

Your technology

is

good.”

DIRGE

95

She could not decide if she was blushing or if her cheeks
were simply reddened from having been exposed to the cold
air during the climb. “I don’t make it; I’m just trained to use
it. From what I read and see on the tridee, your technology’s
good, too.”

“We have done

well enough. Concentrating solely on de-

veloping the Twin Worlds has both helped and forced us to
concentrate our energies. Our two local asteroid belts supply

ample resources, and we are careful not

to overexploit those

Of late

our society has grown somewhat stagnant, but contact with your people has suggested
ways and means of revitalizing our development, as well as
solving problems that previously seemed insurmountable.
For that we thank you, and are most grateful for the contact
that are not renewable.

between our two species. We are especially glad to see you
doing so well here on Treetrunk.”
“Your people have been so helpful ever since the first
settlement went in.” She hesitated briefly, fearful of committing some unseen faux pas. She was a planner, not a diplomat.
“Some of us have become
fond of you.”
“Your demonstrations of affection have been remarked
upon.” His tone was dry and formal, and she wasn’t sure
whether she was grateful for that or not. “We find it peculiar
that a great deal of it has to do with our appearance, which we
ourselves find in no way remarkable and over which we have
no control. Nevertheless, anything that facilitates better relations between us is to be welcomed.” From within his protective hood a smile emerged that warmed her to the tips of her
boots. “Your mate must be proud to be conjoined to so com.

.

.

petent a worker.”

“Thanks for the compliment, but I’m not marri
mated.”
“No children, then?” His tone was unchanged, academic.
“Not yet, but I’m hoping to have a couple someday.” She
fiddled absently with the controls of the siter.
He looked past her, into the shallow valley that would soon
be home to another two or three thousand humans. “As am
I. Our reproductive and birth systems are extraordinarily
.

similar.”

.

.

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

96

She looked away from the siter and back
up at him. “Why haven’t you had any children?”
His smile faded, and he made a gesture she did not recognize. “For one thing, the time is not right for me. That is one
area where our physiologies differ. Not only are our females
fertile only for a limited time each year, but the same is true
for the males. We do not enjoy the flexibility of year-round
breeding that you do.”
“Oh, I don’t know.” She responded with a mixture of consideration and playfulness. “I know plenty of people who
would prefer that kind of biological arrangement. It would
make a lot of things easier.” Reaching out, she tentatively
placed a hand on his arm. She could feel the power even
through layers of winter clothing that exceeded her own. “So
that means you can’t get anyone pregnant right now?”
He made the Pitarian gesture for agreement, a smooth dip-

“So

I’ve heard.”

ping of the right shoulder. “That is correct.”
“Not that you could anyhow,” she murmured as she embarked on a fairly explicit explanation of the intricacies of

how certain specific on-site
From

structures ought to

the preliminary settlement of

be erected.

Chagos Downs

carefully laid-out capital city of Weald, the colony
rapidly.

The

pure, unpolluted air energized

when

it

seemed

grew

new colonists

instant they stepped off their transport shuttles.
bitterly cold winters,

to the

the

Sometimes

as if the entire planet

were about to succumb to the glaciers that were advancing
slowly from both north and south to squeeze the habitable
belt around the planet’s midsection in an icy vise, gave way to
an explosively vibrant spring and therapeutic summer. As
predicted by its discoverers, Treetrunk was no New Riviera,
but it was a highly amenable place to live. Those who arrived
from other worlds to make their homes there generally had
few regrets.
There were always malcontents who would never be happy
anywhere, who really believed they could get all their squirrels up one tree. Grumbling and complaining, they packed up
and left, always in search of the paradise world that existed

DIRGE

97

only in their imaginations. Their number was a trickle com-

pared to the steady stream of satisfied newcomers. Families
began to put down roots, new enterprises were begun, education centers

expanded rapidly.

Operating out of her

own

tiny prefabricated habitation, a

crazy lady preached the gospel of a church that as yet had no

recognized
all

name

but which aimed to include and encompass

forms of intelligent

life.

Bound by tradition and unable

as

yet to envision themselves praying alongside, for example, a

brace of thranx, colonists
the earnest evangelist.

new and

old laughed at and teased

A few, a very few, occasionally stopped

to listen, finding the ravings

of what appeared to be a rational

fanatic entertaining if not convincing.

Following in the gridded footsteps of the planners, the
colony expanded. Outposts became waypoints; waypoints
became stations; stations became the cores of small communities. Imports gave way to locally produced goods and
services.

New

industries congealed,

from small

crafts

and

manufacturing that made use of the planet’s extensive hardwood forests to a pair of mines that extracted useful metals
from beneath the surface.
The colony was well on its way to advancing from dependent to transitional autonomous status, with its own independent world government,

when the

Glistener entered into orbit

above Weald. A small, compact deep-space vessel engaged in
scientific exploration, it stopped to pay its respects to the inhabitants of the new human colony world before continuing
on its planned course through the upper Orion Arm in the
general direction of the galactic center.
Visitors from the ship were greeted with full courtesy and
formalities, if not warmly. Though naturally suspicious of
outsiders, the settlers could not very well refuse to welcome
representatives of a race with which humankind enjoyed officially cordial relations. The thranx were granted permission
to visit several communities. Each group was accompanied
by experienced members of the planetary government who
saw to it that the visitors’ plans and itineraries were well publicized in advance. The majority of colonists had never seen a

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

98
thranx, and

it

would not do

dividuals panic at

have children or susceptible inthe sight of them. That would have been
to

discourteous.

need to worry. The thranx intended a short
visit at best. A species that favored 100 percent humidity and
air temperature to match, they were not at all comfortable in
the brisk, wintry atmosphere of Treetrunk. Despite their personal discomfort, their inborn concern and curiosity caused
them to persevere, if only for the brief duration of their stay.
Dutifully, they admired the energy exhibited by the human
settlers and gestured approvingly at the skill with which the
colony had been laid out and was being developed. Their
hosts thanked them when appropriate while privately wishing
to be rid of the inquisitive, talkative, pleasantly odiferous
bugs so they could get back to the business of building the
There was

little

colony.

Unlike her fellows, there was one senior thranx who seemed,

of the unkind climate, reluctant to leave. Every question
her hosts answered sparked another two or three. Interested in
in spite

was

by nothing. While her hosts despaired of satisfying her, she continued blithely on her way,
inquiring endlessly about the most inconsequential matters.
“The local population is approaching six hundred thousand,” her weary guide informed her. “Of these, some two hundred thousand plus are concentrated in and around Weald, with
another ninety-five thousand at Chagos Downs. Allowing for
everything, she

satisfied

geological constraints, the rest are scattered in small

communi-

and outlying camps that follow the equator.”
“You are not expanding to north and south as well?” Cocooned within cold-weather gear that exceeded in insulating

ties

properties anything a

human would wear except at the poles,

was barely visible. Twin antennae peeped
hesitantly from beneath the brim of the headgear.
The guide sighed tiredly. “Of course we will, but for right
now there’s no reason to do so. The most amenable zone is
being promoted first. When our settlements meet on the other
side of the planet, that will be the time to expand into the
the thranx ’s face

colder forests.”

DIRGE

99

The senior thranx nodded, a gesture they had developed
the habit of using

among themselves

as well as in the pres-

ence of humans. “Then you are doing well here?”
“Extremely well.” The guide could not help but add, “In
addition to the regular runs from Earth and the occasional

from New Riviera or Proycon, the Pitar have been really
supportive. Not just with verbal encouragement, but with
material assistance as well. Especially during the first two
years of settlement, the help they provided was invaluable.”
visit

If the thranx understood this observation to be a dig at her

kind for not offering more, she did not acknowledge its tone.
“We are glad that you received the aid that you needed. You
are fortunate. The expanding colonization efforts in our own
sphere of exploration require our full attention, as no species
has offered to assist our efforts. In addition, we have a longrunning, ongoing disputation with the race you

know

as the

AAnn, which complicates and inhibits our efforts.”
“The AAnn don’t bother us here.” Unwittingly, the guide
had assumed a marginally superior air.
“

Chur/kk the AAnn are very shrewd.” A truhand encased in
insulating fabric waved at the much taller guide, who comprehended nothing of the meaning behind the gesture. “Thinking
oneself safe from them, bound by alliances and agreements,
secure behind a thin barrier of treaties and covenants, is the
most dangerous attitude a people can have.”
“Well, I’m not a diplomat, but all I can say is that they
haven’t given us any trouble.”
“Have they paid you a visit?”
The guide blinked. “Several times, I believe. I only settled
here last year myself. But yes, ships of the Empire have called
at Treetrunk. If I remember correctly they had a look around,
extended their hopes for a successful enterprise on the part of
the colonial government, took some straightforward and innocuous scientific readings, and left. I understand that their
visits were very brief.” He couldn’t keep from smiling. “No
doubt they found it a bit nippy for their liking.”
Once more the thranx gestured. “The AAnn require an ambient temperature similar to ours, but infinitely drier than
,

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

100

even your kind prefers.” A pair of hands wagged in his direction. “Ensure that those who monitor your scanning instrumentation are well trained and remain alert. Nothing is more
dangerous than a well-wishing AAnn.”
“We’ll have a care,” the guide replied with polite
nonchalance.

Whether the thranx detected something

in her host’s voice

or if she simply decided to have a further say in the matter
the
to

man never knew, but the heavily bundled insectoid turned

him with an

he thought she

effort
did.

and met

his eyes with hers. Leastwise,

When gazing at compound eyes, it is diffi-

where they are focused.
“We are always astonished at the confidence you humans
display in the face of a lethal and indifferent universe. Have a
care that your confidence does not exceed your ability to suscult to tell for certain exactly

tain

it.”

“Thank you for that solicitous homily,” he replied tartly.
“We know what we’re doing here.”
“Does anyone know what they’re doing anywhere? Individual or species, it does not seem to matter. We are all of us
sapients adrift together in a cosmos in which the largest single
constituent of matter seems to be composed of unanswered
questions.” Turning away, she started up along the path that
would lead them back to the terminus where the ground
skimmer would pick them up. “I have seen enough. I’m cold,
and ready to return to my cubicle on board the Glistener.
I’m ready for you to do so too, he murmured silently. Most
of us here on Treetrunk have better things to do than escort
garrulous bugs around, answering their inane questions while
trying to ponder their cryptic aphorisms.
flected,

one or two did smell

like attar

Even

if,

of frangipani.

he

re-

Trohanov was relaxing in his cabin with one of the few tridee
recordings he hadn’t already watched on the run out from

was some trifle about a genetically engineered lone
avenger on an endless voyage of self-discovery whose ultimate denouement the creators of the entertainment had left
purposely obscure. The protagonist struck him as shallow and
his paramour devoid of depth, but they were both pleasant to
Earth.

It

look upon.

forms were
any wise significant

Presently, their beguiling three-dimensional

occupied in an activity that, while not in
to the advancement of the plot, was nonetheless engaging. So
it was with some ire that he acknowledged the insistent hail

from the bridge.
“Hollis, I’m off duty!” he barked, knowing that the omnidirectional pickup would convey his tone as well as his words
to the ship’s second-in-command. “Maybe that doesn’t mean
much to you, but when you reach my age you learn to treasure
every

little

—

The second officer interrupted him, which while not unprecedented, was unusual. She also sounded worried, but that
was normal for Hollis. “Captain, you’d better come up here.”
“Why?” Even as he objected, he was swinging his legs out
of the bed. “We made the transition from space-plus without
incident, and this system holds no surprises. What’s wrong
with the ship?”
“It’s

At least, Kharall says it’s not.”
right!” Grumbling to himself as he slipped

not the ship,

“All right,

all

sir.

into his one-piece duty suit,

he damned the regulations that
101

102

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

required a vessel’s captain and senior officers to always be
available for consultation.

No one confronted him as he made his way via lift and corridor to the bridge.

Whatever had upset

Hollis,

it

had not

He

encountered no frightened
faces, no individuals racing to and fro in panic. This had
better be a real problem, he thought irritably, or he was going

caused any panic on the ship.

have serious words with his second.
Nor did there appear to be any reason for distress on the
bridge itself. There was Kharall, bent toward his console as if
by bringing his face a few millimeters closer to the readouts
he could discern details that would not otherwise be evident.
Everyone else assigned to the second shift was in position
and to all intents and purposes engrossed in their work. A few
chatted softly, their attitudes anything but indicative of imminent disaster. No voices were raised, though the expressions
on several faces as he entered were expectant.
Expectant of what? He had no idea yet what was going on,
or why Hollis had thought it necessary to summon him from
the middle of his rest period. Only one thing was he certain
of: He would have some answers very quickly.
Turning slightly to his right, he strode purposefully over to
where Hollis was conferring with Meeker, the ship’s communications specialist. Both looked up at his approach. Hollis

to

didn’t wait for the captain to speak.

“We’re a fraction of an au out from Treetrunk, just cutting
the orbit of Argus Six, and there’s still no response.”
He replied instantly. “So their beacon’s down.”
“All of them?” She met his gaze unflinchingly. “All three?”
“It’s possible,” he shot back, though internally he was already beginning to argue with himself.
Meeker joined in. She was a small woman with big ears,
ragged black hair cropped short in what Trohanov had always
thought a very unflattering cut, and she had a surprisingly
large voice that was the aural equivalent of her occasional
opinions.

“One okay. Two maybe. Three never.”
“Never say never.” Trohanov was not ready

to concede,

DIRGE
though

if professionally

103

challenged he would have been com-

pelled to agree with his communications officer. “Treetrunk’s
still

a

new world,

“Four,”

only been settled for a few years.”

Meeker corrected him.

“Okay, four, dammit.” Ahead, through the narrow, curved
port, could be seen only stars and the still distant dot ofArgus V,
their destination.

“A

multiple beacon failure

is still

possible,

on a world as recently colonized as this one.”
“There’s no response from the shuttleport at Weald, either.”
Meeker was conciliatory but insistent.
“So their communications are down also. It means they’re
especially

having some problems,

that’s all.”

As he spoke he

leaned

closer to the communications console, studying the readouts
closely.

Meeker turned her

child-troll’s face

up

to his. “There’s

no

background noise. No tridee, no chat, nothing. Not even a
hiss. From a communications standpoint, the planet’s dead.”
Her choice of words upset Trohanov, but he didn’t let it
show. “Okay, that’s bad. Maybe real bad. Let’s not anybody
jump to any conclusions. I’ve known several people who
jumped to conclusions and they invariably came to a bad
end.”

“What happened to them?”

He

flicked deep-set

Hollis asked softly.

cinnamon eyes

at her.

“They landed

in

holes. Maintain preset course for orbital insertion. There’s

nothing to suggest

we should do

otherwise.

Keep everyone

on alert.”

“What about the rest of the crew?”
“Leave ’em alone. There’s no reason to tell them anything
until we have something definite to tell. Those who are sleeping might need all they can get.” Reaching down, he put a
strong hand on Meeker’s shoulder. “Keep monitoring everything that sputters and let me know the instant you hear
anything, even if it’s just bad language.” She nodded once. In
charge of words, Meeker was not one to waste them.
Hollis regarded the captain speculatively. “I suppose there’s
no reason for you to stay here, sir. You might as well go back to
bed. We’ll call you when we know something.”

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

104

He

glanced sideways at the starship’s silent, flickering instrumentation, his expression set. “Like hell,” he growled
softly.

They

settled into orbit without incident.

As

expected, they

were the only vessel present. Treetrunk was an outpost, a
comparatively new settlement far from Earth and the other
colonies. KK-drive ships called infrequently, and only on official business. In the ellipsoidal cargo compartment that
comprised the bulk of the vessel’s superstructure was a consignment of goods from New Riviera. Subsequent to delivery, the space-plus transport would move on to Proycon.
Everything about the run, from its payload to its course, was
conventional.

On the chill world below, however, something was not.
Meeker had been
Trohanov

at

it

for another six hours straight

finally lost patience.

By now

all

when

three shifts were

awake, with rumor and controversy rampant among the crew.
It was time to resolve ignorance.
“Run the check on shuttle number two. I’m going down.
Hollis, as per procedure you’re in charge until I get back.” He
turned to leave.

“What about the cargo, sir? We have three full loads. The
company will scream if we have to make an extra drop.”
“Let ’em howl. There’s some kind of trouble down below,
and until we know the nature, extent, and degree of the local
emergency it’s more prudent to hold onto the shipment than
to start delivering it. As soon as we know what’s going on
remain on
alert and everyone is to stand by. I’ll field complaints from
those who are supposed to be on downtime later. Right now
the first thing we need to do is find out why this place is elecwe’ll start shifting containers. Until then, ship

is

to

tronically comatose.”

Nothing untoward materialized to interfere with the
shuttle’s descent. The view out the small, thick ports was uneventful, the surface a watercolor wash of white, brown, and
green. Trohanov and the half dozen crew he’d chosen to accompany him spoke little as the shuttle struck atmosphere
and began to vibrate. At such times each man and woman had

DIRGE

105

thoughts enough to occupy their minds. At the captain’s di-

wore sidearms. Procedure, he thought. In the absence of knowledge it was always reassuring to be able to fall
back on procedure.
Nothing in the literature, or the regulations, or his experience prepared him for what they found, however.
As the shuttle dropped beneath the thick clouds and into
calm air the pilot reported the absence of any signal from the
capital’s port. There was heavy overcast but no rain or snow,
the atmosphere being as eerily silent as the surface. In the absence of the usual datastream to take control of the shuttle’s
instruments and guide it in, the pilots were forced to locate
the landing strip themselves. “On final approach,” one of the
pilots said, and Trohanov and his people scrunched a little
deeper back into their seats. Down, down
The shuttle accelerated violently and without warning. He
found himself wrenched sideways, then pressed back into
the seat. Several of the crew gasped, but no one screamed and
there was no panic. They were still airborne, and the shuttle’s
rection, all

.

engines throbbed with restored power.

.

Moments

later the

voice of the pilot echoed through the passenger compartment.

“Sorry about that, everyone. Obviously, we made a lastsecond pull-up. We’re going to have to try and find a field or
something to set down in. We can’t use either of the two
landing strips at Weald shuttleport.” There was a short pause
while the atmospheric craft began to bend around in a tight
curve, though the arc it executed was no more constricted
than the pilot’s voice. “They’ve been destroyed.”
It took some time for the pilots to locate a suitable site. Relying

on the

shuttle’s landing skids, they

made

a bumpy,

touchdown. Before the craft had slid to
a stop Trohanov was out of his seat and harness and racing

jolting, but successful

forward.

The view out

the cockpit’s

ingly uninformative:

tall

wide double port was madden-

evergreens, distant tree-swathed

a nearby pond whose inhabitants were only

now

hills,

starting to

return following the shuttle’s noisy landing. Everything ap-

peared peaceful and serene.

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

1C6

“Where

are

we?”

Solnhofen, the copilot, pointed to a readout. “About two
kilometers southwest of the southern runway. This appears to

be a natural meadow.”
Bending over to peer out the port, Trohanov nodded once.
“I don’t see any signs of catastrophe. You said the landing
strips were destroyed?”
“Yes, sir.” The pilot’s face was ashen. “We didn’t get a good
look at the city itself too busy with the descent. Neither

—

Lillie

nor

have had to do a manual landing since

I

flight

school.”

You both did great. Could you tell what caused
the damage?”
The two pilots exchanged a glance. “No, Captain,” a regretful Solnhofen told him. “It was as Dik said. We were too
busy just trying to get down in one piece.”
“Forget

it.

“Right.” Turning, a couple of steps brought Trohanov back

compartment. Everyone was out of harness, fidgety and anticipative. “We’re going for a walk. Check
your sidearms and make sure they’re not just decorative. I
want everyone’s weapon and communications gear fully powered up.” They stared at him expectantly, and he realized they
were waiting for an explanation. In the absence of one, he improvised as best he could.
“Something bad has happened here. We don’t know what
yet, but we’re going to find out.”
“That’s not our job, Captain,” someone pointed out. “We’re
a class three KK-drive deep-space cargo carrier, and that’s all
into the passenger

we are.”
“You can

file

a formal complaint about being forced to

function outside your job classification with the
later.

Right

now everybody here comes with me.

Weald twice

company
been
so I’m

I’ve

before, once as recently as last year,

in
at

of familiar with the municipal layout. Stick close
and don’t wander off. No matter what we find, we’ll be back
here before dark.” He looked over his shoulder, toward the
least sort

cockpit.

“You two

stay

on board. I don’t want you going outside, not

DIRGE
even to smell the

107

tree sap. If anything real disturbing should

show itself, you lift off and return to ship.”
“Disturbing?” The pilot looked uncertain. “Like what,

start to

Captain?”

—

“Like I don’t know yet. Use your
tapped the communicator on his duty

own judgment.” He
belt.

“We’ll keep in

touch.”

Stepping out of the shuttle,

it

was

difficult to believe that

anything was amiss. Indigenous wildlife

nearby
forest and the open meadow with intermittent alien song. Arboreal life-forms flitted among the trees and skittered through
the waist-high blue-bladed ground cover. Plotting a simple
straight line, Trohanov led his people away from the shuttle
and into the woods.

The gently

filled the

ground did not slow them, and the absence of dense underbrush except in isolated copses allowed
rapid progress. With the shuttleport lying to their northeast,
Trohanov calculated, if they maintained their current pace
they ought to reach the southernmost outskirts of the city by
midaftemoon. That would not allow much time for exploring,
but they ought to be able to secure transport into the city
center. Someone at Administration would be able to clear
things up and to explain the nature of whatever emergency
had befallen the colony.
But there was no transport readily available in the southern
suburbs of Weald. There was very little left of the suburb they
entered, or for that matter of the rest of the city.
Its inhabitants, it was revealed, were as dead as their
communications.
Whatever smoke and flame had risen from the ruins had
long since burned itself out. Except for the occasional darting
shape of a native scavenger working the dead, the city was devoid of movement. Finding and righting a small skimmer that
still retained half its power charge, they succeeded in covering considerably more ground than they would have been
able to do on foot.
The destruction was selective as opposed to total. Many of
the city’s buildings were still intact, from individual or group
rolling

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

108

habitations to municipal facilities such as the central water-

where Administrawas a spacious, silent crater. Ramparts

treatment plant. But the center of the
tion

had been

located,

city,

of fused glass sloped down to a pile of vitreous slag in the
center. On the northern outskirts of the city, a similar pit
marked the spot where the colony’s intersystem space-minus
communications shaft and facility had been located.
All that afternoon they scoured the capital in search of survivors, and found none. Those bodies that had not been incinerated by shot or subsequent fire displayed indisputable

evidence of having been shattered by violence. Come early
evening Trohanov found himself kneeling alongside an en-

Trapped inside a small shop, they had evidently
attempted to make a stand against whatever had ravaged their
community. Signs that a blockaded doorway had been smashed
inward lay scattered everywhere.
Whatever weapon had been used to kill them was thorough
and messy. Though no forensic pathologist, Trohanov could
see as clearly as anyone that something had struck each of the
bodies and blown them apart. The remains of the father lay in
the middle of the floor, where he had apparently attempted
to intercept the intruders. Back in a corner they found the
corpse of the mother splattered over those of two preadolescent boys. In a warmer climate the stench in the room, as elsewhere in the city, would have been overpowering. The cold,
clear air of Treetrunk had helped to slow decomposition and
decay. Otherwise, it would have been impossible for the crew
to have continued their investigation.
As it was, several of the small group became sick at different times that afternoon. The slaughter gave every indication of having been carried out in a relentless and methodical
fashion. Returning to the shuttle, Trohanov informed Hollis
and the rest of his crew of what he and the others had found
and took care to relay the visual information they had managed to collect. Returning to the ship, they compressed and
sent it on its way to Earth, entangling it with the first quantum
receiver that acknowledged their transmission.
In the silence of the bulbous ship no one slept. As soon

tire family.

DIRGE

109

he took a larger team back down to
the surface. This time they set down near the colony’s first
community and second city, the municipality that had been
as

Trohanov

felt able,

named Chagos Downs

after the ship that

had originally ex-

plored the Argus system. There was no shuttleport at the

Downs, but
craft.

were landing

there

facilities for suborbital air-

Unfortunately, those facilities had suffered the

fate as their

much

once again had to

larger counterpart at Weald,

set

same

and the crew

down in the nearest available field.

Chagos Downs was a mirror image of disaster, albeit on a
smaller scale. The same conditions applied as they had encountered in the capital: Many structures had been left standing and intact, some with no sign of damage at all, while
others had been completely reduced. As before, there were no
survivors. Like the inhabitants of Weald, the citizens of the

Downs had been

slaughtered where they had been found; at-

tempting to surrender to unknown assailants, lying in bed,
slumped over instruments and other devices while busy at
work, caught preparing meals, on the streets, and in hallways.

From the

eldest patient in the hospital to the youngest infant,

no one had been spared.
Whoever, whatever had committed the atrocity had been relentlessly thorough in seeing to it that not one survivor was
left breathing to comment on the cataclysm. Trohanov knew it
was not his responsibility to try and find out who was responsible. The crew member who had spoken out earlier doubtless
had being doing no more than voicing the concerns and
opinion of many of his colleagues. They were crew on a deepspace transport: not soldiers, not mass-homicide investigators, not government operatives. Whatever had happened on
Treetrunk was terrible, but it was not their business to try and
fix responsibility. Nor could Trohanov leave his ship under
Hollis’s command to resume its voyage while he remained behind to await the first official response from Earth. Pragmatically, he and his companions could do nothing with the anger
and helpless fury that boiled within them except bottle it.
Reluctantly, they returned to the ship and resumed their
itinerary. Until the day and hour of their deaths, the memory

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

110

of what they had seen never left them, remaining as clear and
sharp as the air of the devastated world itself.
Little had changed when the three warships emerged from
space-plus dangerously close to the planetary mass. Settling
into equidistant orbit, their instrumentation between them
covering and monitoring every meter of the cloud-swathed
globe beneath, they dropped nine shuttle craft into the clouds
and clear air below. Each was far larger than that of the

On

board were soldiers
as coldly efficient and highly trained as Earth and its colonies
could produce, armed with the most advanced weaponry
their military research institutes could manufacture.
Setting down simultaneously at predetermined locations in
cargo ship that had preceded them.

the planet’s habitable equatorial zone, the independently functional squads immediately established defensible perimeters

around their respective shuttles. Once these landing sites were
secured, ground transports were unloaded from the craft and
boarded by half of each squadron’s personnel. Leaving the
entrenched perimeters that now surrounded the heavily defended shuttle craft, these armed skimmers and their smaller
escorts

moved

out in carefully designated search-and-rescue

patterns.

They found

little

changed and nothing

significantly dif-

from the halting, barely adequate pair of reports that
had been filed by the crew of the cargo transport that had first
made the grisly discovery. Fanning out from their landing
sites, they checked the towns first, then moved on to isolated
hamlets, individual farms, mines, and tiny frontier outposts.
The degree of physical destruction varied, but nowhere did
they find anyone alive, nor any record in any of the surviving
instrumentalities of what had happened.
As soon as the military commander of the expedition was
satisfied that no threat remained on the surface, at least insofar
as his troops could determine, the members of the scientific
team were allowed to descend. Forced to remain on their assigned ship while the soldiers secured the ground, they were in
a quiet frenzy of fervor to begin their work. Over their protests
each was assigned an armed guard. Until some answers were
ferent

DIRGE

111

forthcoming the military was taking no chances. Pathologists

and recorders, biologists and scanners were forced to operate
under the watchful eyes of edgy soldiers.
The scientists’ escorts were not uneasy because they
feared attack. Indeed, they would have welcomed it. To the
last man and woman they had seen too much death on what
had previously been considered a mellow, pastoral, even

Women clutching infants,

men slain in the
doorways of their homes, children shot down in the street: It
was too much for some of them. Those who gutted their way
boring world.

old

through the last of the patrols wanted something to shoot at,
something to kill. No plague had wiped out the inhabitants
of Argus V, no secretive native uprising had surprised the
colonists in their beds. The evidence was indisputable that
advanced killing technology had been at work in the peaceful
forests

and meadows.

The question that was on everyone’s mind— soldier, scientist, and starship crew alike
was, Whose?
Derwent was tired of trideeing bodies. After the first sickening couple of days his stomach settled down and he was
able to go about his job more or less normally and at a faster
pace. The labor was necessary, he knew. Not only so that relatives on other worlds could identify slain relations but so that
the research team being put together back on Earth would
have as much information to work with as possible. Hudson,
his partner, was reciting into her recorder in her familiar monotone. It was her job to render a preliminary judgment on

—

cause of death.

Dozens of additional personnel were active in other districts. Since landing, no one had enjoyed a day off. Given the
condition of many of the bodies there was no time to spare.
Not with hundreds of thousands of corpses to evaluate. For
teams such as Derwent and Hudson, long hours in unpleasant
conditions had become the norm. Every body, or remnant
thereof, had to be dutifully recorded and evaluated.
Outside the ruins of the small country inn a corporal and
two privates stood guard, stood being perhaps too strong
a word. Derwent didn’t mind when the three sat down and

112

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

weapons aside, conversing quietly among themselves. The small skimmer that had transported the team and
its supplies rested nearby, powered down and open to intrusion. The recording specialist was not worried. From the time
the first squad of marines had touched down they had encountered no opposition. Nor had any trouble manifested
itself since. Nothing interfered with the work of the patholoset their

gists or coroners.

Whatever had exterminated the population of Argus V was
nowhere in evidence. If the relentless and thorough attackers
had suffered casualties they had been careful to take their dead
and wounded away with them, as well as erase any evidence of
their existence. Only human bloodstains and fragments of
human bodies were found. The use of generic and not especially sophisticated weapons of destruction precluded the
rapid identification of the killers. Nothing remained of their
handiwork except the corpses of their victims.
To the psychologists, that suggested that the assailants
feared retribution. As well they should. There wasn’t a soldier
among the relieving force who did not go to bed night after
night dreaming of imaginary alien necks to wring.
Derwent was more of a realist. Knowing nothing of those
who had destroyed the colony, it was premature to assign
blame even to imaginary enemies. For all they knew the invading force might have been renegade humans from one of
the other colony worlds.

“What motivation could another colony possibly have for
carrying out a massacre like this?” Hudson had challenged
him. Light glinted off her implanted lenses. She was a pert,
spirited lady whom the adjective vivacious fit in more ways
than one, and she was not slow to defend an opinion.
Phlegmatic and blunt, Derwent argued for the sake of dissention. They were not a particularly well-matched team, but
their personal disagreements did not hamper their work.
“How should I know? Not having the mind-set of a mass

murderer myself,

I

can’t begin to imagine a reason.”

He

stepped over the body of an eight-year-old boy whose head
and legs had gone missing.

DIRGE

113

“Then shut up,” she told him curtly. “If you can’t give reasons, you don’t have a hypothesis.”
“Oh so?” Swinging his recorder around the front room of
the inn, he made sure to keep the extensive damage to the
back wall in frame. “All right, I’ll guess. Maybe somebody
was jealous about the amount of aid these people were receiving. Maybe they thought they could steal whatever was
really valuable and save themselves some hard work. Maybe
a grudge developed between this colony and another.”

“None of those makes any

She was bent over the
remains of a middle-aged couple who had died in each other’s
arms. “Even if one of them did, or if several of them did, all of
them taken together with another half dozen added don’t
serve to rationalize the annihilation of six hundred thousand
people. Humans don’t do this sort of thing.”
Derwent laughed curtly. “Read your prehistory.”
“All right,” she conceded, “they don’t do it anymore We
haven’t turned on ourselves to this extent since the conclusion of the Second Dark Ages.”
“Then aliens are responsible.”
“Nothing is certain yet,” she reminded him. “No conclusions have been drawn. It’s too soon, and the evidence is still
sense.”

.

being assembled.

We

won’t be the ones to render the

final

judgment anyway. You know that. It will be decided back on
Earth.” She fell to murmuring into her recorder.
Derwent had already finished upstairs. Four guests had
been staying at the inn at the time of the attack. Besides the
proprietor’s family there was also a second couple who had
worked for the owners. The number of deceased jibed with
the records a search team had accessed in the nearest town,
except for a Sithwa Pirivi, age twenty, whose body had not
yet been located. That meant nothing, he knew. The young
woman might have been elsewhere at the time of the attack,
visiting friends, shopping in town, or simply out hiking, and
would have been killed there instead of in the vicinity of the
inn where she worked. It was going to take time to fill in the
blanks in the record of Treetrunk’s exterminated population.

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

114

People traveled, both for reasons of work and recreation, and
did not always perish where they lived.

The chore of recording and evaluating the tens of thousands of decomposing dead was a distressing and difficult
task. Not everyone adjusted as efficiently or pragmatically as
the team of Derwent and Hudson. As time wore on many had
to be relieved, some only long enough to recover their equilibrium, others permanently. Throughout the appalling work
the teams and their support groups persevered. The number
of identified dead rose from the tens of thousands into the
hundreds of thousands.
And still there were no answers. Working alongside their
conscripted civilian counterparts, practitioners of military
forensics struggled with the available evidence in an increas-

ingly frustrating and futile attempt to try and identify the

The executioners had left nothing behind, not even footprints. If they had utilized weapons firing explosive projectiles they had gathered up every
perpetrators of the atrocity.

shell casing, intact or fragmentary, so its origin

could not be

identified.

One

aspect of the attack the researchers

propounding:
prise.

How

It

felt

confident in

had taken the colonists completely by

else to explain the utter

sur-

absence in surviving

records of any reference to the invasion? If someone had
jotted a report or warning

down on a piece of paper,

or whis-

pered frantically into a personal recorder, there was no record
of it. It was as if the population had stood blithely by while

whoever was responsible

demise had proceeded methodically with their gruesome work. The pathology teams were specifically instructed to look for any
such surviving testimony.
“You’d think there’d be a note somewhere.” Having finished his work at the inn, Derwent was wandering through the
reception area while Hudson tidied up the last of her responsibilities. “A sketch drawn by some poor terrified kid, or a description buried in a coded file.”
“There isn’t an intact file left on the planet subsequent to
the day of the final encounter.” Hudson rose from where she
for their brutal

DIRGE

115

had been crouching. “Not only were these people surprised
by their attackers, they were surprised repeatedly. It’s crazy.
But I agree with you. No matter how much of a shock this attack was to the populace, someone ought to have left a recoverable message somewhere.” She looked up at him out of her
colorless implants. “It wouldn’t take much. A couple of
words. ‘Humans did this’ would be enough to get started on.

Or ‘Thranx

here, killing everybody.’

Or ‘Unknown

aliens

have landed.’ Anything, anything at all.”
Derwent nodded as he lowered his instrument and started
outside. “Anything’s better than nothing. And right now, nothing is what we got. I don’t suppose you’ve heard any different
from any of the other teams?” As he strode toward the skimmer,
their military escort reluctantly bestirred themsel ves.

She shook her head. “It doesn’t seem to matter if you’re
working out in the country, like us, or downtown in one of the
bigger communities. It’s the same everywhere. All dead, and
nothing to implicate the possible killers.” She hazarded a thin
smile. “Somebody’ll find something somewhere. You don’t
slaughter six hundred thousand people without leaving a few
clues behind. It’s only a matter of time.”
“Better be soon.” Climbing into the skimmer, Derwent
settled himself into his seat. Their next stop was a small vegetable farm located six kilometers northwest of the inn. He had
no doubt what they would find there. “I hear that back on
Earth and the colonies people are raging at their local government ministers. That’s not surprising. They want a face to attach to this enemy.”

“Revenge may be a primitive emotion, but it’s one that’s
likely to always be with us.” Given her smaller frame, it required more of an effort on Hudson’s part to board the vehicle.
As the soldiers began to pile in and take up their positions she
strapped herself in next to Derwent, making sure first that her
precious recorder was secured. “I’d like to personally eviscerate a few of whoever’s responsible for this myself.”
As the skimmer whined to life and began to lift he looked
at

her in surprise. “Seriously? You never struck me as the vio-

lent type.”

116

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

She glanced over at him, her petite features not far from his
own. The optiplants glittered like herkimer diamonds. “I
never saw two hundred dead children all huddled together in
one place before, either.”
Derwent remembered the school, and his teeth clenched.
Everyone had their limits. Despite his outwardly stoic demeanor he wanted to find something to hold responsible as
badly as did everyone else. He wanted something to kill.
Sure, he was first and foremost a professional, and he prided
himself on his professional detachment.
But when it came down to it, no matter how hard he tried to
affect an air of indifference and aloofness, he was only human.

he outrage and anger felt by the rest of humankind at the
awful butchery that had taken place on Treetrunk were shared
by every known sentient species. Ships of the thranx, the
Pitar, the Quillp, and others were instructed as well as warned
to be on the lookout for any unfamiliar or infrequently encountered species that might have the technological capability to perpetrate planetary genocide on the scale it had
been committed on Argus V This request from Earth was
readily, even eagerly, complied with. In addition, the thranx
and the Pitar of their own accord sent out ships whose misI

sion

was

specifically to search for the

home of an

as yet

unknown race of maniacal aliens.
Nor did humans neglect to investigate possible motivations that might have arisen from within their own tortured

unidentified and

racial history.

Like any colony, Treetrunk had been settled by

a heterogeneous broth of folk of every ethnic, religious, and
social background. Nevertheless, the possibility that

powerful group, either from Earth

some

one of its distant
colonies, held a grudge against a significant component of
Treetrunk’s population could not be and was not ex officio
ruled out. In the absence of explanation, no prospect, no
matter how outrageous, was automatically discounted. Every
itself or

theory was investigated, every suggestion taken, every lead
acted upon.

But despite the remorseless and dedicated perseverance of
both humans and their alien allies alike, nearly a year passed
without so much as a single hint or clue emerging as to the
117

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

118

of the perpetrators of the carnage. Human exploration and development of Earth’s recognized sphere of influence were slowed as xenophobia and fear on Earth and its
existing colonies gained sway over those who favored conidentity

on new
worlds knowing that the butchers of Treetrunk’s six hundred
thousand were still out there unpunished, unidentified, and

tinued expansion.

unknown
enough

—ready

to try

Few people were anxious

to settle

—

of humans rash
themselves on yet another empty,

to annihilate the next rush

and

settle

inviting world.

On Earth and elsewhere recriminations raged among a dis-

How could such a catastrophe
have been allowed to happen? Who had been negligent? In the
traught and frustrated populace.

absence of answers blame was readily placed elsewhere.

who were

Many

innocent of oversight or neglect became inevitable

scapegoats. There

was

finger-pointing in the

media and

in pri-

and accusations, while lawsuits and
calumny raged aplenty. The only thing there was a dearth of

vate, there

were

riots

was answers.
and forensic teams
that were assigned to investigate Treetrunk completed their
work. As one contingent after another was withdrawn, that
Inevitably, gradually, the rotating military

hospitable world with

and globe-girdling
life-forms.

No

its

ringing waterfalls, racing streams,

forests

possibility

was abandoned to its indigenous
had been overlooked, not even the

remote chance that some advanced native civilization had
managed to keep in hiding while their planet was settled, only
to emerge one day to murder every unwary, unprepared settler.
The highest form of life on Argus V was an arboreal saurian
with sloe eyes and an accusative yip. Although it displayed
some rudimentary tool-using behavior, it could not cope with
the larger, dull-witted carnivores that preyed

upon

it,

much

wipe out so much as a handful of well-armed humans.
Reldmuurtinjak was a member of one of several thranx
teams that had offered their services to help try to resolve the
appalling riddle. Together with specialists from the Pitar and
less

Quillp worlds, they, along with their

human

counterparts.

DIRGE

119

poured over and through the scant available evidence, finding very little light in the unwholesome darkness that now
shrouded the planet.
If anything, the exceedingly organized thranx

human

were more

Such things simply
did not happen in a part of the galaxy where sentience and
civilization held sway. Yes, death and dissention and violent
disagreement were still present, but they could always be explained if not justified. In the absence of reason, there were
frustrated than their

still

colleagues.

reasons.

Reldmuurtinjak was working in the ruins of one of Weald’s

few surviving administrative buildings when he looked up
long enough to observe the tall human advancing toward him.
He had never met a human being prior to being assigned to
this grim duty. Scrutinizing the barren devastation for clues
was difficult enough for him: He could only imagine what it
must have been like for the first human crews forced to deal
with thousands of corpses lying amidst the destruction.

Like the rest of his kind he had heard a

lot

about the hu-

mans. Visuals had helped to put to rest some of the more outrageous tales that had been told about them. They did not
tower over thranx; they were simply tall. Most could not bend
their bodies into rubbery knots; they were merely flexible.

And

despite their ridiculous tailless longitudinal axis, they

did not

fall over.

At least, not very

often.

While excitable and

edgy, they could also relax and be pleasant. Personally, he

During his sojourn on Treetrunk, the researcher had not seen very many of them relax.
The one who now approached looked uneasy but not nervous. His name was Lee, and Reldmuurtinjak had struck
found

up a

this last

open

to dispute.

causal, casual relationship with

him

as their respective

groups labored side by side in search of answers in the ruins
of Argus V’s capital city. Unusually intense even for a human,

he spent more time in the company of the thranx than did any
other of his colleagues. Reldmuurtinjak wondered at this. He
was soon to find out the reason why.
Lee peered down at where the thranx was working in a

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

120

slight depression in the floor.

The space had somehow

sur-

vived the collapse of the upper two floors. Lying within the
shallow bowl was an intact desk together with contents. Typi-

none of the desk’s linking electronics had survived the
devastation, but there were always hopes of finding notes,
scribblings, jottings that might shed some light on what had
happened. Using a translating scanner, Reldmuurtinjak was
examining these now, neatly filing each sheet of treated synthesized cellulose into one of three piles.
cally,

“Any luck?” the pale-haired human inquired rhetorically.
Reldmuurtinjak replied as expected. “There is much surviving information. Unfortunately, none of it is relevant to
our inquiry.”
Nodding to indicate that he understood, the human turned
sideways and slip-slid cautiously down into the dimple in the
stelacrete floor. “Your people are very good at this kind of
work. You never seem to get tired, or bored.”
Reldmuurtinjak struggled to reply in his recently acquired
Terranglo, even as the lanky human sought to address him in
Low Thranx. Their conversation was a melange of both, an uncertain brew of slippery human vowels and fricative thranx
clicks and whistles. The ungainly but evolving interspecies patois had unofficially been dubbed Symbospeech, and the name
had stuck. As yet, the results were far from justifying even
so semigrandiose an appellation. But with each encounter
between the species, the shared vernacular grew.
“We are accustomed to slow, methodical work.” Reldmuurtinjak did not look up from his labor. It was not necessary, since there were few human gestures critical to interpret.
Aural conversation conveyed the majority of their communication.

“We are glad to help.”

—

know, some of my coworkers not myself,
understand have wondered about that. Of all the other intelligent species, you and the Pitar were the first to volunteer
your assistance.” He looked distinctly uncomfortable, but
Reldmuurtinjak had not dealt with enough humans for long
enough to be able to interpret the extravagant range of human
facial expressions. “There’s been talk
I haven’t participated

“You

—

—

DIRGE

—that maybe, and

myself

121

hope you won’t be offended
by this, that maybe a rogue element of your people might
have had something to do with this.”
It took a moment for the import of the human’s words to
sink in and for the thranx to review it in his mind to make certain that he had not heard incorrectly.
“
‘With this’?” Putting down the four tools he was handling
simultaneously, he now turned face and antennae up to the
human. “I believe I understand the implications of what you
are saying. I just do not want to.”
Lee raised both hands in a gesture unfamiliar to Reldmuurtinjak. “Hey, it’s not me! I don’t give any credence to it
for a moment.” To emphasize his stance on the matter he concluded with a fairly fluent double click from the back of his
throat. “I just think you ought to know what’s being said
about you. Not about you personally, understand. About
some hypothetical thranx who might have had a hypothetical
in

it

I

part in the real tragedy.”
Utilizing the

by-now common human

searcher nodded deliberately. “There
say,

but

it

is

gesture, the re-

tragedy in what you

has nothing to do with what happened to this

He turned slowly back to his work.
The human started to edge a little closer and

world.”

tain,

then, uncer-

held his ground. “I don’t believe a word of it, of course.

mean,

it

doesn’t

make any sense. What would the thranx, any

thranx, have to gain by participating in such a bloodbath?

new

I

Not

Your kind get chilled in Earth’s tropical
regions. You’d be uncomfortable here on a midsummer’s
lands to

settle.

afternoon, like today.

Most of the year you’d just freeze.”

“Quite true,” Reldmuurtinjak agreed, trying to bundle his
own cold-climate attire more tightly around his thorax. “We

have no use for this world.”
“And we’ve had contact with each other for more than half
a century now, with no major conflicts or disputes. Just the
usual ranting and raving from xenophobes on both sides.” He

went silent.

As

human appeared

be awaiting a response, Reldmuurtinjak supplied the one he thought the biped might be
the

to

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

122

waiting to hear. “Those thranx

who

are suspicious of

and

wish no contact with your kind inveigh against it because
they are frightened of your unpredictability.”
Lee frowned uncertainly. “Not our proclivity to violence?”
“No. Recognizing that aggressiveness is not an uncommon

among sentient species, we are not unsettled to
find it among your kind. Our ancestors fought one another as
ruthlessly as did yours. And we have been dealing with the
characteristic

and depredations of the far more belligerent AAnn for
more than two hundred and fifty of your years. But the actions of the AAnn are more or less predictable. Those of your
kind are not.” Now he looked up from his work. “At least, the
formula for mutual understanding is still in the developmental stage.”
Kneeling down alongside the insectoid, Lee was caught up
in a pervasive scent of gardenia. “Look, I want to apologize
for my friends. You have to understand that every human,
here and on all our worlds, is intensely frustrated at our inability to identify the people or peoples who were responsible
for the horror that happened here.”
feints

Glistening

compound eyes considered

the flexible, enig-

matic alien face. Reldmuurtinjak could not decipher what

might be hidden

there, but

mammaTs

“We

us to

voice.

make groundless

he did detect the concern in the
are frustrated too, but it does not lead
accusations.”

An

embarrassed Lee looked away. “It’s a human thing. In
the absence of someone to blame, blame anyone. I’m afraid
that’s not going to change until we find out what happened
here.”

“Then relations between us are likely to be poisoned for
some time.” The thranx ’s voice was soft as always, the tone
cool and uninflected. “Because my people have found nothing
any more conclusive here than have yours.”
This time they were silent in tandem for a while before Lee
does strike some of us as peculiar that among
the known sentient species capable of rendering assistance
only the AAnn have declined to send research teams here to
help with the search for leads.”

spoke again.

“It

DIRGE

123

“

KilUck that does not surprise us. The AAnn are a treacherous and dangerous people. They will kill when it is to their
advantage and retreat in a confusion of apologies when
strongly confronted. That is what makes dealing with them so
infuriating. One moment they will be happy to trade keenly
but fairly, the next they will ambush and destroy. If caught
out, they are masters of repentance. In the absence of surety
one must always be on guard against them.”
Lee considered thoughtfully. “You’re not the first to hint
that the AAnn might be responsible for this. Until the puzzle
is solved, everyone is suspect. Even apostate humans.”
That startled the thranx researcher. “You would suspect
your own kind of such an atrocity?”
“Such things have happened in the past. In the First and
Second Dark Ages.”
“But why? What possible motivation could there be?”
As his legs began to cramp, Lee settled himself into a more
comfortable seated position. “You spoke of the xenophobes
among your own kind who don’t want to have more than the
most minimal contact with us. Ours are more zealous than
yours. There are fanatics who’ll do anything to keep our respective species from growing closer together.” With a sweep
of one arm he gestured at the devastation that surrounded
them. “It’s not out of the realm of possibility that they might
resort to measures as extreme as this so they could blame the
result on the thranx, or on nonhumans in general.”
“Then you have motivation.” Although he spoke the words,
the possibility that the scenario the human had just described
might actually have taken place remained barely conceivable
,

to Reldmuurtinjak.

“Motivation, yes, but seemingly insupportable

means of

on it.” Lee shifted his backside against the hard floor.
“Though powerful, with many undeclared supporters, it’s hard
to envision how the xenophobes could have mustered suffiacting

cient military-style strength to carry out such a devastating assault

on another world

of their participation.

—much

less erase

any and

all

evidence

What happened to the Amazon hive was

one thing. Obliterating the population of an entire colony

is

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

124

something else again. If such was actually the case it would
answer one question, though.”
“Which one?” Reldmuurtinjak executed a gesture of ongoing confusion. “There are so many.”

Lee was not sophisticated enough to catch the delicate hint
of humor. “How the invaders were able to achieve such complete surprise. Battalions of arriving fellow humans, even
heavily armed fellow humans, would not be questioned. Not
until it was too late. They could have spread themselves
throughout the colony before attacking simultaneously at
multiple points in response to some prearranged signal. Evi-

dence of their perfidy could have been gathered up and destroyed after the fact.” His tone was flat. “As I said, in the
absence of the guilty, everyone is suspect. Even ourselves.”
“I

am glad to know that we are not alone.” The thranx had a

well-developed sense of sarcasm. “Better your people should

AAnn,

them on

absence from the collective effort to unearth explanations, and watch the skies of
your other colonies.”
“Everyone from New Riviera to Cachalot is on alert,” Lee
assured the bug. “Every arriving ship has to undergo checks
and quarantine that would have been unthinkable just a
couple of years ago. It’s a monumental inconvenience, but
look to the

press

their

most people understand the need.”
“Inconvenience

is

better than genocide.”

length of the familiar white

human

Examining a tom

writing material, Reld-

one of the three piles that were
rising slowly beside him. “What have you heard from the
central coordinating authority? Is there any news?”
Leaning back against a melted mass of plastic that had
once been a storage locker, Lee sighed resignedly. They were
all tired from their fruitless researches. Arriving in orbit
around Treetrunk, everyone had been flush with energy and
enthusiasm, each man and woman in his complement certain
they would be the one to find the key that would unlock the
mystery of the colony’s destmction. As the days wore on and
became weeks, then months, nascent eagerness gave way to
uncertainty, then to resignation, and lastly to a kind of profesmuurtinjak patiently

set

it

in

DIRGE
sional ennui.

No one expected the next building, the next box,

the next electronic

file,

more informative
leading up to the di-

to provide anything

than the routine details of everyday
saster.

125

life

He wondered if the thranx ran a similar gauntlet of dis-

—

couraging emotion. If so, they did not show it at least, not
in any fashion a watching, wondering human could decipher.
“No,” he replied. “Not a thing. I heard that a Quillp team

working east of Chagos Downs thought they’d stumbled onto
the wreckage of a downed nonhuman shuttle, but it turned
out to be a privately registered aircraft. Strictly suborbital.
Hundred percent human design and manufacture.” In response to the unasked corollary he added, “No evidence of
arms or armament was found in its vicinity, so it must have
been local.”
Reldmuurtinjak was intrigued. “Among my kind individuals do not have access to their own shuttlecraft. There are
private suborbital vehicles capable of very high-speed flight,

but nothing that

is

competent for extraatmospheric

individual entity smaller than a hive operates

its

travel.

own

No

flights

into orbit.”

“In that

we are different,” Lee explained. “Among my kind

nongovernmental organizations engaged in trade and
commerce often operate their own vessels, which are naturally equipped with proprietary shuttles. There are also certain very wealthy individuals who have access to privately
owned and operated ships, even starships, together with their
associated shuttlecraft. It’s not common, but it’s not unheard
of, either. That’s the most likely explanation for what the
Quillp found. Remember what I told you earlier about the
possibility of fanatic human xenophobes mounting their own
attack on the settlements. The first step in plotting something
like that would be to obtain adequate untraceable interstellar
transportation. That means acquiring not only starships, but
also unused or unregistered landing capability.”
Reldmuurtinjak indicated that he understood. “Nothing
large

else,

then?”

Lee shook his head regretfully. “Only rumors that the
money and resolve to keep our work here going is drying up.

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

126

There are people on Earth and the colonies

who want to

con-

centrate the relevant research resources elsewhere.”

“As in finding a species to blame for what took place.”
Lee did not dispute the thranx’s observation. How could
he, when he had alluded to as much himself? “I’m afraid so.”
“Would that not play into the hands of renegade humans, if
it is indeed such who are responsible?” Truhands and foothands worked through the mass of debris in a digital ballet.
“Possibly. I hope those in charge keep that in mind when
they make their final decision.” Raising up, he looked around
the ravaged interior of the building. “Personally, I’d hate to

humans abandon this beautiful world without
taking some answers away with them.”
“You said ‘abandon.’ If I grasp the meaning correctly, your
see the last

authorities are not planning a recolonization?”

Lee eyed the insectoid
thranx doubtless

dismay before realizing

about such matters, as they did
things. “It wouldn’t matter if they were or not.
settle

here now, no matter

profitable or life affirming. Despite

trunk

is

that the

felt different

many
No human would
about so

in

seen as a world of death.

its

how

potentially

physical beauty, Tree-

Humans

are

.

.

.

not always

response to such occurrences. For any of my
kind to even think of resettling the Argus system, an incontroscientific in their

vertible explanation of what

happened here must

be presented. Even then, I’m not sure very many people would want
to live in the psychic vicinity of six hundred thousand dead.”
“
‘Psychic vicinity’? What is that? Is it near Weald?”
Despite the serious turn of conversation, Lee had to smile.
“It’s a state of mind, not an administrative boundary. Just take
my word for it. No one will move here until they know for
certain what annihilated their predecessors, and maybe not
even then.”
“Six hundred thousand dead.” Reldmuurtinjak repeated
the figure in Low Thranx. To Lee the melancholy mantra was
a succession of ephemeral whisperings framed by an eloquence of musical whistles and clicks. It sounded even more
foreboding in Low Thranx than it did in Terranglo. “All the
dead have been accounted for, then?”
first

DIRGE

127

“Less some twenty-two thousand presumed incinerated or
otherwise utterly obliterated.” Along with the rest of his associates the

young researcher had been compelled

such deranged

statistics daily,

but that did not

easier to take, or the images they conjured

simpler to banish. Six

.

.

.

hundred

.

.

.

to deal

with

make them any

up unbidden any

thousand.

An

incon-

ceivable number, an unreal chronicle of annihilation.

As

of the missing twenty-two thousand,
they had been culled from the litany of the known deceased.
There would be no burial for them, and their memorials
would be anonymous. Lee had seen pictures, tridee recordings, drawings from life that had survived in schools and residences. The faces of the exterminated swam before him:
wide-eyed, innocent, oblivious to the fate that was soon to befall them. The weight of the dead was crushing.
All of a sudden he wanted out. He’d had enough. Let
for the identities

someone else be the hero. To an unknown more perspicacious
than himself he bequeathed the honor of unraveling the great

enigma. Climbing to his

feet,

he regarded the industrious,

methodical thranx without envy.
“That’s
transfer.

I

it.

I’ve

done

my share here.

can’t take this

I’m going to put in for
anymore.” Focusing on the alien

helped him to avoid looking
kept

him from hearing

at the

surrounding desolation,

the screams of the dying or envi-

sioning their helpless, terrified faces.

Reldmuurtinjak looked up from his work, his valentine-

shaped head facing that of the

subdued

taller

human

light that filtered into the depression

squarely. In the

between floors,

his blue-green exoskeleton shone dully. “Psychic vicinity be-

ginning to affect you?”

“Something like that.” Glancing around to see if any of his
colleagues were watching, he lowered his voice. “I hope it’s
one of your kind that finds the answer. I hope it’s a thranx.”
Reldmuurtinjak gestured to express curiosity, even though
he knew the human would in all probability not be familiar
enough with thranx body language to appreciate the sensitivity of the response.

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

128

“Why? What

difference does

it

make

to the ultimate

resolution?”

“Because I don’t want to think that your people are responsible. Not even a group of fanatics. Because I enjoy talking
with you and others of your kind. Because unlike some of my
uncertain, suspicious colleagues and friends and relatives
back home I want to see that relationship deepen.” Reaching
out, he extended a hand, palm downward and fingers slightly
apart, toward the insectoid’s smooth, shiny skull. “Because I
like you.”

Twisting his inflexible upper body around as

much as he was

Reldmuurtinjak dipped his head forward until both antennae made contact with the human’s hand. It was a gesture of
greeting and farewell that was becoming more common
able,

among mammalian and insectoid acquaintances, one that took
into account humankind’s regrettable lack

of a flexible cerebral
sensing mechanism. Smiling, Lee turned and moved to rejoin

his friends.

Reldmuurtinjak regarded him for a moment longer, then
returned to his work. It was as monotonous, boring, and unrewarding as ever but without pausing to consider the reasons, he found that he was feeling a little better about it.

—

10

As

downsized craft that stumbled
inelegantly out of space-plus in the vicinity of Argus VII was
singularly unimpressive. The parabolic fan that promulgated its
KK-type drive field was inefficiently aligned and indicative of
low-grade manufacture. Further proof that the vessel was the
product of a struggling as opposed to a surging technology
could be found in the design and execution of the main body.
Any ship of human, thranx, or AAnn fabrication was superior.
But it was no derelict. It moved, and it was guided by its
builders, who took what pride they could in a vessel that represented the pinnacle of their own meager science. All ships
might not be equal, nor their engineering, but the crew of the
odd little craft took pride in their species and its limited yet
very real accomplishments.
The Unop-Patha were not well known. They occupied a
single system whose sun they called Unatha, after the Great
Being they traditionally believed had given birth to the first of
their kind. Ill equipped for long-range exploring, they kept
close to home and sent out no more than a couple of ships at a
time to maintain contact and relations with the far more vigorous sentients who occupied the same general area of the
Arm. Humankind knew of them largely through the thranx,
who had enjoyed contact with the species for well over a hundred years.
The Unop-Patha were neither bold nor threatening, finding
the maintenance of even formal relations with other intelligent races a strain on their limited resources. An easy conquest for an aggressive, expansionist people like the AAnn,
starships went, the battered,

129

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

130
their

world and

its

scanty assets were not even worthy of the

force required to take

it

over. Their

very worthlessness as-

sured their continued independence.

Occasionally they sent one of their few space-plus-capable
ships voyaging.
exploit, or

Not in search of resources they were unable to

worlds they were incapable of settling, but because

they were as curious as any developed people, albeit with a

timorous curiosity. Treetrunk drew their attention not so

much

because of the tragedy that had befallen that human colony
but because it lay within the limited range of the best of their
vessels. They were aware of the catastrophe, of course. Every
intelligence within that part of the Arm that had access to
travel in space-plus or that had space-minus communications
capabilities knew.
Their arrival was immediately noted and their presence
challenged by one of the two warships from Earth that remained in orbit around the planet. It took a few moments for
the analysts on board the cruiser Shaka to convince themselves of the identity of the visitors. Setting aside initial impressions, they did not take the abused, apparently innocuous
appearance of the much smaller vessel at face value. Everything and anything in Treetrunk’s vicinity had to be thoroughly checked out.
As soon as ship-to-ship communications were established
and the taxonomy of the Unop-Patha crew confirmed, the
visitors were allowed to proceed as they wished. Travel to or
visitation of the surface of Treetrunk was circumscribed but
not forbidden, provided that any landing parties first obtained
appropriate clearance from the military authorities on board
the Shaka.

The Unop-Patha accepted these

restrictions obeisantly,

having neither the desire nor the inclination to challenge the
far more powerful human craft. Their own carried virtually

no armament,

its

crew instead relying for defense on

their

transparent helplessness. Nevertheless, their presence and
actions were closely monitored

by

sensitive instruments

on

both warships. Though nearly a year had passed since the destruction of Argus V, no one had forgotten that whatever had

DIRGE
extirpated

131

population had accomplished the evil with the
aid of complete surprise. Certainly the Unop-Patha and their
pitiable vessel looked harmless, but they would nevertheless
its

be watched carefully and scanned periodically until they left
the system or reentered space-plus.
The Unop-Patha did not avail themselves of the opportunity to descend to the surface of Treetrunk. They could not afford nor could their single shuttle craft tolerate more than a
few such trips, and they chose not to expend one visiting
a world whose horrors were well known. Instead, they contented themselves with dropping into as low an orbit as they
could manage and making observations from altitude, even
though they would have found the climate congenial and the
gravity light.

A

week of such

modest

scrutiny proved sufficient to satisfy their

scientific needs. Signaling their intention to

move

on,

was acknowledged by the officer on
board the Shaka who had been given charge of such matters.
A request to take measurements and readings throughout
the remainder of the Argus system was promptly granted. The
unassuming scientists on board the Unop-Patha craft were
particularly interested in Argus VI, a gas giant of unusual
composition. Though located in an orbit comparatively close
to Treetrunk, its banded bulk did not appear to exert any gravitational effect on that far more salubrious world, hinting at the
absence of a solid core. While much material on the gaseous
sphere and the rest of the Argus system was obtainable from
human sources, the Unop-Patha humbly preferred to carry out
their polite appreciation

their

own investigations.

Accelerating slowly away from Treetrunk, the Unop-Patha
navigators plotted a course that would insert

them

into orbit

around the sixth planet of Argus within a couple of days. As
they moved off, tugged along by the greatly subdued glow of
their minimally powered drive, they were traveling slowly
enough to take readings on the two moons ofTreetrunk. Rocky,
airless, small, and astronomically undistinguished, these had
been of no especial interest to the colonizing humans. Their
dimensions, composition, and other relevant information had

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

132

been automatically recorded, filed, and forgotten in the rush to
settle the glamorous, accommodating world nearby.
The Unop-Patha were not sophisticated, but they were
thorough. Patience was a virtue of science that did not demand advanced technology to practice. So they slowed still
further, to ensure that their specialists would be able to complete their readings.

was while passing

and smaller of the two
chunks of rock that one of the three communications technicians, engaged in monitoring background noise, thought she
might have detected an anomaly. Accorded only minimal attention by her colleagues at first, she persisted, finding the
duration and bandwidth of the noise perplexing. Her perseverance finally engaged the interest of a superior, who while
initially skeptical, soon found himself studying the relevant
readouts through the twin lenses of puzzlement and surprise.
The electromagnetic nonconformity was brought to the attention of the family group that was in command. After due
debate and discussion it was decided to pause in the vicinity
of the moon just long enough to investigate the abnormality
before moving on to the sixth planet as planned. A cursory inquiry would cost little and would not involve the use of much
time or equipment. The very low gravity of the moon meant
that the coddled and sometimes troublesome shuttle craft
would not have to be used. A pair of much smaller repair
vehicles could be employed to explore the cratered surface.
Each utilitarian vessel could accommodate a maximum of
four, but two were adequate to fly and operate the compact
It

Taking

craft.

fired

silent leave

programmed

bursts

the inner

of their respective

from

air locks,

they

their tiny engines as they de-

scended toward the scabrous surface of the noticeably

ellip-

moon. The feeble electronic anomaly that had sparked
the unplanned visit grew no stronger as they tracked it, suggesting emission from a natural source.
The reality turned out to be anything but.
The pilot of the first ship altered his trajectory as soon as
visual contact was made, directing his backup to do the same.
soidal

DIRGE

133

Anxious communications flew back and forth between the
two repair craft and the starship.
“A vessel of some kind it is, MotherTwo.” The pilot and his
companion did not have to use instruments to reach their conclusion. The silhouette that was floating above the crater was
unmistakably synthetic.

“Can you

it

identify,

TwelveSon?” came the apprehensive

response.

Both Unop-Patha stared at the quiescent, shadowed object
that lay in front of and below them. “Ours it is not, but that
without saying goes.” Alongside the pilot, his companion
hazarded a guess.
“FortyDaughter here being. Human maybe it is, because it
on a moon sits that a human world orbits it does.”
“Real you speak, FortyDaughter,” came the reply. “However any space-going species belonging to it could. Including

maybe sentience unknown that the population of this world
made dead.”
However reasonable and indeed, unavoidable, the verbalization of such a possibility was, it was seriously disconcerting to the crew of both observing repair craft. Yet there

was no sign of movement or

life

from the unidentifiable

ship,

nor any indication that anything aboard, organic or artificial,
was aware of their presence.
“Very small it is,” the pilot of the second repair vessel reported.
travel

“No

it is,

larger than our

own. Not capable of space-plus

would I estimate.”

His colleague in the other ship continued the reportage.
“No generating projector visible is, nor anything that an
analogous structure might be called. Old it looks. If elsewhere encountered, not capable of flight of any kind would I
think it. Almost at the end of a decelerating synchronous orbit
it appears to be. If not for the slightness of this moon’s weak
gravity I imagine it long ago into the surface would have
crashed.” When no response was forthcoming, he inquired
hesitantly, “Closer looking should we take?”
This time the ensuing silence from the starship was understandable: The commanding family was taking the request

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

134

under advisement and discussing it with the heads of the
other dominant families. The pilot was not sure whether to
be happy or despondent when the response that was finally
forthcoming was affirmative.
“Distance where and when possible keep,” the pilots of
the two investigating craft were admonished. “Remove yourselves if any hint of trouble or hostility there is. Scrutiny we
perform will, recordings you take will, and when done all a
report to the

human authorities we make will.”

TwelveSon waited for FortyDaughter to bring her little
ship up alongside his. Together they advanced on the silent,
inactive alien craft. No, silent not, he reminded himself. It
continued to emit

What

if

its

feeble, intermittent electronic sputter.

a scout ship of the

unknown ravening

species that

had annihilated Argus V it was? He could feel his copilot shivering and shuddering alongside him. Together they sloughed
off an inordinate amount of nervous energy. He knew that
FortyDaughter and her companion must be experiencing
similar terrors. He wanted to turn around, to flee this dark,
dead place and return to the familiar family warmth and comfort of the starship. Wanted to, but did not. The Unop-Patha
were not particularly courageous, but they were persistent.
Oftentimes all that kept them stumbling down the road of
progress

was the

The two

fear of being laughed

investigating repair craft

at.

were soon close enough

to the alien vessel for their integral manipulative

reach out and touch

armature to

should the pilots wish to do so.
“How the emission is?” FortyDaughter inquired.
it,

“Unchanged still,” came the reply from the starship. “No
reaction from the subject craft?”
“Nothing,” TwelveSon reported. “No movement, no lights
internal or external visible are.” Carefully he edged his ship
along the length of the silent vessel. Within the repair craft all
was hushed. “A lock I have maybe found. Sealed it is.” Plain-

he inquired, “Can return to ship now maybe?”
“No. Families further information wish. Conclusiveness

tively

is

sought.”

“Conclusiveness points to nothing living here,” Twelve-

DIRGE

135

Son’s copilot murmured. “Automatic emission only there is.
Not even signal we are sure it is. Energy release from broken

equipment or failed instrumentation could well

humans

be. Let the

further probe.” Tilting his round, heavily furred

head
back, he surveyed their grim surroundings. “Unpleasant this
place is. Dead ship in a dying orbit above a dead moon.”
“Conclusiveness sought is.” The directive from the starship was tranquil but unrelenting. “Search lock external release for. Try.”

“Not even certain builder-owners of ship oxygen breathe.”
Grumbling, FortyDaughter maneuvered the manipulative
arms of her craft into position above the possible lock door
that TwelveSon had located. Unfortunately, there were indications of exactly the sort of controls they were looking for.
Unfortunately, these responded to the pilot’s gentle, precise
handling.

The lock or

seal slid into

its

retaining wall, re-

vealing a small alcove beyond. Both pilots maneuvered their
ships close enough to shine lights within. They were unable

of the instrumentation and internal
engineering. Both dreaded the directives that reached them

to ascertain the identity

subsequently.

“Enter and explore. The source of the emission try to
establish.”
“I here will

remain

to

keep watch,” TwelveSon immedi-

ately offered.

“No,” argued FortyDaughter. “You better at such exploration than we are. You enter, watch we will keep.”

The dispute was

settled

from the ship. “TwelveSon and
FortyDaughter watch will keep.

ThirtyOneSon enter will.
Care to be taken.”
“Care to be taken.” Muttering, TwelveSon released himself
from his restraints, disconnected himself from the repair
craft, and prepared to follow his copilot into the repair craft’s
tiny lock.

was a cramped space whose confines made donning a suit
for outside work more difficult than it ought to have been.
Normally, such suits would be put on in one of the much larger
main locks on board the starship. When they had dropped
It

136

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

away, no one had anticipated any reason

why they might have

took some scrambling, but
after dancing awkwardly around each other for a while, both

to

make use of pressure

suits. It

were suitably outfitted.
They exchanged a brief but intense clinch before turning
and opening the door to the outside. Gravity barely strong
enough to keep the alien vessel from drifting off into space
allowed them to float gently down to its curved metal skin.
Ahead, the open alien lock loomed. Above and behind them,
they could see the concerned faces of FortyDaughter and her
companion anxiously following their progress through the
viewport of their hovering repair craft.
The sooner they completed their examination, the faster
they could return to the warm embrace of the starship. TwelveSon led the way forward. Memories of the empty, shattered
world below rose unbidden into his consciousness. Something
had utterly annihilated the population of a seemingly benign
world. Admittedly, the six hundred thousand who had perished
had been aliens, but they had been intelligent and warmblooded like the Unop-Patha. Whatever had ruthlessly slaughtered them might not be discriminatory in its taste for
extermination. True, the ship they were about to board was unpretentious, far too small to harbor weapons of mass destruction or very many warlike individuals even if they were smaller
in stature than the Unop-Patha. But it was more than a matter
of numbers. TwelveSon did not want to encounter even one
rampaging, murderous alien.
As they entered the lock both he and ThirtyOneSon agreed
that the placement of controls and instruments suggested that
the lock, and by inference the rest of the derelict vessel, had
been designed with beings bigger than the Unop-Patha in
mind. TwelveSon was not sure whether to be relieved or further intimidated by this conclusion. Trying to determine its
composition, he studied a blank screen of alien manufacture
while his companion scanned the inner door and its seals. The
screen and its design were far more sophisticated than anything comparable aboard the starship.
ThirtyOneSon turned to him, staring out of his suit’s head

pilots

DIRGE

137

bubble. “There’s no atmosphere on this craft. If there ever
was one it has all away leaked.”

could be there was aboard never anyone.” Moving to the
inner door, TwelveSon began running his four stubby fingers
“It

around the edge. It was darker here, away from the outer
portal. “It might have been accidentally from the surface of
the fifth planet launched, or from a human starship, or from a
vessel of the attacking species. Or it might a true derelict be
that has here for generations lain.”

“Not many generations,” ThirtyOneSon reminded him.
“The colonizing humans had not this world for very long occupied before they wiped out were.”
“I realize that, but there

He

let

is still

—

out an involuntary yelp and leaped backward as the

inner door began to open.

The paltry

gravity

would have sent

him crashing headfirst into the ceiling had not an alert ThirtyOneSon reacted in time to grab his companion’s lower leg
as he began to soar past. Even as ThirtyOneSon pulled his
friend back down toward the floor, he was already stumbling
toward the outer portal.
“What is it, what happening is?” FortyDaughter’s alarmed
voice crackled over their simple bubbleset speakers.
“The inner lock door cycling is,” TwelveSon reported as he
regained both his emotional and physical equilibrium. Together, he and ThirtyOneSon halted themselves in the frame
of the outer doorway, watching and waiting.
The inner barrier continued to withdraw until the way was
clear. Beyond, they could make out a corridor and more alien
instrumentation. A few lights shone dimly. In the stillness of
the airless moon, nothing moved.
“In the course of your inspection one of your hands must a
still active control have brushed,” ThirtyOneSon remarked to
his companion. When the pilot, still breathing hard, did not
reply, the slightly larger of the pair added, “We should a
survey of the interior make.”
TwelveSon looked over at him. “I would rather not.”
ThirtyOneSon did not possess an especially imaginative
personality, a quality that was a definite asset in their present

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

138

circumstance. His tone was maternal-stem.

“We

should a

survey make,” he insisted firmly. “Having been the opportunity granted,

we

will chastised be if

we

without doing so

return.”

“No one will know

if

.

.

.

oh, wait,” an

unhappy Twelve Son

They had already reported to the other repair ship
that the inner lock was open. Even if ThirtyOneSon had concurred, it was too late to back out now. With great reluctance,
muttered.

the pilot started

back

into the lock

and toward the ominously

gaping inner gateway.
The absence of breathable atmosphere was encouraging.
Surely there was nothing left alive aboard the solitary little
vessel. As they penetrated deeper within, keeping close to
one another, growing confidence began to override his unease. As an exemplar of alien engineering the ship struck
him as more primitive than what he had seen of the best
of contemporary human and thranx and AAnn technology,
but it was still more advanced than anything aboard his
own vessel. A sudden thought struck him: If by chance the
humans did not know this was here, perhaps he and his
people could claim right of salvage. There might be much
to learn from the empty, abandoned craft. It depended how
advanced it actually was. Arrogated technology was of little
use to those who appropriated it if its design and details were
beyond comprehension.
ThirtyOneSon bumped into him, knocking him slightly
forward and in the light gravity, nearly off his feet. TwelveSon whirled irritably on his companion. “Watch where you
stepping are! And don’t so close follow. There plenty of room
in here for the two of us is.”
That was when he noticed that the hair on his friend’s head,
face, and neck was standing straight out. ThirtyOneSon was
looking to their left, and pointing. “You mean, there plenty of
room for the three of us is.”
A shape was rising from the shadows. It continued to rise
until it towered over the two terrified Unop-Patha. TwelveSon
was too frightened to move forward, back, or scramble for a
hiding place. More than four times their mass, the ghostly ap-

DIRGE

139

had a similar bipolar body but with much longer
limbs. What they could see of its face and head inside a
helmet were almost as shaggy as those of an Unop-Patha, but
the eyes were far too small and the mouth too large. As details
continued to resolve themselves in the feeble light, he and his
companion began to relax.
It was a human. Then this was a human vessel, or so they
now supposed. But where had the human come from, and
why was there only one of them? If this was a scientific vessel
engaged in an exploratory jaunt from one of the two huge
warships orbiting the planet, TwelveSon would have expected it to house several scientists. And if that was the case,
why was this individual wearing an environment suit and not
working in a pressurized compartment?
An accident! They had stumbled across a human survey or
scientific craft engaged in exploration of this moon. It had
run into difficulty and become stranded here. It might be
from one of the warships or he hardly dared countenance
the possibility
it might have been caught and trapped here
when Treetrunk had been set upon by its unknown homicidal
invaders. Overlooked by the otherwise maniacally thorough
attackers, its crew had survived.
Except there did not seem to be any crew. Looking past the
single tottering figure TwelveSon was unable to discern any
others, either erect or lying down. The little vessel was large
enough to accommodate a number of individuals the size of
the average human. Possibly they were active in another compartment. If this craft was not a component of the present orbiting human detachment and if it had been here since the
attack on the fifth planet, then supplies of every kind would
parition

—

—

be running very low. Retiring to the confines of sealed suits
would have allowed the marooned crew to conserve their remaining air by in effect pressurizing only their bodies in lieu
of their surroundings. He marveled at the environmental
technology that would let so small a craft keep its occupants
alive for such an extended period.
Of course, how far and how long any onboard supplies
lasted

was

in direct proportion to the

number of

crew.

The

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

140

fewer the occupants, the longer the reserves would

last.

Once

again he peered past the awkward bulk of the human. There

was

no sign of the rest of the crew.
“Why is it not to communicate trying?” ThirtyOneSon was
eying the human intently. This was the first one either of them
had ever encountered in person instead of via a communicastill

tions transmission or study manual.

TwelveSon weighed how best
to proceed. “Or perhaps it is not to open communications authorized and is for one of its superiors waiting.”
“That may be,” ThirtyOneSon conceded, “but I sure it sees
us am. How could it not? We right here in front of it are.”
“Protocol it from acknowledging us may prevent. The
AAnn like that are, and the thranx somewhat less so. We far
less about this species know than we do many others.”
“So what do we do? Just here for the rest of them to show
up wait?” ThirtyOneSon looked around uneasily. “I this place
do not like. I want to back on the ship be.”
“No less than I.” Protocol be damned, TwelveSon decided.
He was not going to stand here waiting on the aliens forever.
If his actions resulted in a reprimand, he would accept it with
good grace. Anything to accelerate matters so he and his
friend could return to their vessel. ThirtyOneSon would sup“Perhaps

it

see us does not.”

port his actions.

Moving

forward, he reached out and touched the leg of the

human. When it failed to react, he grabbed the flexible material
of its suit and tugged on it. This finally produced a response.
Turning toward the two Unop-Patha the human glanced down.
His eyes widened, the framing flesh pulling back to expose
more of the whitish orb, and his mouth opened and began
to move.
Wrenching himself away from the Unop-Patha ’s grasp, the
human stumbled backward until it was pressed up against the
wall.

It

stood there staring at them,

its

mouth

still

working,

arms splayed wide and flattened tightly against the composite
material of the bulwark.

TwelveSon took a

step forward, then hesitated. Hardly a

DIRGE

141

specialist in interspecies contact,

he was once again unsure

how

to proceed. “Is

looking right

at

us

it

to

communicate trying or not?

It

is.”

“No.” In his stolid, unimaginative way ThirtyOneSon was
firm. “It not looking at us is. It looking behind us is.” Turning
as one, the

two Unop-Patha examined the space behind them.

They saw nothing

exceptional, nothing to differentiate

it

from the rest of the vessel’s interior.
“Whatever it is seeing not here is, but in its mind is.”
ThirtyOneSon ’s tone was somber. “I don’t think I to see it
want.”

“But at it look! Surely it trying to communicate is.” Baffled
by the human’s reactions, TwelveSon was at a loss as to
what to do next. “See how open and active its mouth is?
Humans communicate that way, as we do know; by means of
modulated sound waves.”
“Different frequencies,” ThirtyOneSon commented thoughtfully. “We would not its words anyway understand, but specialists on the ship have to the principal human tongue access. Our

may not fluent be, but the necessary data in the library
should be.” He contemplated the task at hand. “We must back to

people

the ship get this one.”

TwelveSon reluctantly agreed. Since he and his companion
could not talk to the human, they would have to somehow
induce it to follow them into the presence of those who
could. Stepping forward, he executed several simple ges-

hoping the human would get the idea. Then he and
ThirtyOneSon turned to start back the way they had come.
“It not following is,” ThirtyOneSon observed. “It still just
tures,

standing there staring at the opposite wall
past the human and down the empty corridor.

is.”

He peered

“Maybe

for the

of the crew it waiting is.”
“I’m beginning to think there no rest of the crew is.”
TwelveSon’s thoughts were tumbling. “If there were they
ought to have by now arrived. This a very small ship is.”
A contemplative ThirtyOneSon was quiet for a moment.
“Then this being a sole survivor of the accident that trapped
rest

this vessel here is.”

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

142

beginning to think so am.” TwelveSon hesitated. “Unless the others, if there are others, are all dead, or otherwise
“I

immobilized.”

know about you, but I not looking am.” The larger
Unop-Patha was adamant. “We our family mandate here and
more have fulfilled, by this craft entering and one human
“I don’t

FortyDaughter or others from the ship explore
further. We leavetaking are owed.”
“I agree. But one last time let us try.” He turned back

finding. Let

toward the human,

who had

not shifted from

stance against the wall. “If it will with us

munications people can with
hunt for answers to
“Yes,” his

it

make

splayed

come and our com-

contact, others

difficult questions

companion

its

have

may not

to.”

readily agreed, “and if it a lost craft

from one of the orbiting warships

is,

we

valuable merit for

performing a rescue should acquire.”
“Wonder make one it does, though.” TwelveSon had approached to within arm’s reach of the much more massive
human. “If that the case is you would expect the humans both

of these moons to be scouring, as well as the planetary surface in search of their lost comrade. And to have informed
our ship upon arriving here that one of theirs had missing
gone.”

“Communication the key is,” ThirtyOneSon observed.
“Once that established is, then the human all such questions
for us can answer.”

Reaching out for the second time TwelveSon grabbed the
human, this time reaching up over his head to tug on the creature’s arm. Its helmeted head jerked around sharply, and the
Unop-Patha could see the large facial orifice gaping and
moving once again. But the human would not leave its place
flattened against the wall.

—

Bemused, TwelveSon stepped back only to see that his
companion had retreated several steps and was staring
mutely up at the alien. “Now what is it?”
It took ThirtyOneSon a moment to respond. “Your suit’s
transmission pickup. Off internal communication switch and

DIRGE

—

143

change to ” He glanced down at the wrist console he had
been fingering. “ eighty-six point three dash eleven.”
“Why, what the point is?” TwelveSon looked from his
friend back up at the immovable alien. “Don’t tell me you
understand it can?”
“Yes.” ThirtyOneSon’s words were barely audible. “Yes, I
can understand it. Just listen, and you will, too.”
Bewildered and a bit angry, TwelveSon proceeded to do as
his companion suggested. As soon as he entered the recommended frequency into his suit instrumentation his ears were
assailed by the voice of the alien, and he understood the truth
of what ThirtyOneSon had told him. He found that he could
indeed understand the human.
It screaming was.

—

11

I

hey’re saying

whatT

Having not been told to stand at ease, the orderly remained
at attention in the anteroom, surrounded by the Victorian-era
bric-a-brac that was the commander’s favored decor. “They
claim to have rescued a human from the inner moon, sir. They
” The orderly glanced down at his reader to the printout
say
of the report to make certain he was recounting everything
accurately, “—that they found one live human in a single
small vessel on the far side of the moon. Beyond being alive,
they cannot testify as to his condition, though they believe it

—

to

be marginal.”
“This

is

preposterous.”

As

she spoke,

Commander

Lahte-

hoja was sealing up the sides of her lightweight duty boots.
‘"Neither

we

nor the Shaka are missing any personnel, and

I

would be more than a little upset to learn that all shuttle craft
and lifeboats were not accounted for. I know that the level of
boredom is high among the crews, but if some people have
gone for an unauthorized joyride I am not going to be pleased.”
With each sentence the commander’s voice had diminished. Eyes set front, body stiff and ramrod straight, the orderly knew what that meant. In contrast to others, when
Lahtehoja grew quiet it meant she was really angry. When a
soldier had to strain to hear the commander’s words, it was
time to look for a hole to hide

He

in.

pivoted sharply to follow her as she exited the com-

mander’s quarters and headed for the bridge, moving with the

same long, purposeful, relentless strides that had made her a
champion quintathlete in her days at the Academy. Crew they
144

DIRGE

145

encountered stopped whatever they were doing to snap to attention and salute, gestures that she acknowledged perfunctorily.

Anyone who had thought that inspection and survey duty

Treetrunk would be a walk through an aerogel had
neglected to note the name of the commander currently in
at ill-fated

charge.

A

lift

carried

them

to the auxiliary bridge blister situated

on the upper-middle portion of the big ship. Far forward, the
immense projection fan of the KK drive dominated the field
of vision. With the warship rotated to face the planet, the
white-girdled globe of Treetrunk loomed in the view dome.

More salutes and salutations greeted her arrival. Lahtehoja
did not move to take her seat but instead strode directly over
to confront the officer

on

duty. Captain

Miles vaan Leuder-

wolk was a paunchy, easygoing career officer who favored a
shaved head and imposing beard. For all his rough appearance he was known to laugh frequently and easily. He looked
like he should have been spending his days serving lager in a
beer garden instead of directing a warship. Those who served
under him were inordinately fond of their easygoing master.
No such rumor had ever been attached to Lahtehoja.
“What do we have, Miles?” The commander’s eyes were
black, small, and intense as a laser. You had to look for them,
but nobody wanted to find them.
The captain of the Ronin wore his bemusement as artlessly as his beard. “You read the report from central
communications?”
“I’ve heard it.” A flick of the head in the orderly’s direction
was sufficient to explain. “Who are these Unop-Patha? I’m
not familiar with their kind.”
“I’ll tell

you on the way

to

B

hold.”

Vaan Leuderwolk

smiled through his beard. “I don’t know much about them, either. Just the basics. They have very little contact with us, and
we with them. When they popped out of space-plus here a

few weeks ago they requested and were subsequently granted
permission to do some cultural and scientific survey work.”
Lahtehoja led the way, forcing the captain and the orderly

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

146
to

have to hurry to keep up. “I don’t remember being notified

of this

arrival.”

happened when you were on
sleep shift. “Buthefasi over on the Alexander Nevsky didn’t
deem it important enough to bother you.”
Lahtehoja muttered something under her breath but did
not comment further. She knew it was a failing of hers that
she felt the need to know everything about everything that
was going on under her command. A good commander had
to know how to delegate, a skill that was not among her
strengths. Nevertheless, although Buthefasi had acted properly, this was one particular she was sorry she had missed.
Her ignorance was soon to be rectified, however.
Having just listened to as concise a briefing as the relevant
department had been able to prepare with virtually no notice
at all, vaan Leuderwolk filled her in on what was known
about the Unop-Patha as it had been related to him. Occasionally she would nod her understanding or interrupt to ask
Leuderwolk shrugged.

a precise, terse question.
felt

she

“It

By the time they reached B hold she

knew as much about these Unop-Patha as did the cap-

tain of the Ronin.

They were waiting

dozen child-sized aliens
with round, almost tubby bodies, big eyes, and no visible
ears. What she could see of their bodies was covered with a
thick, coarse, green-brown hair. They wore miniature space
suits and had removed their headgear. Small black noses with
four openings peeped out from near the top of the skull, just
for her: half a

barely visible within the dense

fur.

A

Lahtehoja and her small entourage halted before them.
specialist eighth-class wearing the insignia of communica-

walked over, saluted, and accepted the commander’s admonition to stand easy with obvious relief.
Lahtehoja glanced automatically at the man’s ident. “What
do we have here, Mr. Waitangi?”
tions

The specialist was prepared. “Their vessel hailed ours,
Commander, and requested permission to come alongside.
They claimed to have found and picked up a lone human
from a marooned ship drifting in low synchronous orbit on

DIRGE
the far side of the nearer

147

moon.” As he spoke the

specialist

down at the oversized reader he held, the
rapid but controlled movement of his eyes automatically
scrolling the information it displayed. “We had to run the
transmission three times to make sure we had it straight.” He
frequently glanced

smiled tolerantly at the waiting, curious aliens. “Their communications technology is pretty primitive.”

“Apparently
neither

The

it

was good enough

person when
system could.”

to find this

we nor any of our predecessors

in this

specialist’s smile

vanished instantly. “Naturally, they
want to transfer him, but they say that they can’t.”
Lahtehoja’s neatly highlighted brows drew together, and
her voice fell slightly. “Why not?”

The young man hurried
they

try,

he

his response.

“They say

—we’ve determined from
question
male—he

that

when

their description that

the individual in

is

resists.

Sometimes

violently.”

The commander nodded knowingly. “And they’re afraid
he’ll hurt one of them or do some damage to their ship. I can
understand

noting the disparity in our respective sizes.”
“Excuse me, Commander, but that’s not the reason.” The
that,

assumed an apologetic air. “They say that they have
him safely isolated on their ship, but they’re afraid he’ll hurt
specialist

himself.”

“Hmm.” Lahtehoja eyed the inquisitive, clearly awed visitors with new respect. “So we don’t know much about these
Unop-Patha, but we see that they understand compassion. I’ll
accept that as a basis for working with any alien species. Ask
them

permit some of our medical personnel to go
aboard their ship and remove this person they have so obligif they will

ingly rescued.”

With a nod, the

As he
spoke through the translator that hung from around his neck
he crouched to bring his face more in line with those of the
aliens he was addressing
and also to assume a less intimispecialist turned to face the visitors.

—

dating aspect.

took a few moments, what with the specialist’s need to
adjust the translator each time human or alien spoke. Unlike
It

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

148

no one on board the warship spoke Unathian. There was no need for it.
Eventually the specialist rose. The look of satisfaction on
his face preceded his announcement. “They say that they
have no objection, but suggest that anyone we wish to send to
visit their vessel be chosen as much for physical dimensions

High Thranx,

for example, or Pitar,

as for pertinent skills.”

“Thoughtful of them.” The commander turned her head in
vaan Leuderwolk’s direction. “Find me some short doctors
and nurses and have them assembled here. Let’s see what
these people have found.” In a less authoritative tone she
added, “What the devil is one lone individual doing stuck out
here, of all places, and where the hell did he come from?”

“I’m as curious to know as you are, Ludmilla.” The captain
watched as the petite aliens began redonning their rudimentary suit helmets. “Who wouldn’t be?”
It took several hours for the hastily assembled medical
team to be transported to the Unathian vessel and to return.
They made the transfer in a couple of the Ronin s accessory
craft
not because Lahtehoja and vaan Leuderwolk did
not trust the patently inoffensive Unop-Patha, but because
'

—

the transportation the aliens courteously offered to provide

would have been too cramped even for the purposely diminutive group of physicians and assistants.
Lahtehoja was back on the bridge attending to the normal
workday duties of a task-group commander when she was
notified that the medical team had returned. Leaving the
Ronin under designated cluster command, she and vaan
Leuderwolk took an express lift to the infirmary. Lieutenant
Colonel Holomusa, chief of medical staff, was waiting for
them in the reception area. Cursed with the face and frame of
a caricatured undertaker, he resorted to scanning

enliven his otherwise doleful appearance. For

makeup

all that,

to

he was

an upbeat and merry fellow, exactly the sort a patient confined in an infirmary would want to see coming toward them.
He was not smiling now, however. Lahtehoja did not like to
see confusion and uncertainty spread like a mask across the
faces of those under her command. She especially did not

DIRGE
like to see

it

149

dominating the usually cheerful countenance of

a ranking physician.

can see the prognosis in your face.” She sighed. “Educate me.”
Holomusa glanced down at his reader. “Anglo-Oceanic
male, height one hundred and seventy-two centimeters,
weight fifty-one kilos” Noting her questioning look he
added, “The reduced body weight doesn’t appear to fit naturally on his frame. He has the underlying musculature of a
much stockier man. One doesn’t have to be a physician to
be able to tell just by looking at him that his health has
“I

—psychologically

suffered

as well as physiologically. In other

words, he’s had to deal with shock to his nervous system as
well as an insufficiency of food. Naturally, each magnifies the
deleterious effects of the other.” The chief medical officer
swallowed. “After examining him, I’d say it’s a wonder he’s
not in worse shape. Given his condition,

it’s

something of a

surprise that he’s even alive.”

Vaan Leuderwolk spoke up. “To what do you attribute his
survival, Ben?”
The physician made a noncommittal gesture with his
reader. “Better to ask him that. It certainly wasn’t a sound and
satisfying diet. He’s suffering from an impressive catalogue
of nutritional deficiencies.” He nodded in the direction of the
recovery chamber. “Not vitamins, though. Pills can help, but
they’re no substitute for solid food.”
Lahtehoja turned toward the silent, shuttered chamber
where their mysterious visitant lay. “You’re feeding him
now?”
“In a manner of speaking.” Holomusa chuckled softly.
“He’s receiving a steady flow of osmotic fluids.”

Vaan Leuderwolk nodded knowingly. “When will he be
able to sit up and take solid food?”
“Yes, and how soon can we talk to him?” Lahtehoja had to
restrain herself from carrying the conversation into the recovery room. Commander of the visiting force she might be,
but within the confines of the infirmary it was Holomusa who

was

in charge.

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

150

know,” the chief medical officer replied candidly.
The commander ground her teeth a bad habit she had
never quite been able to break. “That’s not the kind of answer
“I don’t

I

—

my staff. I don’t deal in incertitude.”
“You think I like to?” Among the complement

expect from

Ronin, the chief physician was one of the few the

of the

commander

could not intimidate. “Nonspecific as it is, that’s my prognosis. The man’s comatose. I’m not going to try and force

him out of

it.

Push

his condition

and we could lose him

permanently.”

As always, Lahtehoja was ready with a sharp retort.

Instead

of delivering it to the unblinking physician, she sighed again
and raised her gaze ceilingward. “All right, Ben. It’s your call.
What happened when you went aboard the Unathian ship?”
“They took us to the room where they were holding him.”
Holomusa’s tone was even, professional, but vaan Leuderwolk could tell that the physician had been shaken by the incident. “He was curled up in a comer, not quite fully fetal, but
on the way. As soon as I saw the state he was in I ordered
everyone else to remain in the corridor and out of his line of
sight. I’m not a big man, but the Unop-Patha are a lot smaller,
and I had to bend low to fit through the doorway.”
“What did he do when you entered his ‘space’?” Lahtehoja’s voice was flat, unemotional, analyzing.
“Started whimpering,” the physician told her without missing a beat. “I’ve seen disturbed men and women, people who
have suffered a severe mental shock, try to dig their way into
the floor or climb through the walls. This is the first time I’ve
seen one try to crawl into himself.” Behind the three offi-

commander’s orderly stood mesmerized by the doc-

cers, the
tor’s tale.

“As soon as

I

hurting himself,
contact,
of,

I

was a very real chance of him
stopped where I was. Trying to make eye

saw
I

that there

Anything I could think
mind, so he would hear a familiar, non-

just started talking to him.

whatever came to

threatening, hopefully soothing

him

human voice.

My object was

slow his heart rate, which I supposed
might be dangerously high, and to get him to trust me.”

to get

to relax, to

DIRGE

“And

151

did you?” With one ear Lahtehoja

was

straining to

hear sounds from the recovery chamber, but the only audible
noise besides that of their own voices were the soft beeps and

hums of efficient,

indifferent instruments.

“Long enough to stick him with an osmotic hypo that
pumped him full of tranquilizer. I was ready to jump him, to
call for help, or to flee back out the doorway depending on
his reaction. Funny
all he did was slip quietly into unconsciousness. Never uttered a sound. We squeezed him back

—

through the door, off that claustrophobic Unathian ship and
onto one of ours. He’s been sleeping soundly until about an
hour ago, when he woke up.”

“Woke up?” Vaan Leuderwolk blinked.

“I thought

you said

he was comatose.”

maybe ‘woke

an overstatement. He
opened his eyes and he’s breathing on his own. Other than
that, there’s nothing there. Severe trauma.” He spread his
hands helplessly. “Not much I can do here. Sure, we’re trained
and equipped to deal with a whole range of combat psychoses,
but wherever this guy has retreated to, he’s gone deep. I could
“All right,

try to pull

him out

up’

is

—

“Why don’t you?” Lahtehoja prompted him.
“Like

I said.

Because

make a mistake, I could drive him
Deep enough so that he might never

if I

down deeper into the pit.
come out. I’m not prepared to take that responsibility.”
“Suppose I change my mind and order you to try?”
The chief medical

officer stiffened slightly.

respectfully relinquish my post

“Then I would

and report to the brig. I assure
you that in that event every one of my subordinates will
follow me, one by one.”
“Take it easy, Ben,” she soothed him. “I had to ask. I have
no intention of trying to countermand or supersede a medical
decision. Damn! That means we’ll have to take him back to
Earth for treatment without knowing his history. We’ll end up
seeing his story on the tridee like everyone else.”
“If he ever recovers enough to tell his story,” the cautious
physician reminded her.
“What about physical details?” vaan Leuderwolk prompted

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

152

the other man. “Identification, clothing, indication of possible

origin?”

“His garments were filthy” Fastidious physician that he was,
Holomusa’s expression wrinkled at the distasteful memory.
“My inclination was to have them burned.” At the look of

alarm that spread over the faces of the commander and the captain the physician hastened to reassure them. “Ai, don’t have a
stroke in my presence! Rest assured that everything has been
properly preserved for future examination. I can tell you that

garments disclosed nothing spectacular or specific, which
was in itself telling. They were clothes such as anyone might
wear around the house or on a ship. Casual and domestic.
his

—

No

uniform. Nothing in his pockets or sealed secretively in

the fabric of his clothing.

“He

carried

no

identification.

Nothing.

I

have been

in-

formed that the suit he was wearing when the Unop-Patha
found him is a very old model. It was in bad shape, barely
pressure-safe. Certainly would never have passed inspection
on this ship, or on any private vessel that valued its certificate.
It showed evidence of having been repaired, restored, and refitted more times than is legal. I spoke of burning our mystery
man’s clothing. His space suit should have been burned before he stepped into

“Yet

it

kept

him

it.”

alive,”

vaan Leuderwolk pointed

out.

“On

the inner moon.”

“In what circumstances?” Lahtehoja’s brain was running

“Did the colony have a scientific station there? Some
kind of observation post, perhaps for weather watchers?”
“Sorry to disappoint you, Commander.” Vaan Leuderwolk
knew what his superior was thinking. His thoughts had
rushed down the same path of possibilities until some basic
research had shot them down. “According to every available
record on Treetrunk there was not recently and never was any
kind of colonial outpost or base of any kind on either of the
planet’s two moons. They’re too small and their orbits are too
irregular to make them of much use in that regard, and like
most relatively new, rapidly expanding colonies, this one had
no resources to spare on scientific frivolities. Their standardhot.

—

DIRGE

153

communications satellites did the same kind of work
more easily and cheaper.” He paused briefly.
“Of course, whatever annihilated the population took the
time and care to destroy anything that might have been capable of recording what was taking place at the time. Including all communications and monitoring satellites.”
Lahtehoja grunted. “So we don’t even know where this
poor bastard is from.”
Holomusa shook his head sadly. “Not based on his appearissue

ance, his suit, or his clothes, no.

We can’t even say if he’s from

Treetrunk or some passing ship that subsequently vanished.
And that’s all we have to go on.”

“Not quite,” the always calculating commander countered.
“There’s the vessel the Unop-Patha found him in.” Badly as
she wanted to speak to the survivor, it could wait. Turning to
the Ronin's captain, she issued the order for a change of orbit.
Starting at opposite ends, two teams of investigators would

examine the exterior of the unknown survivor’s ship while a
third plumbed its interior. Should they encounter anything of
significance, it would be removed to the cruiser’s labs for

more

detailed analysis. Following this preliminary survey

and investigation the tiny ship itself would be brought aboard
the warship, where further studies could continue in a controlled environment during the flight back to Earth.
Even if the Unop-Patha had not provided details of the
vessel’s location, it would have been easy to find. The inner
moon was not large. But anyone not making a deliberate
search of its far side, she reflected, would never have picked
up the incredibly feeble remnant of a signal that the diminutive craft was emitting. Identifying it proved surprisingly easy.
It was a lifeboat. A lifeboat from a KK-drive ship. What it
was doing crewed by a single psychotic on the inner moon of
Argus V no one could say. It was only when the Ronin was
several days out from Treetrunk and deep in space-plus that a
team of inspecting engineers brought the news.
Certain details had led them to one unlikely but inescapable conclusion. The lifeboat had not been launched
from a ship. Leastwise, not in recent memory. Instead, it had

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

154

been used to travel from a planetary surface to the satellite
where it had been found. A one-way trip with no possibility
of return or of traveling anywhere else. A suicide run or one
of ultimate desperation. Tests of microscopic particles clinging to its interior confirmed the obvious: that Treetrunk had
been the origin of the battered vessel’s most recent and final

—

flight.

What was an

and amateurishly

re-

doing on a colony world like Treetrunk in the

fitted lifeboat
first

ancient, oft-repaired,

place? That was a question for which the most detailed

examination of the boat failed to supply an answer. The

on-board instruments had recorded only

flight data,

craft’s

and there

of answers hidden away in a cabinet
or storage locker waiting to be opened. Only its presumed
pilot, navigator, crew, and sole survivor could provide an

was no magic

bottle full

explanation.

And he wasn’t talking.
The government intended

to

keep the matter as quiet as

possible for as long as possible. Revelation that

someone

might have survived the Treetrunk massacre, much less have
been a living witness to its destruction, would have sparked
an outcry and concurrent media frenzy unprecedented in the
history of interstellar colonization. Under the resultant pressure for information it might have proven well-nigh impossible for the physicians assigned to the case to perform their

work properly.
.

was decided at the highest levels that the comatose survivor’s privacy would be protected at all costs,
along with that of the specialists who were charged with
It

doing their utmost to try to revive him.

The

hospital

was located

in a quiet

the Pacific island of New Ireland.

It

suburb of Kavieng, on

was

from the
attention as it was

as isolated

mainstream of world culture and tridee
possible for such a facility to be while remaining close to
relevant government centers of operation on Bali and in Brisbane. Originally a center for research into and treatment of
tropical diseases, over the years it had been expanded and
modified to serve the needs of a wide area, including and be-

i

DIRGE
yond

155

Bismarck Sea. Workers on the regional tuna and
lobster farms were among its regular clients.
Not everyone knew what the unconscious man in room
fifty-four had been admitted for, nor the cause of his condi-

tion.

the

An

unusually large number of visiting doctors came

and went from his bedside, prescribing, consulting, and conversing among themselves. Some were rumored to be specialists from as far away as Europe and North America, and
several members of the staff recognized one especially famous neurosurgeon who was noted for never leaving his
distinguished practice in Gangzhou.
It

did not matter

how many

physicians visited

room

however. The condition and status of the patient
did not change.
four,

The

it

fifty-

housed

hospital’s regular staff attended to his conventional,

daily needs.

He was

fed and hydrated intravenously. Fifth-

and changed him, making sure the monopole braces that suspended him in a clinical magnetic field
above his resting place did not fail and drop him to the bed or
surge and fling him against the ceiling. Such lifters, which
held a patient aloft in a strong magnetic field, were usually reserved for seriously injured patients such as critical bum victims, and its employment simply to ensure the comfort of one
who could not express feelings of pain puzzled some of the
staff. But orders were orders, and since the facility was notably free of critical cases at that time it did not become anything more serious than a topic of conversation.
That the patient was someone special was evident not only
from the parade of specialists who visited his room but from
the presence of the two plainclothes guards who were always
present outside his door. These men and women were polite
but uninformative, insisting to inquisitive staff that they had
no more idea who the man in room fifty-four’s bed was than
they did. They had been assigned to watch and protect. There
was no need for them to know anything more, and frankly,
floor nurses bathed

they preferred

it

that way.

So the equatorial days

slid into equatorial nights,

with the

tropical sun dropping systematically behind the distant high

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

156

island of New Hanover, without

more than a few people at the
very top level of hospital administration knowing that the
silent, unimpressive figure who lay motionless in comer room
fifty-four was the most important patient on the entire planet.
Certainly Irene Tse was unaware of his prominence. Unlike some of her colleagues, she worked the graveyard shift
because it allowed her to spend many of her daylight hours
diving. Wearing their compact rebreathers, she and her friends
would spend endless hours in the waters framing the dozens
of small islands that speckled the ocean surrounding New

New

Hanover, observing what was still the
world’s most diverse and impressive aggregation of underwater life. Widowed at twenty -three when her husband had
Ireland and

been crushed in a stampede of panicked three hundred kilo
bluefin tuna, at thirty she had yet to remarry. A lively and
spirited personality, she had been attracted to a number of
men and several women, but attraction was not love, affection
not passion.

man

was concerned,
identified on his charts as a Mr. Jones, to her he was just another patient who needed to be cared for, an insensible lump of
humanity who might or might not one day emerge to a greater
or lesser degree from his present state of catalepsy. At two
o’clock in the morning she greeted the guards, both of whom
were engrossed in watching a live windsand race from central
Asia. Even though they all knew each other by sight now, she
was required to produce her ident as well as being physically
recognized by both retinal and heartwave scanners.
Once passed into the room, she began by checking the
monitors. It was not necessary for her to record their readings, as these were transmitted directly to the hospital’s central monitoring facility. Activating the levitator, she changed
the bed and sponge-bathed the patient while he hung suspended in the field, the atoms of his body temporarily magnetized. When she shut down the field he was lowered gently in
fresh hospital gown onto the newly changed bed.
She was preparing to move the osmotic fluid injector to a

As

far as the motionless

new area of his torso when she

in fifty-four

felt

something touch her arm.

DIRGE

157

She might have stopped breathing for a second or two. She
wasn’t sure. What she was certain of was that fingers had
moved against her skin. Looking down, she saw that the patient’s left hand had brushed her wrist. Fallen against it, no
doubt. As she was preparing to make a note of the phenomenon, two of the fingers, the middle and the index, rose.
Trembling, they lightly grazed her for a second time before
falling back, as if exhausted by their own nominal weight.
Looking up, she saw that the two fingers were not all that
had moved. The patient’s head was inclined toward her
though that may simply have been where it fell, she reminded
herself. The open eyes did not startle her
they opened every
morning, to stare at nothing, and closed every night. It was
the moisture at one comer that was unexpected. It could
easily have been the result of a miss with the soft towel following the evening bath. There was a quick and easy way

—

to tell.

Leaning forward and reaching over, she wiped at the bare
trickle with a finger and brought it to her lips. Her tongue communicated the unmistakable taste of salt. The moisture was
a

tear.

Why she voiced her thoughts

she never knew.

It

was not

a

conscious decision, simply part of an automatic response.
“I’ll call the duty doctor,” she whispered tightly. As she

do

of the fingers on the patient’s
left hand suddenly uncurled and reached up to grab her wrist
in a grip of iron.
Lips fluttered, lips that had been kept moist through the justarted to turn to

so, all five

dicious application of treated cloths and expensive salve. For

time in the month and a day since the patient had
been brought into the hospital and placed in his bed, a sound
the

first

emerged from the hitherto unused throat. She had
close to sculpt a word from the whisper.
“Don’t

to lean

.”
.

.

Transfixed by the single word, by the man’s blank stare,
and by the utterly unexpected firmness of his grasp on her

Tse stood there, not moving, waiting to see what would
happen next. She could break the hold if she tried, she felt,
wrist,

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

158

but what effect might that have on the patient, who obviously
wanted her to remain? He had spoken she was certain of

—

that.

Could he also now hear?

“I’ll stay,”

she told him, “but

let

go of

my

arm. You’re

hurting me.”

The
wrist.

slumped away from her
In minutes, she knew, someone at Hospital Central
fingers relaxed, released her,

would have noted the surge in physiological activity within the
room. The duty doctor and staff might already be on their way.
Sure enough, they piled into the

room a couple of minutes

crowding around the bed as close as they dared without
impeding the patient’s access to air. Among the panting arrivals was an imposing woman in expensive designer garb
and a tall, lanky older man wearing the uniform of a highranking military officer. They competed for space and attention with Dr. Chimbu, who bent low over the patient.
“Mr. Jones, can you hear me?” When no response was
forthcoming from the motionless figure in the bed, the doctor looked expectantly up at the woman in the expensive
suit. After exchanging a glance with the officer, he nodded
solemnly and tried again—but differently.
“Mr. Mallory. Alwyn Mallory, can you hear me?” The
doctor licked his lips. “If you can hear me, can you give us a
sign of some kind?”
The single, barely perceptible nod the patient managed by
way of response generated more activity in the room than a
speech from the president of the world federation. Bodies
flew through the outer door, startling the guards. More decorously dressed but heavily armed individuals appeared moments later. In the interim, a steadfast Dr. Chimbu tried to
keep at a proper distance those who sought to crowd the bed.
Only the woman in the suit would not be denied.
“Mr. Mallory,” she whispered in a compassionate and gracious tone, “you are on Earth. You are safe. You were brought
here from the inner moon of Argus Five. Treetrunk. You were
found there on a badly jury-rigged lifeboat of outmoded design, in a spacesuit that was supplying you with a seriously
reduced flow of air, presumably to conserve dwindling suplater,

DIRGE

159

She swallowed delicately. “It is presumed by some that
you came from Treetrunk itself. Others feel you reached the
moon from a passing ship. We everyone would like very
much to know which is the truth of the matter.” When no response was forthcoming she glanced back at the stone-faced
officer and tried again.
plies.

—

—

“Please, Mr. Mallory. If you can say anything, anything at
all,

do

try to

do

so.”

The prone shape on the bed lay still and silent. Its lips did not
move;

arms remained listless at its sides. Then very suddenly, without any warning whatsoever, it began screaming.
“Out, everyone out!” Chimbu was already working on the
its

patient, giving orders, directing nurses.

The

startled

woman

and her entourage were ejected from the room, despite the
halfhearted protests of the man in uniform. Only Chimbu,
two assistants who had arrived with him, and Tse, standing by
the door, stayed.

When

had been sedated and was once more
resting quietly, eyes closed, heart rate and other vitals stabilized, Chimbu drew the nurse aside.
“I saw what happened on the monitor replay. He grabbed
your wrist. Is that correct?”
She nodded slowly. “First I felt something him touch
me. Then he grabbed me.”
“You touched his face in the vicinity of his left eye and
the patient

— —

then put your finger to your mouth.”

Chimbu ’s words were

composed, professional. “What was that about?”
“I saw moisture there. I thought it might be left from the
bath I had just administered. It was salty. He was tearing.”
The doctor nodded. “He also moved his lips. The pickups
that are in place are sensitive, but they’re not perfect.

say anything

Did he

you?” The quiet intensity in the physician’s
voice unsettled her. Chimbu was no automaton, but around
the hospital he was not noted for exhibiting a wide range of
to

emotion.

She licked her
‘Don’t.’

lips

before replying.

“Yes.

”

“That’s all?”

The

doctor’s expression wrinkled.

“

He

said,

‘Don’t’?”

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

160

She nodded, and he seemed disappointed. “Don’t ‘what’?”
“I had the impression he didn’t want me to leave.”
“Ah.” Chimbu looked back at the stabilized, immobile patient for a long moment. “Then stay. If he even hinted that he
might want you to stay, you should stay.”
“Doctor? I have to complete my rounds.” What was happening here? she found herself wondering.
“Not anymore,” he informed her firmly. “As of right now
you are relieved of all other duties. Replacements are already
being scheduled. From this moment you are assigned to this
patient exclusively. Furthermore, you are being placed on extended half-day shifts.” Raising a hand, he forestalled her imminent objections. “You’re also on double pay. No, triple.
Murmuring more to himself than to her, he added, “Administration will approve it on my recommendation. They don’t
have any choice in the matter anyway.” Raising his eyes back
he remembered that he was speaking to another
human being and not to a mechanical or a recorder.
“I would like to make arrangements to move another bed in

to hers,

here, so

you can sleep

on duty.”
She gaped

in the

room when you’re not

officially

him. “Doctor? I take pride in my work, but I
have a life outside it, you know.”
“I know; I know.” He made mollifying gestures. “You’ll be
fully compensated for your sacrifice. And if the patient beat

gins speaking rationally to others,
leave.

you

will

be permitted to

On extended vacation, at hospital expense.”
“

Her eyes widened. ‘Permitted’ to leave? What is this?”
Looking past him, she focused on the man in the bed. The ordinary, now officially semicomatose man whose brief stirring
had aroused an unexpected tidal wave of activity. “Who is
this ‘Mr. Jones’ that you called Alwyn Mallory?”
“You’re a good nurse, Tse. You don’t miss much.” Chimbu
pushed his physician’s probe back from his forehead to the
of his skull so that it pressed tightly against the receding
hairline. “You know about Treetrunk?”
She searched his face. He looked suddenly tired, weighed
down by unexpected and unsought responsibility. “I’m not
crest

DIRGE
dead, so of course

I

161

know. What’s that to do with this Mallory

person?”
“If you’re going to attend

him you have to know, so you
might as well know now.” The hospital’s chief of staff was as
serious as Tse had ever seen him. “He may be a survivor of
the massacre.”

Overwhelmed by

the implication, for a long

moment

she

had nothing to say. Finally she stammered, “There are no survivors of what happened on Treetrunk.”
“You heard what the woman from the bureau said. He was
found in a lifeboat on the planet’s inner moon, traumatized
and speechless. He might be a refugee from a passing ship, or
someone a disgruntled crew kicked out. Or ... he might be a
survivor of the catastrophe.

deep into her startled eyes.
“Yes, Doctor.”

The only survivor.” He peered
“You understand now? Do you?”

As much

as anyone could understand the

impossible, she thought.

“He wants you to stay. Or he might have meant something
else when he whispered ‘Don’t’ to you. We don’t know yet. We
don’t know anything. No one knows except him.” Turning, he
gazed speculatively at the figure in the bed. “His reactiveness
tonight might have been a one-time fluke. Or it might be the
harbinger of future stirrings. We can’t take any chances with
this man. He might be nothing important. Or he might be able

manage only another sentence or two. They might be sentences twenty billion humans are waiting to hear.” He took a
to

step

back from her.

“Until

we know what he meant when he

said ‘Don’t’ to

you, you are to stay with him. Continue with your usual duties. Bathe him, check his hydration and nutrients and medicine drip. Stay close.” His tone softened. “I
statue, not a

know you’re not a

machine. You can use the room’s

tridee.

What-

make you as personally comfortable as posbe sent in. The room monitors will remain on,

ever you want to
sible will

recording twenty- four hours a day just as they have been for
more than a month, so you don’t have to worry about missing

something of significance. If one of his eyelids twitches,
will be noted and recorded.”

it

162

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

—

” She tried to gather herself, to make sense of
everything that had happened in the past few frenetic min“
what else should I do?”

“What

utes.

—

Reaching out to her, Chimbu gently squeezed her shoulder.
“Be here. For him. If he wants to whisper, you listen. If he
”
wants to converse, you talk
Do you want me to ask
She nodded. “Do you want me
.

.

.

him about Treetrunk?”
The doctor considered. “No. The important

thing right

encourage any progress in his condition. I’m still
the Chief of Staff here, and I’ll shield you. From the government, from the military. So will my colleagues. If he speaks,
let him talk about whatever he wants. If he improves enough,

now

is

to

we’ll consider putting questions to
his health is the
lets

most important

meantime
Don’t worry if he

him later.

thing.

something important or relevant slip,

it

In the

will

—

be recorded.”

He released her shoulder.
Around them, curative instrumentation and devices hummed
and clicked softly. On the bed, a single figure lay unmoving. Tse
and Chimbu contemplated it together.
“Is there anything else, Doctor?”
“Yes,” Chimbu murmured. “If the opportunity arises, be
kind to him.

He needs it.”

12

aving heard only one word in the course of one month,
Tse did not expect tirades to spill from the mouth of the af-

I

I

But she was surprised when, upon awakening on the
morning of the fourth day after being moved into the room,
she sat up rubbing sleep from her eyes to find Alwyn Mallory
flicted.

staring at her.

Nothing else had changed; nothing in the room had been
disturbed, though she knew that down in Central doctors and
other important people must by now be glued to viewscreens
in response to the patient’s action. It must be demanding a
tremendous effort on their part, she reflected as she turned
and slid her legs off the inflatable bed, for them to stay out of
the room.
Not only was he staring at her, he had raised his head
slightly to get a better look.

Now it fell back, the inches it had

inclined forward proving too

much

for the man’s

weakened

muscles to sustain.
“Don’t stress yourself,” she heard herself saying to him.
“I’ll come over there.” Aware that monitors were everywhere,
including the bathroom, she simply slipped out of the sleeping gauze and into her uniform.
By the time she sat down in the chair that had been placed
by the right side of the bed, he had ignored her advice to remain still and had turned his head to face her. Then he smiled.
So brightly unexpected was it, so warm and full of thanks, of
the simple joy of being alive, that this time it was her own eye
she found herself daubing at.
“Well, that’s better.” It was all she could think of to say.
163

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

164

“Who

are

you? Where

am I?” His

lips

moved

slowly, with

be constructed
and approved by a separate portion of his brain before he attempted its actual verbalization.
“You’re in Golman Memorial Hospital, South Pacific Recareful deliberation, as if each syllable

gion. I

had

to

am your duty nurse, Irene Tse.”

shake your hand, Irene, but you told me not to stress
myself.” A different sort of smile this time, more calculating,
“I’d

of looming uncertainties. “I don’t like taking orders, but you I think I’ll listen to. Not because I have to, but
because it pleases me.” Defying her admonition, he raised his

reflective

head again, holding it up longer this, time. With each movement, each word, he seemed to grow stronger, not weaker.
“You said ‘South Pacific Region.’ I’m on Earth?”
As she glanced over at his readouts in what she hoped was
an inconspicuous manner, she did not comment on the obvious. He looked around, inspecting the room.
“How long have I been asleep?” His eyebrows tried to

“They must have knocked me out for the jump here.”
“No one knocked you out. You traveled to Earth and arrived here in a cataleptic state.” Reflexively, she put a hand on
his lower arm. “As of this morning, you’ve been here in hos-

knot.

pital thirty-four days.”

“Thirty-four

.

.

.

?” Leaning back against the pillow, he

“Not asleep. In coma.” She
nodded gravely. “I didn’t wake up at all? I mean, if I did I
don’t remember it, but it’s hard to think of being unconscious
all that time. I don’t feel like I’ve been out for more than a day
gazed pensively

at the ceiling.

or two.”

“The mind plays wonderful tricks on the body.” She smiled
reassuringly. “Sometimes the body plays back.”
She was acutely aware of the omnidirectional pickups that
were judiciously placed around the room, of the fact that
everything that was being said or done was being observed
and recorded by a multitude of devices. It shamed her. Whatever he had gone through, this man deserved his privacy. It
might never be given back to him, she knew. Issues of an

DIRGE

165

order of magnitude greater than the personal desires of one

man were at stake.
“Who found me?” Though

he had asked a question, it
seemed to her that his thoughts were concentrated elsewhere.
He had posed it almost absently.
“I don’t know.” Before she could finish, her recorder vibrated gently against her.

Removing it, she found information on the remotely activated page. “Some people called the
Unop-Patha. A minor race about which not much is known
except that they’re shy and inoffensive. They just happened to
be in the right place to pick up the signal from your ship.” A
line of questions appeared on the screen immediately after
this information. Consenting only to the first, she firmly
tucked the recorder back in its holder. “I understand that the
vessel they found you in was of an old, discontinued type and
wasn’t in very good condition.”
He laughed then, a good sign. It was followed by a spate of
coughing that was not. Unable to raise his hand all the way to

manage

When
his

it,

she

he
felt

her slip the drinking tube between his lips.
he’d had enough, she gently withdrew it from

let

mouth.

enough for now. You’ve been on osmotics for a
long time, and you don’t want to shock your system with too
much real drink and food too soon.”
“Yes I do,” he shot back. “I want to shock the hell out of it.
I want tea, and coffee, and twenty-year-old bourbon. I want
fish, and canned goods, and crispy vegetables, and cremated
dead cow.”
Her mouth was firm. “How about some applesauce?”
“How about you ?” He broke off his rejoinder and in“That’s

—

haled deeply, slowly. “I can’t argue with you. I can’t argue
with anybody right now. ‘Applesauce’!” Astonishingly, his
expression grew mischievous. It was about the last thing she

would have expected. “Will you feed

it

to

me?”

Mindful of their significant unseen audience, she kept her
response coolly professional. “That is part of my job.”
“Good! Then I will have some applesauce.”

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

166

he said nothing more, she hazarded a cautious
prompt. “Don’t you want to talk some more?”
Now he was grinning broadly. “Applesauce. Your idea.”
Afterward he slept, ignorant of the frenzy of activity his
awakening had galvanized within government and military
circles. Indifferent to a flood of entreaties, she refused to

When

wake him early or otherwise intrude on the peacefulness that
seemed to have come over the rechristened Alwyn Mallory.
True to his word. Dr. Chimbu and the rest of the medical team
supervising the precious patient’s care backed her decision.
Two more days passed in recovery for Mallory. Two days
during which the inner workings of government lurched for-

of semiparalysis. Two days in which extraordinary efforts somehow succeeded in keeping an always
ravenous media ignorant of the lone man in room fifty-four of

ward

in a state

Golman Memorial Hospital on the island of New Ireland.
The intentional isolation helped. Even in the latter half of the

the

twenty-fourth century.

New Ireland was not an easy place to

visit.

In those forty-eight hours Mallory went from barely being
able to raise his head to being able to feed himself, from hesi-

voluminously. His apparent progress was underlain by the very real
medical fear that he could lapse back into coma at any moment. Chimbu and others put their careers on the line by sup-

tating in the clouded search for

words

to talking

porting nurse Tse’s determination not to pressure the man in
their care for details or ask if he knew anything about what

had happened on Treetrunk.
Following lunch on the third day, her forbearance and the
medical staff’s conviction were rewarded.
“A couple of days ago, when I mentioned the kind of ship
you’d been found in, you laughed at me.” She came toward
the bed, having just dumped his lunch dishes and utensils in
the room’s recycler.

This time he only chuckled. “I remember. You said that it
was old and not in very good condition. That’s hardly surprising.” When he was alert, like now, she found that his eyes

had a wonderful twinkle.

“It

was an old

lifeboat, freighter

DIRGE
class. I got

167

cheap, since the masters of the cargo ship that
left it behind on Treetrunk knew it would cost too much to
renovate it to the point where it could pass a safety-board init

spection again. Fixing

it

up, puttering around with

its in-

was my hobby. Kept me busy whenever I started to
think too much. I never expected it to actually fly anywhere
again, much less offworld.” His gaze met hers. “Did you
know that I was a member of the original survey team of the
ChagosT
The name meant nothing to her, and she told him so. Down
in Central, where hospital communications had been linked
in half a dozen ways with centers of power all across the
nards,

’

planet, technicians scrambled while several of their superiors

digested the patient’s disclosure in stunned silence.
To Mallory, however, the innocently ignorant Tse clearly
required elaboration. “The Chagos was the starship that dis-

covered and carried out the first surveys of Treetrunk. Since
there was no reason for the people who brought me from
there to here to presume that kind of personal connection, I
guess no one made it. Also, I used to space under the name

Alwyn Lleywynth.” He

grinned. “Finally got tired of people
not being able to spell or say it, and had it changed officially

when I settled on Treetrunk.”
“That’s interesting,” she told him, nodding. “I have a
feeling that you’re right and that no one made the connec-

They would be making it now, she knew without a
glance at any of the pickups. Making connections and trying
to draw conclusions.
“I was good at what I did. I’m also an accomplished
bitcher, which didn’t endear me to many of my colleagues,
tion.”

But in spite of my customary complaining, I liked
Treetrunk. Liked it a lot. Enough to ask for my release and stay
behind when the Chagos finally left. I helped build the place,
worked on some of the first infrastructure for Weald and a lot
of smaller towns. Always kept to myself as much as I could,
though. I didn’t much care to be around people. It was one of
the reasons I originally went into deep space. It was one of the
reasons I chose a new world to be my home and final resting
I’m

afraid.

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

168

place.” His voice fell slightly. “That’s all changed now. When
in
I get out of here I think I might like to settle down

New

York, or Lala, or Joburg.

I

want people around

me now.

Lots

of people. Swarms of ’em.”
Without warning, he began to tremble, the covering sheet
shivering above his torso like rapidly advancing bleached

The contrast between his strengthening voice and frail
body could not have been more dramatic. When she started to
rise, he lifted an arm to detain her.
fog.

he whispered shakily. “I’m all right.” His
expression pleaded. “Would you I swear I’m not trying anywould you just, hold me? For a moment. Just
thing here

“I’m

all right,”

—

—

.

.

hold me.”
Rising from her chair, she tentatively took a seat on the bed
alongside him. Bending low, she put her arms around his
shoulders. Immediately his head slid into the crook of her
arm, like a bird finding its nest. Hesitant at first, she brought
her legs up onto the bed and slid them carefully next to his.

Then she lay down beside him.
More than an hour had passed when she awoke,

quietly

surprised to discover that she had fallen asleep next to him.
Around her the machines ticked and whispered. The room

was unchanged. No one had disturbed them.
Moving her head, she found that he was awake,
her, his eyes

swallowing every inch of her as

if

staring at

she were a

cool, invigorating potion, a silent libation for the soul.

Uncer-

and a little confused at what she was feeling, she sat up
quickly on the side of the bed.
“Relax. Take it easy,” he told her. Then he smiled afresh.
“Hey, did you hear what I just said? Me, telling you to relax
and take it easy. Want me to check your vitals?”
She had to smile back. This man, who had obviously

tain

been through an experience too horrible to imagine, was irrepressible. She found herself liking him instead of pitying
him. He sensed the shift in her attitude and was pleased.
“So you became a citizen of Treetrunk.” She rested a hand on
upper arm, not entirely for therapeutic purposes this time.
“Yes,” he told her. The smile faded away, and he began to

his

DIRGE

169

shake again. In response to her look of alarm he willed his
body to relax, forced the muscles to still. “It’s okay. I’m not
going to scream again.”

She blinked. “You remember screaming?”
“I remember.” He nodded. “I just couldn’t stop it. I didn’t
want to stop it. It was so easy, to scream. It blotted everything
out.

A little.” He began to fidget beneath the sheet. “I’m sick

of lying down. Help me sit up.”
Immediately she reached for the bed’s remote. “I can raise
you to any angle you
“No, goddammit!” He was emphatic. “I want to sit up! Me,

—

not the

damn bed.”

She assisted him, wondering as she did so what Dr.
Chimbu would have to say about stressing the patient. But no
one interrupted them, either in person or via communicator,
and with her aid in a couple of minutes he was sitting up
straight, his back propped against the pillows.
“How do you feel?” Her concern was a mixture of professionalism and something else. “Any nausea? That would be

—

normal.”

“Not for me it wouldn’t. A little dizzy, maybe. That’s all.”
Looking past her, his gaze focused for the first time on the
view through the room’s large window. From his location in a
top-floor

comer of the

hospital he could see

palm

trees

and

A

ships in the harbor and the blue, blue water of a tropical sea.
flock of flying foxes was flapping from east to west over the
harbor, a dark motile cloud scattered

among towering white

cumulus.
Turning to her, he asked in a calm, quiet voice and without
warning, “Would you like to know what happened to my
adopted home? To Argus Five, also known as Treetrunk?”

Down

in Central,

and

in linked

monitoring stations

across the globe, instant pandemonium ensued.

all

13

was a good life. Mallory was happy with his decision to resign his position on the Chagos in order to become one of the
first settlers of the new world. That choice would not make
him rich, but perhaps his progeny, if he ever had any, would

1

1

one day find

it

useful to be able to boast that their great-

grandfather, or whatever, had been

among

the original sur-

veyors and colonizers of Argus V.
Despite his irascible, often contentious personality, he

had no difficulty finding work. As a jack-of-all-trades on
KK-drive craft like the Chagos and a retired ship’s engineer
and at a precocious age, at that he was a master of many
skills that were highly valued in the new colony. Disdaining
seductive offers from the rapidly burgeoning municipality of
Weald and the innumerable companies and concerns that specialized in abetting the development of new colonies, he set
himself up as an independent consultant. Wealth did not flow

—

he made a more than adequate living. In
his ample free time he visited many of the beautiful and as yet
unexplored regions of the temperate equatorial belt or enjoyed
in his direction, but

the

home and shop whose

construction he had supervised.

on an uninhabited mountainside deep within a
choice patch of virgin alien woods gave him the freedom to
tinker with the surplus freighter-class lifeboat he had purchased on a whim for an astonishingly modest sum.
When he needed credit he would choose from among the
many standing assignments on offer. Given the headlong forward expansion of the colony, these were always in plentiful
Its isolation

170

DIRGE
supply. There

171

were few newly arriving settlers with his knowledge and experience. His expertise was eagerly sought.
In this manner five years passed during which Mallory,
while not entirely happy such a state of existence not being
in his nature
was forced to concede that he was less discontented than usual. When compelled to visit the city for those
necessary items he could not manufacture or grow himself,
he tolerated the occasional company of others. As a known
recluse who was irritable by nature, he was not sought out except when his professional abilities were in demand. This
suited both him and everyone else on the planet just fine.
He did not hear the general announcement that interrupted
all tridee programming. That particular morning was unusually bright and clear, even for pristine, unpolluted Treetrunk.
As the sun rose and warmed his mountainside he ate a
leisurely breakfast on the hand-hewn porch and then prepared to spend a stimulating and enjoyable day working in the
simple shed that housed his shop and hobbies.
The walk from his home to the outbuilding was a short
one. Though he had built a covered walkway to shield him
from the rain and snow of Argus V’s wet season, he had no
need of it that day. The sun was out, and there was hardly a
cloud in the sky. The shed itself was a single large enclosed
structure stained brown and green to match the surrounding
trees. Such a large, unmasked building would have attracted
the attention of the passing curious. Having no wish to be disturbed and being fanatical in his desire for privacy, Mallory
had caused both his home and workplace to be camouflaged
from the rapidly expanding population. Newcomers in particular he sought to avoid. They were invariably effusive and
friendly, two qualities he did not seek in neighbors.
Four months before, he had taken the old lifeboat out for a
short flight from the capital district over to Demure and back.
While successful and as smooth as could be expected, the
journey had predictably loosened some internal components.
Entering the open boat, he found his tools where he had last
left them and settled down happily to effect the necessary

—

repairs.

—

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

172

Several times during the morning he thought he heard the
echo of distant, dull booming. Despite the absence of clouds

when he had made the walk from home to shop, he put the
noise down to an approaching thunderstorm. Rough weather
could blow up on Treetrunk at any time, and with summer
approaching abrupt atmospheric disturbances could be expected. Or it might have been a construction team excavating
new foundations for large buildings on the outskirts of Weald
itself. Or perhaps it was simply boisterous adolescents working mischief closer to his home. He gave the random, sporadic
echoes barely a second thought.
It was nearly two when, sweaty but satisfied, he set the

something
to eat. As he often did, he’d labored through the lunch hour.
One of the pleasures of working for oneself, he reflected as he
industrial-strength tools aside

and resolved

to get

wiped at his face and rose to leave the lifeboat, was the
freedom to eat when one was hungry instead of when it was
expected.

Exiting the shed, he started back toward the house—and
stopped. Shading his eyes with one hand, he stared in the direction of the capital. Rising into the crystalline air, smoke
from numerous sources drifted together to form an enormous
dirty

brown cloud

the hell

.

.

.

?

that

had begun

to

block out the sun. What

he thought.

he hurried back to the house. Some
kind of widespread industrial disaster had struck Weald. At
the moment he could not imagine its nature. Modern fire prevention techniques prevented destructive blazes from spreading freely from house to house, building to building. Yet the
distant glow of flames and widely separated pillars of smoke

Moving a

little faster,

suggested not only spreading, but that the conflagration had
broken out simultaneously in different parts of the city.

Hurrying straight to his den, he activated the tridee and
waited for the first three-dimensional image to congeal above
the floor. Colors and shapes appeared, but did not coalesce.
No matter how much he fiddled with the controls he could not
induce the flickering polygons and sparking clouds to come
together into anything recognizable. Similar static dominated

DIRGE
every infochute. Then he lost the

173
static, too.

The

air in the

room was silent.
Something was very wrong.

Not panicked

but anxious and concerned, he rushed
back outside. If anything, the smoke cloud had grown larger
in his absence.

yet,

He couldn’t be certain, but it seemed as if new

smoke pillars were appearing even as he watched. The recurrent booms he had heard before were sounding more frequently now.

He had never seen a city under attack, but he had seen tridee
recordings, both fictional and historical.

Who would assault a

defenseless colony and why, he struggled to imagine. His first
thought was of the AAnn. The thranx insisted the aggressive

would jump on any advantage it could find.
But Treetrunk was much too cold to suit them, far from the
nearest of their own worlds, and did not even lie along a potentially Empire-threatening vector. Nor was it a storehouse of
reptilian species

valuable resources that could not be found elsewhere.
The same reasons only more so applied to the thranx. Like
the great majority of humankind his feelings toward the insectoids

was ambivalent. They wanted to be

friends, but

most

people were not anxious to jump at the opportunity. Distance
remained largely because of the species’ appearance. Having
spent thousands of years battling the thranx ’s

much

smaller

very distant terrestrial relatives, it would take time before
people were ready to invite them into their homes.

Who

then? he wondered as he stood stunned and
watching the distant destruction blossom. Surely not the
else,

Quillp, as inoffensive a species as
tered. Still, the Quillp

humans had

were colonizers and

yet encoun-

settlers, too,

and

of influence lay much closer to that of the rapidly
expanding humans than did the empire of the AAnn, though
not the thranx.
their sphere

Might

be a new, previously unencountered race? Standing there on the mountainside watching the city he had
helped to found bum, that seemed to him at that moment the

most

it

likely explanation.

logically sophisticated.

Whoever

it

was, they were techno-

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

174

Retreating back into the house, he returned to the porch carrying a handheld scoper. Methodically, he played it over the

perimeter of the great cloud, then scanned the interior. There
was no sign of aircraft. The descending explosives were extraatmospheric. They were being launched from orbit and then

A

more distant pillar of
guided to their targets with precision.
rising smoke marked the location of the city’s shuttleport. Two
others indicated the sites of outlying towns.
While thorough, the intent of the attack was apparently not

Had that been the case, he would not
have heard multiple booms while he had been working on his

to annihilate completely.

salvaged lifeboat: only one overwhelming one as a single

nuke obliterated the

entire city. Instead,

it

was

still

there, al-

He

did not doubt that the attackers,
whoever they were, possessed such weapons of mass destruction or the ability to manufacture them. Any sentience suffi-

beit burning furiously.

ciently

advanced

to negotiate space-plus

had

to first achieve

nuclear technology. You couldn’t learn to manipulate the components of other space until you had mastered the minutiae of
this one.

What were they after? What did they want? If total obliterasuggested they wanted something intact. He couldn’t imagine anything that an invading force
could not have acquired simply through threat. The only ex-

tion

was not their aim,

it

was that the attackers wanted to protect
their identity. Based on the collapse of planetary communications and on what he could see from the front of his home, it
was a hypothesis that gained credence with every passing moment. He had no doubt that the space-minus communications
facility near the shuttleport was one of the first sites to be targeted. Almost certainly the other one at Chagos Downs had

planation, he decided,

suffered a similar fate.

suggested that the aliens knew what targets to hit
first and where to find them. That put the lie to the notion that
the attackers were a new, previously unknown and unencounIf so,

it

tered species. There were always KK-drive ships in orbit

around Treetrunk, and they would have noted and communicated the presence of any alien vessels embarked on a survey

DIRGE

175

of strategically important locations. Therefore the attackers
must have arrived with a carefully laid-out, premeditated
plan of assault based on prior research already in hand.

Even

unannounced arrival of one or more large
alien craft would have been noted by the government and as a
so, the

matter of course passed along to the citizenry through the
usual media channels. He had seen no such bulletin on the
tridee, not the previous night or this morning during breakfast, when everything had been operating fine.

He was missing something, he realized. Something imporWhatever

was, the authorities had missed it as well.
Not that there was much they could do to stave off a determined attack by a properly equipped military force. As a new,
developing colony Treetrunk had only domestic policing
tant.

it

weaponry of its own. Humankind was not
the

known

at

war with any of

Disagreements that revolved
around matters of commerce and settlement were settled by
discussion, sometimes loud but never physical. Interstellar
war on a large scale was too complex and expensive a proposition to be viable. Even the AAnn realized that and limited
intelligent species.

their occasional depredations, usually in thranx territory,

to isolated, confinable piratical acts.

No

one thought of

as-

saulting an entire world.

Until now, he told himself grimly.

Having returned to the notably aggressive AAnn, his
thoughts once again considered what reason the bipedal reptilians might have for launching so violent an assault on an
innocuous colony world. Try as he might, he could not conceive of one. Of course, he was speculating from the standpoint of human motivation. The AAnn might have reasons for
attacking Treetrunk that were quite incomprehensible to him
or to any other human.
He needed information. In the absence of the usual tridee
chutes, he would have to try something else.
Rushing back into the shop, he activated the antique communications console on board the lifeboat. Designed to scan
and decipher every possible comer of the spectrum that might
contain downloadable information, under his direction

it

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

176

began by checking the bands that carried information from
ship to ship and ship to ground. There was plenty of chatter, but
the atit was all in colors and hisses unknown to the unit. It was
tackers, he decided. Talking among themselves. It was maddening to know that he was seeing and hearing the answers to

most pressing questions but could not decrypt them.
Changing focus, he sampled more familiar bandwidth. As
expected, all the usual tridee chutes were either dead or suffocating in visual static. Weald was silent. So were Chagos
Downs and Waldburg and every other town that boasted its
own chute or uplink. Nothing came from above, the dozen or

his

so communications satellites proving as quiet as their landbased transmitters and translators. Destroyed during the initial attack,

most probably.

It

was what he would have done.

Blind and isolate your prey first, then butcher at leisure.
He had almost given up hope and had decided to fly his
truck as close to the city’s outskirts as he dared in hopes of

was happening when something flickered in
the lifeboat’s viewing alcove. It was smaller than similar images would have been in his house because the display space
was smaller.
What he was picking up, distorted and intermittent, came
from a mobile remote, an automated unit that was the property of one of Treetrunk’s two independent media concerns.
He identified it by the small rotating logo that hovered above
the floor of the lifeboat. There was sound but no commentary.
Whoever had been traveling with the unit was quite likely
dead, murdered by the invaders. Since communications both
local and extraplanetary had been among the invaders’ first
targets it was not unreasonable to assume that everyone back
at the media concern’s main offices were dead by now as well.
Unconcerned and oblivious to the fate of its human operators, the independently powered robot soldiered on, obedilearning what

probably
no longer existed. No home or commercial receiver could
pick up its pictures. For one thing, such interception of a
ently transmitting tridee

images

to a base unit that

commercial signal would have been illegal. It would take a
skilled technician working with specialized equipment to

DIRGE

make

the grab.

Someone

177

like Mallory, for

example, working

with something like a lifeboat’s all-encompassing emergency
instrumentation.
Sitting alone in the boat’s cockpit,

he watched in stunned
silence as the mobile unit’s pickup roved the city. There was
fire everywhere, and smoke that obscured many of the images. Trained to seek out the visible, the unit kept moving. In
the absence of directives from an accompanying commentator or its

home

base,

it

relied

programmed into its memory.
Not every building was on

on the fallback

fire.

instructions

Some had been

spared or

missed. Others had been melted, and gaping, smoking craters

marked

the prior location of those that

obliterated.

had been completely

A man appeared from off-image left, running at

an angle across the pickup’s field of view. Dirty and bleeding,
his clothes tom, he carried a baby in his arms while a teenage

boy ran along

parallel to him.

The man kept looking around

as if in search of help or a refuge.

He might have been an of-

worker or a technician or a civil servant.
The boy looked back, and as he did so, his head vanished in
a rainbow puff of blood, brains, bone, and flame. Ducking to
his left, the man tried to bend as low as possible while
shielding the child in his arms. One of his legs exploded, and
he went down. Unlike the teen, who had perished in silence, a
horrified Mallory heard him scream. The mobile remote
picked up the shrill sound with detached efficiency.
Dumped from cradling arms, the infant went rolling across
fice

the street.

It

too

was screaming. One

leg gone, the

man began

himself across the street toward the child. As Mallory
bit down on the back of one index finger hard enough to draw
to pull

blood, shapes appeared out of the smoke, advancing from the

There were two of them, tall and straight, clad in protective helmets and bulky body armor. One of them walked up to
the crawling man, put the tip of a long, unrecognizable instruleft.

ment against the side of his head, and activated the device.
The man’s head blew apart, blood and fragments of bone
splattering against the armored legs. The killer’s companion

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

178

walked over to the squalling infant and without hesitation repeated the action. Mallory ordered his body to breathe.
The mobile unit moved sideways, traveling along the
street, emotionlessly following its programming. When it
found a scene that would trip something within its set of internal commands, it would stop and focus, then move on
again. Twice Mallory lost the image; both times frantic manipulation of the lifeboat’s outdated but still functional instrumentation brought it back. As he worked at the controls
something large and powerful screamed past overhead, loud
enough to be heard within the lifeboat that was inside the
shed. Transfixed by the images he was seeing on the tridee,
he ignored the sonorous echo of the object’s passing.
Drifting aimlessly in a fallback

news search

pattern, the

mobile reached Weald’s central plaza. Carefully and lovingly
laid out to resemble a series of concentric gardens, the square
had been planted with blossoming plants and exotic growths
gathered from all over Treetrunk. Many of these careful
transplants were dead or dying now, incinerated or blasted
square’s central fountain, a gift

from

the populace of the enormously successful colony of

New

from

their planters.

The

was a shapeless lump of ceramic and composite slag.
Water from broken source pipes ran in a steady, aimless
Riviera,

stream into surrounding drains.
Several air repulsion-type vehicles were clustered together

near the center of the square, hard by the demolished fountain.
All boasted protrusions that, while not immediately identifiable, were easily recognized as weapons. More of the armored

body shapes were moving about nearby. In addition, there
were a large number of figures engaged in other activities.
The mobile moved in closer. For some reason it was not
immediately noticed by the invaders. Or perhaps, having already destroyed all known communications facilities, they
felt no urgency to eliminate a single mobile device of obviously mechanical origins. The tridee image in the lifeboat
flickered and danced. Cursing, hammering on the console,
Mallory fought to

A

stabilize

it.

small vehicle arrived and halted. Several of the

more

DIRGE
lightly clad figures

moved to

its

side

179

and helped those aboard

Mallory leaned forward slightly, expecting to see
valuable electronic components or containers full of inforto unload.

mational recordings. The objects the aliens disbursed were
somewhat larger, though equally recognizable.
Bodies.

Whether they were dead or simply paralyzed Mallory could
not tell. In any event, none of the dozen or so exhibited any
visible signs of damage. They were all, insofar as he could tell
from the unsteady, intermittent image, female. Ranging in approximate age from fourteen to forty, they were carefully laid
out on a prepared portable platform.
Other figures came forward. They carried small devices
that Mallory at first thought were sidearms. They were not.
Three of the figures immediately set to work on the nearest of
the neatly laid out torsos. Silently, stolidly, having

no one to
lament with, Mallory watched as the aliens carefully and efficiently sliced into the abdomen and removed, insofar as he
was able to tell, the complete set of female reproductive organs: uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, everything.

Wet and

were smoothly transferred to a waiting container from which smoke/mist drifted, indicating that its integlistening, these

rior

was either very hot or very cold.

Their excision completed, they

moved on to the

next body

who looked to be close to but not quite
twenty. Whether the woman they left behind was still alive or
not Mallory could not tell. It did not matter to the aliens, who
made no attempt to close the gaping wound they left behind,
in line, that

of a

girl

and he found that he did not want to know.
He wanted to look away, to stare at something else, to put
what he was seeing out of his mind, but he could not. The mobile unit, following

programming, continued to focus on the
grisly biopsies, following the horribly inevitable course of one
after another. So stunned was Mallory’s system by what he was
witnessing that the shock was sufficient to suppress even his
nausea reflex. At least, it was until he saw one of the eviscerated women twitch and try to sit up. Not through any dint of
its

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

180

empathy but operating strictly from efficiency, one of the patrolling armored figures noticed the movement and shot her before she could rise far enough to comprehend the gaping crater
in her belly She had been granted the mercy of indifference.
Devoid of involvement beyond its unemotional programming, the mobile was relentless. It watched, it transmitted, it
commented not. Pausing before the seventh helpless, prone
one of the alien exenteraters paused to adjust his protective gear. In the course of so doing it momentarily removed its helmet. Reacting to this action, a companion did
likewise. Mallory stared. Humans. Other humans. Then he
took note of the subtle differences, of the prismatically colfigure,

ored

hair, the too-perfect posture, the

sculpted countenances.

Not human.
Pitar.

Why? he felt himself screaming silently. Why, why, why?
What reason could there be for the Pitar to attack an inoffenand harmless colony like Treetrunk without warning,
without reason? It made no sense. Exultant madness ruled
the day, and dementia had taken control of the plenum. And
what were the invaders doing, what could they possibly want,
sive

with the preserved reproductive organs of human females?
To these hopeless questions he could configure no rational
answers. It made no sense, none whatsoever. Surely the Pitar
knew the consequences of their actions! Not only humankind
but sentience throughout the Arm would react with outrage,
with anger, and then with retribution. Whatever they hoped to
gain through the successful fulfillment of this atrocity would
be infinitely transcended by the devastation a united and fully
mobilized humankind would wreak on the perpetrators of the
outrage.

Which would only happen, he realized with abrupt, exquisite
clarity, if the identity of the perpetrators became known.
He was already moving when one of the body-armored
Pitar finally took notice of the hovering mobile, turned di-

and fired. By the time the
tridee image vanished, Mallory was out of the shed and racing
back toward the house.
rectly

toward

it,

raised a weapon,

DIRGE

181

There was no need for structures and facilities on Treetrunk to be camouflaged. Who would want to attack a colony
with a restricted habitation zone, limited industry, and still
underexploited resources? Only someone who wished to be
avoided by his fellow settlers would seek to distance himself

from them and to make an effort to conceal his abode. There
were no true hermits on Argus V, but there were a number

who

cherished their privacy.

skill

and the wherewithal

Among these,

to render

only one had the

himself and his habitation

semivisible.

That wouldn’t save him, Mallory knew.

It

might keep him

from discovery by the invading forces for a while, but eventually they would seek him out. They had to. The horrors they
were committing demanded no one be left alive to speak of
what had been done. The Pitar would scour the habitation
zone for colonists and the cold wastes of the north and south
for exploration parties. If they carried life detectors they

would be able
tory patterns.

down and analyze even minor ambulaOn such instruments a human being left a sigto track

nature as clear and sharp as a tridee paragon. Only a deep
cave or oceanic environment could mask the individual auto-

graph, and he didn’t doubt that the Pitar would search beneath the ground and sea as well.

He

couldn’t

remember from

the last time he

had viewed

news if any KK-drive ships were currently in orbit. If they
were, none were likely to be warships. Undoubtedly their unthe

lucky crews had been

among

the

first to fall

Pitarian treachery. Vessels stopping at

victim to the

Argus could not con-

tinue to disappear without notice, but given recent shipping
patterns he estimated it might be several months before an-

other called at Treetrunk. Several months would give the
Pitar more than enough time to search the length and breadth

of the planet for possible survivors and then depart without
notice.

They would know where

what zones were being
surveyed for minerals or development; what areas were under
consideration for future expansion; where important communications, power-generating, and transportation facilities
to look:

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

182

were

situated.

And why not? After the first several calls, their

regular visits to Treetrunk had ceased to be restricted. Why
circ umscribe the movements of amiable, considerate, conge-

had been helping the colony to
expand, they had been recording and consolidating data for
the day of the attack.
They might not immediately notice his home and shop, isolated and concealed as they were on the side of the mountain.
But after securing the few cities they would methodically
move on to the larger towns, then the smaller villages, and finally to outlying farms, infrastructure postings, and individual
structures. Even the forest would be no refuge. It would

nial friends? All the time they

be expected that some people would flee into the Argusian
wilderness in search of safety. Ruthless and relentless, the
well-prepared Pitar would have anticipated that and would
have come prepared for it. Mallory’s expression tightened.
After the cities and towns, there would be hunts. Human
hunts.

maintenance craft
would already have been captured or destroyed. A competent
attacking force would first secure the space around a world

Any

ships, satellites, or free-orbiting

before turning

its

ports and airfields

attention to the helpless surface. Shuttle-

would be next

in line for destruction or

occupation, together with any craft capable of flight that happened to be on the ground. Once confident of having elimi-

nated a target’s ability to fight or flee in atmosphere or free
space, invaders could settle down to methodically exterminating the local population.

A

few companies and citizens operated aircraft of their
own, he knew. But such craft, while they might preserve their
owners for a while longer, could not escape the attentions of

much

faster, higher-flying, orbit-capable shuttle craft.

Any-

thing with the ability to reach orbit required the long runways
and support facilities of a port, or in an emergency a spacious

open

field or

dry lake. Nothing robust enough to escape the

pull of the planet’s gravity could take off straight up.

would require a

craft

That

with a short, explosive propulsion sys-

DIRGE

183

tem: one designed to generate a single sustained but brief
burst of speed before its motive source gave out.
In short, a lifeboat. Alwyn Mallory had a lifeboat. It was

more or less. It was internally equipped and provisioned, more or less.
The question was, could it exceed orbital velocity, more

intact,

or less?

Having no options, he did not hesitate. If he remained
where he was he would undoubtedly survive longer than the
great majority of his unfortunate fellow colonists. It might be
a matter of days, it might be a matter of weeks, but eventually
the Pitar would come for him, as they would for everyone
else. He did not intend to wait helplessly for that moment,
like a rat chittering impotently at the back of its burrow.
Without hesitation, he tore through his once orderly home,
ripping into cabinets and storage lockers. Anything that
might prove remotely useful he threw into the transport cart
from his shop. Food, medical supplies, reading material, raw
electronic components, clothing, small tools
all found their
way into the bowels of the old lifeboat. There was plenty of
room. Designed to carry and care for a dozen people, it would
soon be serving as refuge for only one. He would be short of

—

everything but space.

took him less than a day to scavenge his home of several
years, the home where he had expected to live out a long and
reasonably contented life. With luck he might see it again
someday, but he did not stand around dwelling on distant posIt

sibilities.

The

lifeboat

would be

his

home

now. Or

it

would

could escape the attention of the Pitar. When the last bar
of sustenance had been thrown aboard, the last potentially
if he

useful tool stowed away, he rigged a line to

fill

the boat’s tanks

with water. There was none aboard, just as the craft was devoid of food. It had been so when he had purchased it, everything useful and portable having long since been salvaged by
the previous owners.
One tank leaked copiously before he noticed it. Despite the

urgency and desperation of the moment he had to laugh at the
idea of fleeing into the cold, heartless vacuum of space with

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

184

water sloshing around his feet. It was a short, terse laugh. He
had neither the time nor the inclination to indulge in any ex-

tended bouts of hilarity. Outside, down the mountain and beyond the woods, the beautiful, the glamorous, the estimable
Pitar were slaughtering and eviscerating. The noble Pitar. The
neighborly

Pitar.

He had to get away. Somehow he had to avoid the blanket of
detection they must even now be expanding across the planet.
It was possible that the spider’s web was not yet complete. All
that

was necessary was

for

one

fly to get

through. Throughout

on readying his wings.
Two hours before sunrise he was ready. As to whether the
lifeboat was, the answer would come from the trying. The

the night he slaved intently

proof would be in the doing. If his preparations proved inadequate, if trouble arose that was beyond his power to amend,
well then, he would die no slower than if he fell into the hands

of the invaders.
Settling himself into the cockpit he ran a final check. Those
instruments that still functioned, many of which he had personally repaired or replaced, insisted that their respective

components were functional. He found himself wishing he
had spent more time with each and every one, that he had
taken a little extra effort with each installation and connection. But it had all been a lark, a time killer, something to
amuse himself with in his idle hours. Now his life would depend on the skill with which he had indulged in a hobby.
Was there anything he had forgotten, anything that had
been omitted? Once committed to the launch sequence he
would not be able to change his mind, to remember something overlooked.

matter his

own

He did not trust the old lifeboat,

skill at restoration, to

or for that

recover from an abort

sequence. Deciding to go, he would go, and devil take the

consequences.
Then he did remember something. Spending as

much time

and away from home attending to
various work assignments, he tended to miss a good deal of
live entertainment and news. When not watching the tridee, it
was set to record. It would have recorded informational bulas he did in the shop,

DIRGE

185

would have recorded presentations and sports from
the capital and elsewhere throughout the colony. Unfortunately, the last transmissions it would have recorded were unletins. It

watchable garbage.

But the images he had recently viewed on the lifeboat, the
singular movements and images that had been transmitted by
the orphaned media mobile, would have been recorded by its
own built-in unit, and should be available for playback.
He did not have time to check. Opening the console, he
dug inside until he found what he was looking for. Removing
the tiny mollysphere, he slipped incontrovertible proof of
Pitarian perfidy into a pocket, shut himself into the lifeboat,

force-sealed the reluctant lock, and settled into the pilot’s seat
and harness. He was no qualified pilot, not of a craft the size

of the lifeboat or of anything else. But the whole concept behind such a vessel, the notion that underlay its very design,
was that it had to be able to be operated in a moment of emergency by utterly unqualified passengers. As an ex-ship’s engineer he was far better prepared than the average citizen to
operate a lifeboat’s instrumentation, even a design as antiquated as the one that now enfolded him.

The

Argus would soon be making its presence known
above the eastern horizon. While the Pitar were certainly
equipped with all manner of sophisticated tracking devices,
he saw no reason to make their search any easier by providing
the additional possibility of visual identification. He could do
nothing about the lifeboat’s initial liftoff signature. It would
be noisy and bright, but only until he reached escape velocity.
At that point he would have to risk shutting it down.
A preflight check of the weather indicated the presence of
a small storm to the northwest. What he wanted was a hurricane, or some severe thunderstorms. Anything to help mask
evidence of his liftoff. The modest rain event would have to
do. Programming the shed’s roof and the boat’s navigation to
the best of his ability, he tightened the harness as much as his
body would tolerate, then waited.
Even if he was detected lifting off, nothing but a shuttle
that happened to be in the immediate vicinity stood a chance
star

186

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

of intercepting the vertically ascending lifeboat. Not that it
mattered. Once out in space, drifting free, he could be tracked
down and eliminated by an orbiting shuttle. Or, if he was extremely lucky, a warship might actually have to bestir itself
for a moment or two to chase him down. If nothing else, he

might at least inconvenience a few of the invaders.
Or having analyzed his craft and realizing it had no spaceplus capability, they might simply decide to ignore him, letting him float aimlessly in the vastness of space until his
supplies and atmosphere ran out. He suspected that was a forlorn hope. Having already witnessed evidence of their thoroughness, he did not expect that the Pitar would leave anyone
alive, not even a lone soul adrift between worlds without any
hope of returning to one. He might be found, and that they
could not permit.
He had to try, though. Anything was better than sitting and
waiting for death to come knocking. Better to kick back and

keep on kicking for as long as was possible.
A pleasant feminine voice announced that departure was
imminent. He had taken special care with reprogramming the
boat’s methodical, businesslike tone. Now he was glad that he
had. It might be the last voice besides his own he ever heard. A
loud whine permeated the air, and the cockpit began to vibrate
around him. There was no port, but the forward viewscreen
showed the roof of the shed parting like a pair of flat, featureless hands. Beyond, black sky and scattered stars became
visible in the lucent night of Treetrunk. The whine became
an irritation, the vibration in his seat and harness almost
soothing. A final massage, he mused. The solicitous attentions
of a mechanical undertaker.
Something shoved him hard in the chest, and he gasped
sharply. The receded roof panels disappeared, and the stars
rotated wildly. In minutes he had punctured roiling cloud
the storm that was drenching the forest to the northwest. Minutes later he burst free, like a fist punching through stuffing,
to find that the stars had multiplied beyond counting. The
pressure on his chest lessened; the hand that had shoved him
gradually withdrew. Small unstowed objects began floating

DIRGE

187

about the cockpit. His stomach churned, and his inner ear
sisted he was falling. And so he was
falling up.

—

Free of Treetrunk’s gravity, he was
lifeboat

still

alive, the

in-

embracing

around him. Loosening his restraints, he
hastened to check the readouts. Designed to locate and skew a
vector for any nearby ship, the lifeboat was already searching
for presumptive help. Prior to liftoff he had thoroughly disstill

intact

abled the automatic beacon designed to signal the lifeboat’s
presence to other vessels. There was no help to be found here,

and he did not want any nearby craft to pick him up. He would
blow the lock first and die cleanly in the emptiness of the void.

The
tions,

relevant readouts

made no

sense. Testing for malfunc-

he found none. There were no ships within detection

range, which

meant

was possible there was nothing to
silent and small, away from the surface

that

it

him as he raced,
ofArgus V That was impossible. Where were the Pitarian starships, their transports and shuttles? They could only be one
detect

place, he realized.

On the

other side of the planet. For the

moment, Treetrunk

was screening him from detection.
It was not how he would have conducted an invasion. But
the more he thought about it, and he had time for nothing
else, the more he realized that his extraordinary luck was the
product not of alien stupidity but of a quite understandable
succession of factors. Having destroyed or captured everything in orbit around Treetrunk before

commencing the actual

physical invasion, the Pitar had no doubt already secured
or rendered useless all three of the colony’s shuttleports and

any orbit-capable craft located on the ground. That and the
two space-minus interstellar communications facilities would
have been their first ground-based targets.

With the ports and
for in the first

complement of vessels accounted
stages of the attack, there was no reason to suptheir

pose anything like a rogue lifeboat might be present elsewhere

on the planet, much less anything in operable condition. In the
first flush of what surely must look to be a complete and unqualified triumph, they

might relax

their surveillance just a

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

188
little

—just enough for a single minuscule, almost undetect-

escape ridiculously perpendicular from
the planet’s surface on the opposite side of the world from the
attacking armada. No shuttle craft would lift off at the angle
able craft to

make

its

he had taken.
He wanted badly to record the size and strength of that invading force, but even if he had possessed the maneuvering
capability necessary to sufficiently alter the lifeboat’s course

he would not have done it. If he tried to move into a position
to observe them, then surely the far more sophisticated instrumentation on board a modem warship would detect his
presence first.
So he continued to speed outward from the devastated surface, leaving warmth and atmosphere and ongoing horror behind, heading for the only destination the lifeboat had a
chance of reaching before its limited supplies began to run
out.

He had programmed the boat to aim for the

inner

moon.

Not because it was closer, but because it was far smaller than
its more distant relative. It was a less likely place to hide, a
much more modest potential refuge. As such, if the Pitar
thought to consider such possibilities, there was the chance
they might conduct a cursory survey of the more accommodating satellite while passing over

its

relatively insignificant

cousin.

The inner moon of Argus

V

generated barely enough

gravity to hold itself together, let alone affix anything to

its

Maneuvering the lifeboat as delicately as his limited
skills and the remaining propulsive capability allowed, he
dropped the craft into lower and lower orbit until eventually
it was hovering only a short distance above the floor of a
suitable impact crater. With the boat’s motive power all but
surface.

exhausted, he ran multiple checks of the restored vessel’s
status.

He had power. He had air. There were no
Hull integrity was

detectable leaks.

Having positioned himself to the
best of his ability, he settled down to wait and to deal with
dangers as serious as those posed by the Pitar: loneliness and
silence.

intact.

DIRGE

189

The first days and weeks were a cycle of rising,

eating,

and

watching the readouts for signs of passing or patrolling ships.
With each succeeding day that the instruments remained
quiet

of the

and the screens blank

month he

his confidence grew.

By

the end

had escaped the notice of
the invading Pitar entirely. As the end of the second month
approached he began to fear that he had.
It

first

was terrible

felt

certain he

The psychic weight of airless
rock on the other began to press

in the lifeboat.

void on one side and lifeless
inexorably on his spirit. He

very self squeezed between resignation and isolation. Yes, he had foiled the Pitar.
Yes, he was still alive when every other human being on
felt his

Treetrunk was probably dead. But to what end? To thumb his
nose at invaders who were not now and never had been aware
of his existence? So he could die out here, alone, not even
surrounded by the corpses of his fellow settlers? As the days
continued to pass, the minutes slowing to a visible crawl, he
began to wonder if he had made the right decision. Resis-

—what was

tance, survival at any cost

it

worth? Did

it

have

meaning, or had it been nothing more than the instinctive
flex of a clever ape?

re-

Growing desperate, he even risked some of his precious air
by going outside in a suit. The barren, lifeless surface of the
dwarf moon drove him back inside where at least there was
warmth and recorded sound and visuals. After a while he
stopped watching them, too, unable to bear the sight of
happy, living humans. The boat was stable in its absurdly low
orbit, but his mind began to drift. Gravity is only a local constant and does not hold thoughts.

By the third month his hastily assembled supplies began to
run out. He found that he did not care. To conserve air he
began

choosing to shrink the available atmosphere around him. He did it because it was expected of him,
to preserve life, and not because he had any especial desire
any longer to do so. A sufficiency of water to sustain existo live in a suit,

tence for a

while longer remained, but he was out of
food. That was a good thing, he decided. He would weaken
little

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

190

and eventually pass out and not know when the last air available to his suit was exhausted. His body would remain untouched by Pitar or decomposition, preserved in the perfect
coldness of space that had already established its imperturbable grasp on the rest of the ship.
He had been drifting, drifting, for a long time, sucking less
and less often at the plastic teat of the water tube in his

when something hazarded to ruffle his sleep. Irritated
interruption, he rose from his seat and moved to locate

helmet,
at the

the source of the disturbance. Before he could find

it, it

found

him, and he started to scream. After that, he remembered
little except the screaming.
As it turned out, except for a few inexplicable outbursts,
no one could hear the screaming but him. It went on and on,
forever

.

.

14

“
.

F

I

orever.”

Tse said nothing. Sliding her hand down his arm, she took
his right hand in both of hers. Lifting it, she brought it up to
her lips and kissed it gently, then pressed it against her cheek,
not giving a damn what any vexed bureaucrats or disapproving hospital personnel watching on distant monitors
might think. As he continued to stare out the window at the
blue water and gently swaying palms, tears were running
down Mallory’s cheeks, copious and unstoppable. His respiration was normal, his heart rate steady, but he could not stop
crying. Eventually, he simply ran out of water.
“A part of me is here, alive. Another part is back on
Treetrunk, with my friends and associates, dead. A third and
last part is floating, floating on an inner moon, raving mad.”
“I’m here,” she told him softly. “I’m alive.”
“Yes.” Smiling again, he wiped at his eyes with the sleeve
of his hospital gown. “Thank God for small favors. Not you,
Irene. There’s nothing ‘small’ about you.

May

I call

you

Irene?”

“Mr. Mallory, you may call me anything you want.” Lowering his hand, she squeezed it very tightly before lowering it

back to the bed. “You’ve earned that right.”
“I don’t want it as a ‘right.’ I want it from a friend.”
“However you wish,” she told him softly.
The moment was broken, though not shattered, as Dr.
Chimbu, several military and civilian personnel Tse did not
recognize, and two medical technicians entered the room.
Though they filled it, there was no frenzy, no pushing or
191

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

192

shoving. Everyone, including the solemn-visaged officers,

was

quiet

and respectful.

“Mr. Mallory,” Chimbu began gently, “we don’t want to
crowd you. If there are too many people in here now, just say
so and we’ll have

some

leave.”

bed grinned. He had not let go of the
nurse’s hand, and she did not draw it away. “Too many
people? There aren’t enough. There can never be enough for
me, not ever again.”
Standing behind the chief medical officer, a handsome woman
in a colonel’s uniform was no longer able to restrain herself. It
was an attitude plainly shared by everyone around her.
“Mr. Mallory, as I’m sure you can understand there are
some of us who very badly would like to ask you some ques.”
tions. If you don’t feel up to it
“Ask away.” He smiled up at Tse. “And how about some
preferably on a large eland
real food? Applesauce is fine
any
sirloin, with fried potatoes. And gravy. And shellfish

The man

in the

.

—

—

kind of shellfish.”

Tse glanced expectantly at Chimbu, who looked reluctant
but eventually nodded. “A small sirloin,” he could not forbear
from adding.
The elegant soldier was hesitating, spurring Mallory to
prompt her. “Go ahead and ask what you will. You won’t
upset me. I’ve done

my time in upset land.”

“Very well. Mr. Mallory, I’m sure you know that everything
that has happened in your vicinity since you were brought
here has been carefully monitored. I’m sure you must understand that given the reception the Pitar have been accorded
here on Earth and elsewhere, coupled with the fact that over a
period of some five years they have displayed nothing even re-

motely

like the

just told

is difficult

room was dead
tient

behavior you have described

—

the story

for the rest of us to accept.”

silent as

everyone waited to see

The

you

hospital

how

the pa-

would react.

Mallory’s reply was low, but perfectly intelligible. “So you
think I’m a liar?”

DIRGE

“Nobody

193

said that,” another officer hastened to add.

“Nobody’s calling you a liar” He looked to the woman, then back
down at the ravaged figure in the bed. “You’ve been through a
terrible ordeal, sir. It’s a miracle that you survived, much less
with your body and your
Aware he had stumbled into
.

.

awkward territory, he broke off.
Mallory finished the thought for him. “My mind intact?”
His eyes searched the attentive gathering. “You think I may
have hallucinated what happened on Treetrunk? How about
the six hundred thousand dead or missing?” His voice rose
perceptibly. “That’s one hell of a hallucination.”
“No one disputes the destruction of Treetrunk.” The fe-

male

officer’s

tone was tender, but hardly condescending.

something no human being would dare try to deny.
What Major Rothenburg and the rest of us are wondering is if
you actually saw what you say you saw, or if your mind, overwhelmed by the horror, invented something, however implausible, to mask or blot out an even worse reality.”
“Worse reality? Worse than genocide? Worse than female
reproductive organ evisceration and theft?” He shook his
head slowly. “Ma’am, all I can say is, you must have a greater
“That

is

capacity for inventing horror than

From

I

do.”

end of the bed, Chimbu spoke
up. “Mr. Mallory, Colonel Nadurovina is an eminent military
psychiatrist specializing in combat and combat-related disorders. She doesn’t mean to impugn your veracity. Like the rest
of us, she only wants what’s best for you and to get at the
his position near the

—

truth.”

”

“The truth!?! His voice bordering on hysteria, the patient
leaned sharply forward in the bed. Nearby, a medtech activated the osmotic hypo he held behind his back and started
forward. Startled by the unexpected violence of his response,
Tse let go of Mallory’s hand. But she did not stand up or retreat from her position alongside him. Seeing the sudden fear
in her face, he made an effort to regain his composure.
“I’ve told you the truth. Whether you believe it or not is up
to you.” Staring hard at the circle of the curious, he added
wamingly, “You’d better, because there’s no guarantee the

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

194

something like it again. Unless, of course,
they got everything they needed from Treetrunk.”
“Human female reproductive organs?” Rothenburg’s tone
laid bare his skepticism. “You’ll excuse me, Mr. Mallory, if
that doesn’t strike some of us as unsound grounds for rationalizing an assault on a colony. To gain a strategic advantage
or base, yes; to acquire a world rich in rare metals and minerals, perhaps; or even to try and intimidate the occupying
species into conceding possession, possibly. But what you
Pitar won’t try

say

makes no

sense.”

“Deliver us from the blindered workings of the military
mind,” he muttered. “What’s the military doing here anyway?”
“When six hundred thousand people are slaughtered without mercy or warning,

it

becomes a

military matter,” a

man

behind Rothenburg replied stithy.
Mallory grunted and leaned back against his pillows. “For
what it’s worth, it doesn’t make any sense to me, either. Pitar
and human can’t generate offspring, but at the same time I
can’t put the kind of organized organ-gathering I witnessed

morbid scientific curiosity or aimless disemboweling. The Pitar I saw looked like they knew exactly what they
wanted and how to go about getting it. They had storage

down

to

handiwork. What they did
was for a reason. If they had other motives for annihilating
Treetrunk, then they’re the only ones who can tell you about
containers ready to store their

them.”

He made an obscene

.

.

.

gesture, heedless of

who might

be watching via relay on distant monitors.

weapon we can find on
every ship that can be mustered and blow them out of existence all the way back to their beloved bastard Dominion, and
then seed both their precious Twin Worlds with radioactive
“Me,

I

think

we should

put every

dust that has a nice, long half-life.

you put the question

How

about

it?

Why

don’t

to a couple of their local representa-

of course. Fluently.
They’re doubtless convinced they obliterated any evidence of
except for me.” The bluster
their treachery. Which they did

tives?

Gauge

their reaction. They’ll

lie,

—

and bravado abruptly leaked out of him

like the air

from a

balloon subject to deep-sea pressures. His voice became

DIRGE

195

small and frightened, as if two distinct personalities were
fighting for space in the same body.

“They don’t know about me, do they? They don’t know I’m
here

.

.

.

?”

“Easy,” Tse told him, leaning closer and stroking his arm
with her fingers. “Be calm, Alwyn. Nobody knows you’re

She looked anxiously over at Chimbu. “Do they?”
The chief physician shook his head. His words spelled confidence. “Only the upper echelon of the hospital staff knows
here.”

about Mr. Mallory’s origins. Beyond the people presently
assembled in this room, there are a handful of government
officials

who had to be informed.”

Colonel Nadurovina added soothingly, “You would be
surprised who knows and who does not, who was deliberately
informed and who was kept in the dark. You are safe here, Mr.
Mallory. If you look in the hallway you will not see much, if
you look out your window you will see less, but it would take
vaster weaponry than

we believe the Pitar or any other species

possesses to reach you.” She smiled, and it did not seem
forced or artificial. “At this moment you may very well be, Mr.
Mallory, the best-protected individual in this portion of the

Orion Arm. The members of the world council are not as well
looked after.”
“Then you do believe me.” She might not be in charge, but
Nadurovina acted as if she was, so he directed half his atten-

Whether she was aware of it or not, the rest had
been settled on Irene Tse.
“We believe you saw something. We believe that a powerful and inimical sentience is responsible for the eradication
of human life on Treetrunk. Whether those two things are one
and the same we cannot accept on the word of one man found
drifting in space starving, near death, and out of his mind.”
This time her smile was wry. “Surely you can appreciate the
sensitivity of my position and that of my colleagues who are
tion to her.

charged with rendering a decision in this matter.”
“Question the Pitar,” Mallory shot back. “Corner them and
press them. Ask them what they might want with human organs and judge their reaction.”

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

196

A

plump man

silent

in civilian clothes

now pushed

his

way

who had

forward. “I

am

hitherto

been

Jenju Burriyip.

I

represent the world council.” His lips curved upward. “Those
members who have been informed, anyway. Please tell me,
Mr. Mallory, how I am supposed to confront the representa-

of what to this point has been a likeable, good-natured
species and inquire politely if they might perchance have in
an off moment slaughtered six hundred thousand of my
fellow beings?”
“How should I know?” the patient snapped curtly. “I’m no

tives

diplomat.”

Burriyip nodded solemnly. “That is exactly my point, Mr.
Mallory. If, and please bear with me when I say ‘if,’ what you
have told us has somehow become confused by your condi-

because you have suffered physically, or has
otherwise been altered in your mind, and we wrongly accuse
the Pitar, however obliquely, then we stand to forfeit some
nice, useful, popular new friends. If word got out, the govern-

tion, or distorted

ment could fall.”
“Listen to me.” Mallory chose his words slowly and carefully. “The Pitar are not nice. They are not ever going to be

They murdered six hundred thousand men, women,
and children, for what depraved reasons of their own I can’t
say. And if they only had to do it once to get what they wanted
‘useful.’

or needed, and never do anything like
have done worse than what they did.

away with it.”
Burriyip was immovable.

“I said

it

again, then they will

They

‘if,’

will have gotten

Mr. Mallory.

No

one

ready to discount your theory out of hand.”
“Goddammit, it’s not a theory!” He looked as if he was
going to start crying again but pulled himself together with
an effort. The hypo wielder held his ground. “Then you won’t

is

confront the Pitar?”

am

Mr. Mallory, but to accuse an entire race of interspecies genocide
on the word of one man ... We cannot. You have to understand that. You do not have to like it, but you do have to

The

representative sighed heavily. “I

understand.”

sorry,

DIRGE

197

“I understand that if you don’t

do something you’re going
to have humankind dancing and laughing down through the
years hand in hand with the worst enemies in its history, and
that they’re the ones who are going to be laughing the hardest.
If they do laugh, that is.”
“We will do something, Mr. Mallory.” Nadurovina tried
her best to mollify him.

who

is

“We

will find out

who

is

lying and

telling the truth.”

“And most of

Rothenburg added, “we’re going to
find out who or what was responsible for what happened on
Argus V”
“Not if you don’t ask the right people the right questions.”
Closing his eyes, Mallory slumped deeper into the pillows.
Tse held his wrist, not trusting the machines. “That’s
enough. He’s only recently emerged from his coma, and this
is

all,”

more activity than he should have to endure.”

Chimbu rose. “Nurse Tse is right. We should leave so he
can get some rest.”
“When can we talk to him again?” Despite his professional
skepticism, Rothenburg felt concern for the man in the bed.
“Not before tomorrow.” Chimbu began to urge everyone out
of the room, an insistent father herding his flock. “If you don’t
want to communicate with a mind that might be playing tricks

on itself, allow it to rest.

If his vitals continue to strengthen

and

we ’ll try this again tomorrow.”
“Maybe once he’s rested some more he’ll remember something else,” Rothenburg murmured as he stepped out into the
he

is

willing,

corridor.

“Like who actually committed the atrocity?” Nadurovina
followed her colleague down the hall.

“Then you don’t believe his story?” Absently, Rothenburg
saluted the two guards who were posted at the far end of the
walkway.
know. The Pitar as exterminators? And for such an
obscure reason? One that might well devolve from some unhappy or repressed childhood sexual experience of the patient’s? I could not find anything in his records, but that does
not mean there is nothing of the kind buried deep within his
“I don’t

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

198

memories.” They entered the hospital lift and stood back
from the closing doors. “That does not mean he is not telling
the truth.

The question remains,

is it

the truth as

it

actually

is

or merely the truth as his traumatized self sees it?”

Rothenburg considered. “Burriyip meant it when he said
the government couldn’t confront the Pitar.”
“I know. We cannot, either. Not without a specific directive
from above, one that I do not think will be forthcoming. Ever
since the first encounter, people have been mesmerized by the
Pitar.”

Rothenburg nodded knowingly. “My wife has two outfits inspired by Pitarian design. She’d find the very idea of
them killing one human grotesquely laughable, let alone hundreds of thousands. If we challenge or accuse them in any
way, there’ll be diplomatic bedlam. Careers will be ruined,
or at the very least any hopes for advancement aborted. In
that respect Burriyip wasn’t understating the gravity of the
situation.

Such a confrontation

really could bring

down

the government.”

government nor the military can
directly confront the Pitar. But someone else can.”
“Someone else?” Rothenburg ’s uncertainty showed in his
?” He halted in midexpression. “Who else could possibly
“I agree. Neither the

.

.

.

“You can’t be thinking what I think you’re thinking.”
Nadurovina did not smile. Her posture was as regimented
as her thinking. “Tell me true, Erhard: Haven’t you ever,
watching such happenings on the tridee, had the desire one
time in your life to gamble a million credits or so on a single
query.

throw of the dice, or spin of the futures’ globe?”
They stepped out of the lift and into a main hallway, busy
with nurses and medtechs, doctors and support personnel.
The two by now familiar uniformed officers hardly rated a
glance.

could lose him,” Rothenburg warned her. “The shock
might be too much, even if the Pitar are involved only in his
imagination. Fantasy can kill as readily as reality.”

“We

“I’ll

speak to Chimbu about

it.

Medication and specialists

DIRGE
be standing by

will

at all

199

times in the next room, ready to

intervene.”

“What about the
will agree to see

The

colonel’s

Pitar?

What makes you think one of them

him?”

mouth

twitched.

“How

could they refuse?

Compassionate and neighborly as they are, it would look
funny if they declined to offer their deepest sy mpathies to the
sole survivor of the Treetrunk holocaust. Anyone who agrees
to pay their respects will be intimately screened for the carrying of anything even potentially inimical, of course, before
being allowed to come within a hundred kilometers of this island,

much less this hospital. Much less Mr. Alwyn Mallory’s

presence.”

“Even

Rothenburg felt compelled to point out as they
turned a comer, “determined assassins invariably find a way.”
Nadurovina nodded thoughtfully. “In that event we would
have something of an answer by roundabout means, wouldn’t
we?” Rothenburg did not know what to say in response to this
cool, detached calculation. “But I do not think that will be a
so,”

problem. The Pitar may very well believe that we are testing
them with words. If they are the responsible party, as Mallory
continues to insist, then they will gladly go along with any
they believe will help to remove them from the list of suspected peoples. If they are not responsible and their particitest

pation in the atrocity

nothing more than a figment of Mr.
Mallory’s addled imagination, no harm will have been done.”
“Not to human-Pitar relations, maybe,” Rothenburg ob-

jected, “but

“Time to

is

what about to the patient?”
roll the dice,

Erhard.”

He

smiled thinly at his colleague. “Easy to say
not your sanity that’s at stake.”

His retort clearly troubled

may think,

don’t

Mr. Mallory

it’s

“In spite of what you
this course of action easily or
her.

recommend
without qualms, Major. However
I

when

inchoate,

I

am

quite aware

our only connection with whatever happened on Treetrunk. I have no more desire to see him lose his
strengthening grasp on reality than you or anyone else. But I
that

am the

is

senior officer here, and

I

am the

one being pressured

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

200

Not informed speculation, not reasoned hypotheses, but answers. Whatever happens if we confront Mr.
for answers.

Mallory with his terrors, whatever the consequences, I am the
one who will have to answer for them. I am prepared to take
that risk.”

“Again, with somebody else’s dice.” Rothenburg refused
to let his colleague and superior off the hook. “In spite of initial impressions I find myself liking this Mallory.”
“It is

not his likability that

is at

stake here. For

what

it is

him, too. But in the resolution of this frightful mystery, neither his life, nor mine, nor yours, means

worth,

I

like

anything”
“All right.

I’ll

cosign on the requisite directives so long as

you accept ultimate responsibility.”
She found herself walking toward the exit. Outside were
languid breezes and the scent of orchids, the warm, moist
aroma of mother Earth. Upstairs lay a lonely, frightened man
who might hold the key to cataclysm, if only they could drag
the proof or denial of it out of him.
“As senior officer on site, I have no choice. So I might

do it willingly. You will commence the necessary
arrangements?”
He nodded. “I’ll handle my end of things. How long before
you think you can have one or more of them here?”
“One should do, I think. If we make too much of a show of
it they may become suspicious. We want them to react, not
anticipate. I will discuss with Dr. Chimbu a means of monias well

toring Mr. Mallory’s reactions even

more

effectively than

we

do now. We will need to record everything that happens in the
finest detail for study later.”

“In case he locks up, or blanks out again, or dies?” Resigned to the turn of events Rothenburg might be, but he was

not happy about them.

Nadurovina ignored the sarcasm. “Yes. In case any of those
eventualities unfortunately come to pass. I hope they will not.”
“What about having the nurse present Tsue or Tsoy or

—

whatever her name is?”

DIRGE
“Irene Tse. She should be there. She
does a lot of little things.”

201
is

good

for him.

She

Rothenburg was moved to reluctant admiration. “You
don’t miss much, do you, Colonel?”
“No, Major. It is my job not to.”

He was

and bronzed, regal of posture and sleek of
muscle, faultless of demeanor and enchanting of smile. Wherever they went, heads turned; men out of admiration, women
from a plethora of confused but animated emotion. In other
words, he was a typical Pitarian male, no more or less spectacular than any other of his kind. Walking alongside him
tall

Nadurovina felt slighted, but not overawed.
His name was Dmis-Atel. A tertiary assistant from the
southwest branch of his embassy, he had flown to New Ireland
was
at the request of the authorities there to pay his respects, it
that
said, to a survivor of the Treetrunk bloodbath. Protesting
no such survivors were known to exist, the Pitar had been informed through the most secret channels that this was most
probably the case, but in the event it was not, it would be gracious of them to bestow their guileless commiserations in
person.

And

in the far

more

likely event that

it

was a

clever

falsehood being perpetrated by certain unscrupulous individuals for amoral reasons of their own, perhaps a perceptive
Pitar could shed some light on the matter by examining it from
a nonhuman perspective.

Once

the situation

Pitar did not hesitate.

them thus, the
Representative Dmis was placed by his
had been explained

to

and charged
with rendering whatever sympathy or service he could in the
matter, as the occasion might demand. Rothenburg had met
him at the airport and escorted him to the hospital, where he

embassy on the

first

available aerial transport

had been taken in hand by a calm, unruffled Nadurovina.
“I

am anxious to see this person.”
202

DIRGE

203

The Pitar moved with effortless, graceful strides that
gave him the appearance of flowing over the floor. One was
tempted to bend low for a look at the bottoms of his feet to see
they were actually touching the ground. The Pitar did
everything effortlessly and well. Nadurovina was no more
if

immune

than her friends to the spell they cast. Only her innate professionalism allowed her to maintain a greater degree

of detachment. Did they also slaughter the innocent effortlessly and without strain?
“He does not know that you are coming.” They turned into
a corridor through double doors that shouted Restricted
Entry
Authorized Personnel Only and headed for the lift.
Every step of the way, hidden scanners were examining every
aspect of their bodies, from the material of their clothing to
the contents of their digestive systems. Specific instruments

—

>

searched for explosive components in their bloodstreams
and toxins in their saliva. By the time they reached the comer
room on the northwest end of the fifth floor they had been
subjected to as thorough a noninvasive analysis as con-

temporary technology could contrive. This despite the fact
that Nadurovina and her associates were fairly certain that the
Pitar would not make an attempt on the patient’s person. To
do so would amount to an admission of guilt or, at the very
least, a stain on their saintly mien that would be difficult to
wash away. Armed and highly trained personnel would be
close at hand in any case, ready to intervene at the slightest
provocation.

The

Pitar did not give indication

of being under any unusual stress, but then, the Pitar never did. It was difficult for
the most perceptive at the best of times to tell what they were
thinking. They never lost their temper or burst out in uncontrolled laughter. Like their physical appearance, their demeanor was always perfect.
They were alone in the lift. Nadurovina knew that a battery of
observers was waiting in the

room next

to the patient’s,

with

dozens more cemented to remote monitors and pickups. Every
movement of the visiting Pitar would be scrutinized, every word
deconstructed, every shift in expression analyzed.

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

204

The door loomed ahead. The
to smile gently at her.

Pitar looked over

and down

“Are the guards for us or for

this

individual?”

“For him.

As you can imagine we’ve been very

interested

adopted

what he’s had" to say about the destruction of his
homeworld.”
“And what has he said?” The Hellenically perfect counteagitation.
nance betrayed no concern, the body movements no
yourThe military psychiatrist smiled back. “You can ask him
her guest to the guards,
self.” After identifying herself and
him an interthey were allowed to pass. “I think you 11 find
in

esting subject.”

Why

should she have expected
first.
anything different? Opening the door, she entered
his
Mallory was sitting up in the bed with Tse in a chair at
Still

no

visible reaction.

had become intimately familiar to
Nadurovina over the past week. In that time the patient had
could be
put on weight and regained lost muscle tone. Much
the nurse,
attributed to the attention he had received from
whose devotion to the single patient whose care she had been
side. It

was a tableau

that

reacharged with looking after exceeded anything that could
sonably have been expected.
Here it was. The moment of confrontation. She could feel
screens,
the eyes behind the multiple pickups glued to their

watching, waiting.
Mallory, Ms. Tse. I hope you do not
bemind, but I have brought a guest.” Stepping aside, she
queathed to the man in the bed an unobstructed view of the

“Good morning, Mr.

visitor.

Mallory’s eyes shifted. He saw the Pitar. As importantly,
holding her
the Pitar saw him. Nadurovina was not above
as the
breath, ready to intervene, spring aside, or call for help
occasion should demand. She did not know exactly what to
expect.

No

one

did. In their intense discussions prior to this

she believed that she and her colleagues had imagined and discussed every possible scenario.

moment

They were wrong.

“A Pitar.”

Mallory’s voice was calm, controlled, absolutely

DIRGE

205

devoid of fear or panic. “Here.” His gaze shifted to the psychiatrist, and he did something even more remarkable. He
smiled. “Another of your tests? A little experiment, maybe?”

“Dmis is a member ot the delegation that is headquartered
on Lombok,” she explained. “He is a real Pitar, not an actor
made up to look like one.”
can see that.” Did his tone darken ever so slightly, or
was Nadurovina reading into it one of the things for which
she and her associates were searching? “I know what a Pitar
“I

looks like.”

She tensed but made no move

moved toward

to interfere

when

the alien

beyond the wall, she knew
that the strike team of armed commandos would have reacted
to the alien’s approach by automatically advancing to another
level of readiness. To her relief he halted at the foot of the bed.
the bed. Outside,

You survived
whelmed Argus Five,”
“So.

the

disturbing incident that over-

Mallory met the alien’s inscrutable
gaze without flinching. “I saw what happened there.”
“That’s right.

did.”

I

The Pitar made a small, almost imperceptible gesture whose
meaning no one in the room comprehended. “My people are
very concerned about what took place.”
Mallory’s mouth set in a tight line. There was no trembling,
no quivering that Nadurovina could see. A glance at the readouts of the instruments that monitored the patient’s vitals
showed little change, certainly not enough to be considered
significant.
“I’ll

bet they are.”

“What did you see happen there, man?”
Seated next to Mallory, Tse listened quietly to the conversation, one hand resting on the patient’s forearm. Reaching
up, Mallory affected an air of mock forgetfulness.
“I’m not sure
Oh yeah, it’s coming back to me now.
.

.

.

Your people were there.” Once more the mocking
smile. Did the Pitar stiffen? Again, the psychiatrist couldn’t
be certain. Being in the room, standing to one side and observing, was like watching a chess match with living pieces.
“Yes, that’s right. Your people. I recall it quite clearly. They
Let’s see.

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

206

were killing everybody. Destroying anything and everything
that might record or otherwise indicate what they were doing.
Your people are real thorough. Real thorough motherfuckers.”
Nadurovina felt compelled to play the role she had assigned herself. “Please, Mr. Mallory. Dmis is a diplomatic
representative.”

“That’s kind of a contradiction, Doc. There’s nothing

diplomatic about the Pitar.”
The alien’s expression did not change.

He seemed more

“You are a very imaginative person, Mr. Mallory. Very inventive. The Pitar do not kill
except in self-defense. I am no physician, but I think the
dreadful experience you have obviously suffered must have
fascinated than upset by the patient.

unhinged your mind. Why my people
should figure prominently in your delusions I cannot think,

at least temporarily

not very flattering.”
“I’m not delusional. It wasn’t delusion. I know what I saw.
Your people attacked without warning, trading on friendship
acquired through five years ofjoyful, kindly contact to achieve

but

it is

complete surprise. You slaughtered anything on two legs. It
didn’t make any sense to me then, and it doesn’t make any
sense to me now.”
“Ah,” Dmis murmured, “an admission that confirms the
diagnosis.”

“No, you don’t understand. What doesn’t make any sense
to me is what you needed with the reproductive organs of
human females. I saw them being removed with surgical precision from one woman after another and carefully packed

away in what I believe now to be cryogenic containers. What
do you do with them? Eat ’em? Venerate them? Use them in
some kind of unimaginably barbaric conceptual art? Tell me,
diplomat Dmis. I’m really curious to know.”
“As am I,” the Pitar replied. “Curious to know what sort of
human mind can invent such absurdities.”
Nadurovina interrupted. “If this is upsetting you too much,
Dmis, we can leave.”
“No, no.” The alien did not appear in the least perturbed by
the accusations that were coming from the bed. “It is inter-

DIRGE

of my kind, I want to know as much as posabout humans. Even their mental aberrations. This is a

esting.
sible

207

As do

all

useful occasion.”

Mallory nodded agreeably. “Useful for me, too. See, I
want to know all about the Pitar, because it will help me to
understand how better to kill you.”
“I have to tell you, Mr. Mallory, that I understand what is
happening here and that I truly sympathize. With ongoing
care of the quality you are obviously receiving I am certain
that your condition will improve. Meanwhile, I am intrigued
by your misconceptions.” He smiled over at Nadurovina. “Is
there anything

can do to help?”
“Yeah,” Mallory declared without hesitation. He proceeded to describe an act that was an anatomical impossibility, even for the limber Pitar. Nadurovina choked slightly,
but the alien took no apparent offense.
“Another elaborate fantasy. Naturally, Mr. Mallory, you
have proof to underline and support your fantasies. Images of
this imaginary assault, perhaps, or voice records, or a corroboI

rating witness.”

“No,” the

man

bed muttered. “You know damn well
that I don’t. If I did, you wouldn’t be standing there grinning like an underfed Buddha. You wouldn’t even have been
brought here. Somebody would’ve shot you on sight.” His
smile widened. “I’d gladly do that myself except that where
my mental state is concerned plenty of these ‘specialists’
happen to agree with you, or at least are willing to consider the
possibility. I could get up from this bed, right now, and put my
hands around your blemish-free throat and squeeze until all
the life leaked out of you.” For the second time, Nadurovina
in the

tensed.

do not think even if you were healthy you would be physically capable of such a feat,” the much taller Dmis replied
calmly. “As it is, you are weakened from your misfortune, and I
am considerably larger and stronger than you.”
“I can see that, but you’ve never experienced the kind of
“I

strength that uncontrolled fury can give a

human being.” He

glanced at the anxious psychiatrist. “Don’t worry, Doc.

Much

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

208
as I’d like to

Not even

I’m not planning on leaving this bed

for a while.

for the sheer pleasure of feeling a Pitarian neck
fingers.” He turned his attention back to the alien.

under my
“I’m saving myself, you see. I want to kill many more than
just one of you.”
Dmis looked to his escort. “I hope Mr. Mallory is receiving
appropriate medication for his condition. It would distress
me to think that he might one day attack someone else, perhaps believing that they were Pitar.”
“I can assure you that his treatment regimen takes all possibilities into account,” Nadurovina told the alien, succeeding

him

in answering

any

truthfully without

committing herself to

specifics.

“This has been most interesting.” The Pitar leaned slightly
over the foot of the bed in Mallory’s direction and beamed benignly. “When you have invented some proof to give support

your expressive delusions, you must see to it that I am notified. It would be educational to continue this discussion. In
the absence of anything additional, however, I must return to
my mission and make a report.” Stepping back, he turned his

to

full attention to the psychiatrist.

be kept informed of Mr. Mallory’s progress,
as a matter of personal interest. It is distressing to see any sentient being slide so far into fantasy. But it is quite understandable. Among my kind it is also common to build a mental wall
around a terrible experience as a way of dealing with the conse“I

would like

to

quences. In the absence of truth, the patient has invented elaborate imaginings to avoid having to deal with a large, threatening

blank spot in his memory.

I

am

sure that with time and your

good offices these delusions will gradually begin to fade away.”
“I’m sure he will continue to improve,” she replied noncommittally as she gestured toward the doorway. The Pitar
preceded her into the hall.
Nine and a half hours later Irene Tse burst from room fiftyfour in panic. From behind her and within the room came a
cacophony of instruments shattering and furniture breaking.

inhuman howling, the piteous shrieks of
an unhinged mind teetering on the razor edge of sanity.

Above

it

all

rose an

DIRGE
Nadurovina was interrupted
sat

down

to

209

where she had just
dine with her husband. Tearing back to the hosin quarters

pital at velocities that threatened to

send her vehicle spinning

out of control, she blew through the entrance and past startled
hospital personnel in her race to reach the building’s top
story.

Shoving her way through the crowd that had gathered at
one end of the floor, she espied Tse and ungently forced a
path to where the nurse was sitting. Though the psychiatrist
was not in uniform, the medtech who was attending to the
nurse recognized the officer and gave way.
Trembling, Tse was holding her face in her hands. Blood
from a deep scratch had welled up to stain the upper right
sleeve of her duty blouse. Settling in behind her, the

medtech

began to treat the wound.
Nadurovina had no time for niceties. “What happened?”
Reaching forward, she grabbed the younger woman’s wrists
and roughly pulled them away from her face. “Look at me,
nurse!” Tse’s tear-stained face lifted to meet the psychiatrist’s.
“I ...

thing

I

don’t know.

It

just happened.

One minute

every-

was fine. I was just clearing away the dinner tray when it

happened.”

Nadurovina glanced

in the direction

of the room but was

unable to see anything but surging, swirling bodies. If it was
this confused and chaotic now, she reflected, what must it
have been like ten minutes ago?

“When what happened? Talk to me,
the Pitar

.

.

.

nurse.

Was

it

.

.

Did

?”

“Pitar?” Blinking, Tse reached

up and rubbed

at

her eyes

with the unstained sleeve of her uniform. “What Pitar? There

no Pitar here.” Realization penetrated the younger woman’s
understanding as Nadurovina heaved a vast sigh of relief. Deare

spite every precaution, despite all the round-the-clock, state-

of-the-art security, there

was always

the possibility, the fear,

were guilty of Mallory’s charges or if they had
simply taken a severe disliking to him they might somehow
manage to get to him. Evidently they had not.
that if the aliens

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

210

other hand, their apparent absence and lack of involvement in whatever had taken place in the hospital room
they were still, in the eyes of uncommitted justice, as

On the

meant

innocent as Dmis had claimed.
Tse was babbling quietly. “He just went crazy. One minute
he was finishing the last of his ice cream and passing me the
.” The slow shaking of her
smiling and happy, and then
tray,

.

.

head was visible evidence of her disbelief. “It was like a
bomb went off inside him.”
all right?” With her initial concerns allayed,
“Is he
Nadurovina could afford to be more compassionate.
expres“I guess so. I don’t know.” The younger woman’s
sion pleaded for understanding. “I tried to help, tried to calm
him down, but it was like he couldn’t hear me. He started
.

.

.

throwing things, breaking things.” As if still not believing it
was there, she reached up to feel the cut the medtech had just
finished bandaging. “I ran, both to protect myself and to get
help.” She looked toward the room. “It’s been quiet for a little
guess they got him calmed down. I hope ... I hope
they didn’t have to hurt him.”
“He’s had the best people the staff of this hospital can boast
attending to him on permanent rotating duty.” The psychiawhile, so

I

trist tried

to

sound reassuring.

“I

am

certain he will be all

right.”

“What do you think happened. Doctor?”
“I don’t

know,

either, Irene.

But

I

can hazard a guess.

has experienced a delayed psychological reaction to the
Pitar’s visit. You saw how calm he was in the alien’s presence.

He
It

was

is

true or not.

the last thing

I

would have expected, whether his

Somehow he held

it

all in,

story

kept perfect control

of his reactions and emotions. Then I expect he tried to forget
could
all about it. And he managed to do it—until his system
not take any more. When you told me it was like a bomb went
off inside him you were probably closer to the truth than you

She shook her head.
“People have this belief that fusionable material contains
the most explosive type of energy.” Reaching up, she tapped
her forehead. “Myself, I have always believed it was trapped

realize.”

DIRGE

211

Her expression somber, she knelt to face the shaken
woman and put a comforting hand on the other’s knee. “If you
would like to be relieved of this assignment, I will see to it
in here.”

that the order is cut.”

Tse swallowed and wiped at her eyes again. “No. I’ll stay on.”
Silently pleased, an admiring Nadurovina straightened.
“Your devotion to your job is commendable. I will make sure
that you are properly compensated for your dedication.”
Tse looked up at her. “I’m not staying on because I’m devoted to my job.”
Nadurovina hesitated only briefly. “Oh. So that is how it is.”
The younger woman nodded. “That’s how it is.”

The

psychiatrist’s

mouth

tightened. “I don’t approve.

It is

not professional.”

Tse responded with an awkward, choking laugh. “You’re
telling me. I didn’t plan it, you know. I had no idea anything
like this

would happen.”

am not sure that any of us ever do, dear.” The older
woman sighed. “I won’t say anything. As long as it does not
“I

appear to be interfering with your professional duties, I will
not raise any objections to your staying on.”
Reaching up, Tse took the other woman’s hand in hers and
mustered the best smile she could. “Thank you.”

With a

nod, Nadurovina turned and pushed back into
the crowd. This time she was held up by a guard, but from
within the room Chimbu must have seen her because she
last

heard his voice

The

out for her to be admitted.
hospital room did indeed look as if a bomb had gone

off within.

call

Of the patient there was no sign.

“We moved him

across the hall into fifty-two.”

A

weary

Chimbu looked harried and strained. “Along with anything else
that

was worth moving. He’s sleeping now, under

sedation.”

Without further comment he indicated their surroundings.

The destruction was impressive, Nadurovina
to believe

one

short, malnourished, sick patient

saw.
still

Hard
in the

middle stages of recovery had been able to wreak so much
havoc in so brief a span. Chimbu saw the question in her face.
“Nurse Tse called the medtech staff on duty immediately,

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

212

he might seribut they hesitated to interfere out of concern
few minutes
ously injure himself It took the duty physician a
the patient was still
to get here and issue orders. At that time
their efforts
going strong. Five orderlies needed to coordinate
them to administer a
to get him down long enough for one of

made the decision to jump him when it
looked like he was going to make a run for the window.”
sedative.

They

finally

Nadurovina glanced
fitted safety glass. It

in the direction of the specially retro-

was strong enough

an explosive
would have been

to stop

She found herself wondering if it
enough to thwart the crazed Mallory. The window was
shell.

“What about self-inflicted damage?”
“Nothing too serious. Minor cuts and bruises. I’ve
”
off
him
set
what
clear
pretty
it’s
think
I
and
to Tse,

still

closed.

talked

As
psychiatrist nodded. “I have also spoken with her.”
scanned the
she conversed with the chief medical officer she
The

cables
room. Expensive instrumentation had been smashed,
Bent
ripped from the walls and monitors, furniture crushed.
and twisted, a chair lay in one comer like a beached anemone.
Even the bed coverings had been shredded. Bending to pick up
out of the
a plastic cup, she saw that pieces had been chewed
The tornado that had gone back to sleep in Alwyn Malrim.

had reawakened. Remembering the shaken, frightened nurse, Nadurovina was thankful no one had been hurt.
What would Mallory do when he began to come out of

lory’s brain

By that time if the hospital staff
a new set of monitoring equipment

his sedative-induced sleep?

had done its job properly
should be in place and operational. There was no guarantee
raging and
the patient would not resume where he had left off,
well as himdestructive, endangering all those around him as

Tse’s intervention could be crucial, she knew. Steeling
herself, she headed for the hallway to talk to the nurse.
self.

Her considerable powers of persuasion were not required.
Tse was anxious to return to Mallory’s side. She listened quithat advice
etly to the older woman’s instructions, taking on
this
she thought useful and wordlessly ignoring the rest. By
time she felt she knew Alwyn Mallory better than anyone

DIRGE

213

when he next awoke she was the one who
would have to make the first, critical decisions.
In furniture, facilities, and layout room fifty-two
was a
else. Ultimately,

mirror image of the one a berserking Mallory had wrecked.
Under the influence of the powerful sedative he slept all
through the rest of the day and on into the night. Tse dozed off
beside him, unwilling to

had been provided

make use of the

for her.

inflatable

bed

that

When she awoke, it was to find the

of daylight creeping through the window and
the patient lying with eyes open, staring silently at her.
first

tendrils

Surprised, she started slightly, relaxing only

when he smiled.

was a bad boy, wasn’t I, nurse?”
“How are you feeling?”
Even before he could answer she was automatically check“I

ing the monitors alongside his bed. She knew they would
read more or less normal. If anything serious had manifested
itself during the night, doctors and other nurses would
have

attended to the problem, invariably waking her in the process.
But she had to ask.
“Tired.

A little

Reaching up, he felt of the pellucid
epidermal seal that had closed a cut on his forehead. “I don’t
remember many details. Just a lot of noise.”
Her tone was quietly reproving. “That would have been
you smashing up everything within reach in the other room.”
“Other room?” Raising up slightly, he scrutinized his new
sore.”

surroundings, noting the reversed layout and the altered view
through the large window. “I don’t remember being moved.”

“They had to knock you out. It took five orderlies.”
“Five, eh?” He seemed perversely pleased. “I imagine this
is going to go on my bill.”
Putting a hand over her mouth she covered the laugh she
was unable to suppress. This was supposed to be a serious
moment, one in which she admonished the invalid for his unacceptable actions and discussed with him how to prevent a
recurrence. Instead, she found herself giggling and grinning
at the irrepressible patient’s every other comment. Further-

more, she discovered that she didn’t give a

damn about

the

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

214

reactions of those individuals

whose

attention

might be fixed

to distant peeping monitors.
“I

your

have a feeling the government

is

picking up the cost of

stay.”

“Really?” Pushing

“Maybe

I’ll

down

against the mattress, he sat up.

trash this one later. Yeah,

one room a week. That

would fit the way I’m feeling.”
be serious, she wagged a warning
Keep it up and
finger at him. “I’d think twice about that.
sedation. You
you’ll be spending most of your time under
won’t be any good to anyone in that condition.”
Who
His smile evaporated and he looked away from her.

Making an

gives a

effort to

good goddamn?”

“I do,” she replied simply.

That brought his head back around. Outside, the equatorial
but
sun was climbing rapidly, flooding the room with diffused
glass darkened slightly
still sharply defining light. The window
in response, moderating the illumination
in the

and temperature level

room.

His tone was subdued, thankful. “I’d like to be able to say it
was worth everything I went through just to hear those two
words.”

She put a hand on his. “I don’t expect that kind of oblique
praise, Alwyn. I don’t need it.”
“Then you believe me?” Despite his outward bravado, she
could sense that veiled desperation underlined his words.
con“I believe you,” she replied sympathetically, “but to
vince others will require more than your word. Surely you

can see their

side.

You can’t accuse an entire

species of geno-

cide and inconceivable acts without something more to back
the words of a shipit up than the word of one man. Or even
ful.

You mustn’t feel singled out.”

do feel singled out,” he told her. “I was singled out. I
survived. I’m the only one who survived. Why me? Why not
“But

I

someone with a better nature, or great artistic talent? Why not a
composer or a writer, or a mother with three kids? I’m a cynical,
misanthropic, short-tempered, semiretired son of a bitch. If

DIRGE
there

was any justice

215

in this universe I’d

have been one of the

first to die.”

“That would have been a pity.”
His gaze narrowed slightly. “Yeah? Why?”

Her fingers tightened around his. “Because then we couldn’t
be having this conversation.”

He stared at her for a moment longer. Then he began to cry.
Not silently this time, nor in great racking sobs, but normally,
the way any man would cry when overwhelmed by irresistible emotion. The very ordinariness of it was a profound
relief to her.

He stopped so suddenly that she was alarmed.
“Alwyn, what is it, what’s wrong?”
“Nothing’s wrong.” He wiped at his eyes almost angrily, as
if trying to punish them for their betrayal of his fancied indifference. “I just
“Is

it

remembered something.”

important?”

“I think so.”

He was nodding slowly.

Nadurovina was not the

“It’s

proof.”

room. Rothenburg
was faster. Chimbu followed behind, accompanied by an orderly. There were others who wanted to join them, but the
chief medical officer had ruled against any more being present at any one time. Given the patient’s recent deranged outfirst

into the

want to do anything to make him feel
pressured. That included crowding his space.
On the bed, Mallory was nodding wisely to himself. “This
burst, the doctor did not

is

about as

much privacy as I thought I had.”

Rothenburg would not be denied. “You said you remembered proof. I heard you. I heard you distinctly. What kind of
proof?”

Mallory eyed the intelligence
think

I

officer unflinchingly.

invented that story about the

nuts, that

Pitar.

You

all

“You

think I’m

my mind is conjuring illusions to cover what I actu-

what that smiling Pitarian bastard you flew in
to confront me with would like you to think, too.”
“Change our minds.” Ignoring the cautioning looks he was
receiving from Nadurovina, Rothenburg challenged the other
ally saw. That’s

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

216

man

openly.

truth right in

“Make us look

stupid.

Go

on, do

it!

Shove the

my face.”

Mallory held the Major’s eyes for a moment longer, then
dropped his gaze and looked down at the bed. I can t. Not
yet.”

An

exasperated Nadurovina kept her voice level.

not? You said you had proof.”
“That’s the right tense, Colonel.

“Why

Had is the operative word

here.”

Rothenburg wanted to lurch forward, to shove the seated
nurse away from the bed, reach down, and violently shake the
made
infuriating man hiding beneath the covers until he
have
sense. “All right. You ‘had’ proof. What kind? It would
be convincing beyond doubt.”
Mallory coolly met the officer’s angry glare. “How about a
few hours of verifiable media-grade recording of the Pitar
ravaging Treetrunk? Shooting down adults and children, razing buildings, stalking through the streets in body armor?

to

Surgical teams carefully eviscerating

women and preserving

His body had begun to tremble again,
but his voice held steady. “How about it, Major? Would that

their internal organs?”

constitute sufficient ‘proof’?”

“Yes.” Rothenburg straightened. “Yes, once cleared beyond doubt of possible falsification and professionally veri-

would probably suffice. Where is it?”
The man in the bed was shaking his head slowly.

fied, that

“I don’t

know.”
?” Rothenburg began, but held himself
“You don’t
back when Nadurovina grabbed his shoulder.
.

.

.

mean,” Mallory muttered as he struggled with himself,
“I know, but I don’t know. I thinkl can find it.” He wore a look
“I

of honest helplessness. “I hid it.”
Glancing up at a small dot in the ceiling, Rothenburg barked
directives. “Security recheck! I want to know that this entire
building is scan-shielded, not just this room. Do it now.” When
a reply in the affirmative sounded from a concealed speaker,
he nodded sharply and turned back to Mallory. “Very well.

DIRGE

217

You have a recording, but you hid it somewhere. You think you
can find it. Where do we look?”
have to do it. Retrace my steps.”
He smiled wanly and gripped Tse’s hand tightly. “It’s the only
way.”
‘‘You’d never locate

it. I’ll

“Why?” Rothenburg prompted him.

“Just

tell

us where on

Treetrunk you concealed this recording and there’ll be a recovery team on site within days.”
not on Treetrunk,” he told the officer. “It’s on the inner
moon.” His expression turned apologetic. “Under a rock. I
“It’s

want to leave it on the lifeboat in case the Pitar detected
my emissions and picked me up.”
Rothenburg looked like a fighter who had just taken a combination to the head and body. “After the Unop-Patha delivered you to the Ronin your lifeboat was brought aboard and
thoroughly checked over. Nothing was found, of course. But
if that was your reference point for what you buried, how are
you going to find it now? As moons go, I understand that
Treetrunk One is pretty small. But it’s still a moon.”
“All I can do is try.”
“You’ll have help.” Rothenburg’s mind was racing ahead
planning, directing, plotting logistics. “What kind of container did you bury the recording in? Metal?” he concluded
didn’t

,

hopefully.

“Sorry.

used a small composite

Impervious to
extremes of heat and cold, maintains a good vacuum.”
“What was the recording medium?” Nadurovina asked.
“Standard home-recording mollysphere. A big one, centimeter in diameter. High grade
I could afford quality stuff.
Also composite material, of course.”
“Which means we’ll have a hard time running a materials
scan through rock.” The major took a step back from the bed.
I

sealtight.

—

“It

doesn’t matter. We’ll find

it

if

we have

to take the

whole

planetoid apart grain by grain.”

can save you a lot of time.” Mallory leaned back
against the pillows. “At least, I hope so.”
“I think

I

“Just a minute.”
that’s

Chimbu broke

“I’m not sure
where you were

his silence.

such a good idea. If you go back to

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

218

The experience
flash back and relive the trauma you origi-

found, there’s no telling

could cause you to

how

you’ll react.

back into coma.”
“I’m sorry, Doctor,” Rothenburg began, “but the overis
riding importance of this dictates that your authority
Mallory cut him off. “Take it easy, Major. I’m coming. He
don’t have
shifted his attention to the troubled Chimbu. “I

nally suffered. You could lapse

.

hundred thousand dead neighbors.”
of“If you experience a serious relapse,” the chief medical
not come out of
ficer warned him stiffly, “this time you might
might not come out of it at
it in as little as a month’s time. You
you’ll have neiall.” He looked sharply at Rothenburg. “Then

any choice.

I

owe it to

six

ther proof nor witness.”

“A witness without proof is worthless,” the officer
back. Remembering the man in the bed, he added less

shot
stri-

“Nothing personal, Mallory.”
“Up yours,” the patient responded without hesitation. “I’m

dently,

g°i ng-”

“Good. I’ll initiate the necessary arrangements.” Rothenburg eyed the doctor. “You’ll certify that he’s well enough to
travel.”

“Since that wasn’t phrased as a question,” a diffident
Chimbu replied, “I don’t suppose it matters what I say.”
“You’ll come along,” the officer continued inexorably, “to
supervise his medical care.” His gaze shifted to the side of the
bed. “As will you, Nurse Tse.”
“I

have no problem with that.” She continued to hold Mal-

lory’s

hand in hers.

one-centimeter diameter composite molly sphere.” Exhaling slowly, Nadurovina rubbed tiredly at her forehead. “I

“A

hope his mind will be clear enough to remember its location.”
“Screw his mind,” Rothenburg snapped. “His sense of direction is all I’m concerned about.” Remembering the figure
in the bed he added, “No offense.”
“For a repeatedly offensive person, at least you’re appropriately apologetic,” a serene Mallory informed him.

16

he long journey to the Argus system was accomplished
via military transport. Mallory was given a commanding officer’s suite with two adjoining orderly’s quarters. Tse was ensconced in one and Chimbu in the other. Though he objected
I

strenuously to the profusion of monitoring instrumentation
that

had been placed

in the suite, his protests

were courteously ignored. Until the greater matter at hand was resolved,
Alwyn Mallory would not be allowed to go to the bathroom
unsupervised.

He was

too important

—

so important that the

KK-drive dreadnought conveying him back to Treetrunk
traveled englobed in a cruiser-and-destroyer convoy.
It was an incredibly costly escort for one man. But Rothenburg could have asked for half a fleet and had the request
granted. Out of concern for secrecy, he did not. The movement of a small task force would not be overly remarked
upon. Military vessels

made

the run to

Argus

periodically.

Mallory’s escort was certainly of unusual size, but not aberrantly so.

As one by one the
back

ships executed the drop from space-plus

was outwardly nothing wrong
convoy’s first passenger. How much he was holding

into space-normal, there

with the

inside only he knew.

Nadurovina worried herself sick about
him. To a lesser extent so did Chimbu and Rothenburg and
the few others who knew what a full-strength task force was
doing visiting the devastated Argus system. Of those close to
medical science’s most important patient, only Tse was relaxed and confident.
219

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

220

one
“He’s stronger than you think,’’ she told Nadurovina
morning over real coffee and calorie-free beignets.
“Taxonomically speaking, I realize that Alwyn Mallory is
coffee
one tough son of a bitch.” The psychiatrist sponged
defensive
with a beignet. “I also know that he puts up a strong
He would not
front that conceals what he is really feeling.
despite
be human if it were otherwise. We are both aware that
never very far
his jaunty demeanor and tough exterior he is
and
from the edge. He proved that when he became violent
wrecked his original hospital room.” Her voice fell slightly.
“What happened before can happen again. As the physician
far
nominally in charge of overseeing his state of mind, I am

from prepared to

piss off that possibility.”

weight
Mallory
during the past weeks, Nadurovina noticed, while
had put it back on. Diet, concern, or fear? “I know Alwyn ’s
hesitantly
sanity has survived a terrible shock. She smiled
of his
over the rim of her cup. “He likes to say that the hinges
“I didn’t

mean

to

make

light

of

it.”

Tse had

lost

’

mind are intact, but rusty.”
“Has he said anything more about the
recording he claims to have made?”
Around them, crew shuffled back and

location of this

forth

from the

food wall to tables, chattering in small groups or eating in soliwere
tude. The crew of the dreadnought knew only that they

making a visit to Treetrunk. Rumor had it that the stop was intended as a grisly object lesson, to emphasize that those who
staffed the giant military KK-drive starships must never stray

from alertness. This erroneous scuttlebutt was encouraged.
Not ‘claims to,’ ” Tse countered primly. “Made. It’s real.
All we have to do is find it.”
Nadurovina sipped at her coffee. She had taken quite a
liking to the younger woman, motherly concern she kept well
hidden. Nothing could be allowed to affect their professional
relationship.

had your confidence. This is a very expensive
but to follow
little excursion. We have no choice, of course,
up on the only clue that has bequeathed itself to us. The world
council realizes that. Even so, they were reluctant to autho“I

wish

I

DIRGE

221

rize the escort force that

Rothenburg insisted on. For his part,
he refused to take your Mr. Mallory off-world without it.”
“Major Rothenburg is afraid that the Pitar might try something, isn’t he?”
“He just wants to be prepared. That’s his nature. A consummate alpha personality.”
“I want Alwyn to find the mollysphere, of course,” Tse
murmured, “but more to prove that he’s been telling the truth
all along than for any other reason.”
Nadurovina was slightly taken aback. “What about bringing the butchers of the six hundred thousand to justice?”
Tse hesitated momentarily. “If Alwyn ’s right and the Pitar
were responsible, if they did all the terrible things he says
they did and he can bring forth proof of it, it will mean war,
won’t it?”

The psychiatrist nodded

slowly.

“One does not need an ad-

vanced degree in human psychology to envision the explosion
of rage that would result. Personally, I cannot see anything less
than all-out hostilities satisfying the atavistic revenge response that would ensue. The limits of such a conflict would

remain to be defined, of course.”
Tse looked unhappy. “There are

interstellar

wars with

limits?”

“We have no

experience in such matters, but if the thranx
are to be believed, they have been engaged in just such a con-

with the A Ann for more than two hundred and fifty years.
do not see anything that time-consuming happening in this

test
I

She looked thoughtful. “We do not have the patience or
the forbearance of the thranx. Or so the relevant literature insists. Myself, I have never met one of the bugs. Someday I
think I would like to do so.”
“Not me.” Tse spoke with conviction. “I don’t care how intelligent they are. Every time I see one I’m reminded of the
time I snuck into my mother’s pantry looking for candy and a
bunch of cockroaches fell out on me. I was washing my hair
case.”

for days afterwards.”

“They do not look
tridees?

like cockroaches.

More like mantids.”

Haven’t you seen the

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

222
“I don’t like

them

either.”

Tse pushed back from the

table.

with multiple mouthparts, or
has honeycombed eyes, or walks on more than four legs.”
“You are phobic. I am surprised. A woman with scientific
“I don’t like anything that eats

training like yourself.”

“I’m not perfect,” Tse contended. “Everybody’s afraid of
something. Major Rothenburg is afraid of not having everything sufficiently organized. Dr. Chimbu is afraid of losing a
of Alwyn losing his mind again.”
“And Alwyn Mallory is afraid of the Pitar,’ the psychiatrist

patient. You are afraid

concluded.
“No. You’re wrong there.” There wasn’t a hint of doubt in
the nurse’s voice. “Alwyn isn’t afraid of the Pitar. He hates

them.

What he’s afraid of is himself .”

Consistent, disciplined activity

was

the

norm on

the bridge

behind him as Rothenburg gazed out the port. Mallory was
moon.
right, he reflected. Treetrunk One was not much of a
Easily overlooked, it was hardly worthy of the astronomical
designation. Looking at it put him more in mind of a captured

was more than large enough to
hide a small ship behind. Something as small as a lifeboat
would be swallowed entirely.
He had seen the tridees of the tiny vessel Mallory had used
to escape the holocaust that had swept over Treetrunk. The inasteroid than a

moon. But

it

had immediately struck him as uninhabitable. The outside was worse. Somehow the irascible engineer had not only
coerced it into lifting off without exploding on ignition, but

terior

had managed to coax it to the point of achieving escape velocity. Without its outmoded navigation equipment to automatically hone in on a destination, Rothenburg knew it would
have gone sailing silently off into the starfield, never to be
seen or heard from again.
Instead a quirk of luck had led to its being found by ingenuous aliens and its pilot being returned to his people. Subsequent events had precipitated a sequence of scarcely credible
concurrences culminating in the arrival proximate to the minor
satellite of Treetrunk of the most powerful expeditionary force

DIRGE
this sector

of

223

had ever seen.

starfield

It

was hardly

to

be

believed.

Rothenburg believed
short while that

same

it,

pilot

just as he believed that in a very

was going

embark on a return

to

scene of his recent madness. All the medical technology human science and experience could muster was
going to be brought to bear on that singular individual to envisit to the

sure that a recurrence of his dementia did not take place.

Even so, Rothenburg knew that nothing was certain. The best
minds and the most skilled techniques could not warrant that
upon setting foot on Treetrunk One Alwyn Mallory would
not go stark raving

mad or lapse into coma or otherwise react

in a fashion guaranteed to drive Rothenburg, Nadurovina,

and everyone
little

else connected with the current enterprise a

crazed themselves.

They could only hope and do

and put more trust
the ministrations of an ordinary duty
their best

than they wanted to in
nurse with a less-than-extensive professional history.
As so often happens at such times, events progressed in
ways unforeseen by even the most adept prognosticators.
Mallory allowed himself to be suited up without complaint or
hesitation, joking at the ongoing process and lending a hand

when and where he was able. Meantime, while everyone was
focusing on the indispensable patient, they neglected to consider the condition of his personal attendant. Having never

worn an environment
ship in

much

been outside a
space, Irene Tse was rapidly working herself into a
suit before,

less

of near hysteria.
The consequences of this were as salutary as they were unforeseen. Instead of being left to worry about himself, Mallory spent the last moments before disembarking working to
soothe and reassure the nurse. Only when he was convinced
of her well-being did he condescend to board the military repair vehicle that would carry them from the vast cocoon of
the dreadnought to the surface of the tiny moon below. This
time it was he who gripped her hand reassuringly.
They were not alone. A small flotilla of armed lifeboats, repair craft, and other vessels awaited, hovering like so many
state

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

224

incandescent bees around a darkened, mottled hive. Their operators had been primed to respond instantly to any requests

—

from Mallory once these had been quietly cleared by Major
Rothenburg or one of the two extensively briefed lieutenants
who were assisting him.
The major’s declaration that if circumstances demanded
it they would tear the moon apart to find the mollysphere
was held in abeyance. Stir up the satellite’s surface and they
might bury the inestimably precious recording permanently.
Or worse, the abysmally low gravity might allow it to drift off
into space. In respect of everything that could go wrong, each
ship kept its preassigned distance. Only one descended, with
infinite deliberation and care, to the surface of the moon itself.
It did not quite achieve touchdown. Hovering just above
the battered, eroded surface,

it

adjusted

its

position until the

was occupying the exact
same coordinates as the patient’s lifeboat had previously.
Even the north-south axis of the repair craft was oriented
identically. Stepping outside, Mallory theoretically should be

best records available insisted

it

able to recognize his surroundings, theoretically ought to be

capable of retracing his steps to the spot where he had buried
the recording.
Theoretically.

He entered the lock effortlessly and without apparent trepidation. Two techs preceded him while a third accompanied a
visibly agitated Tse.
fort, insistent

She was controlling herself with an

upon being included

in the excursion,

that if Mallory suffered a relapse she

wanted

ef-

knowing

be with him.
She needed to be with him, and not just for his sake. Their relationship had progressed beyond that. Nadurovina followed
her into the lock while a fourth tech signaled to those on the
other side of the barrier that all was well and the landing party
was ready to proceed.
All

was not

well, but

Tse knew how

to

to utilize various

mind- and breath-control techniques to stabilize her system.
Such skills were part of her training. It was the first time she
had used them on herself, however, and not on a patient. Con-

DIRGE
trolling her

225

emotions was another matter

entirely.

Somehow

managed that as well.
The outer door opened, and the dusky light of Treetrunk’s
star poured in. The first pair of techs exited efficiently, one
after the other floating gently down to the rocky surface. In deshe

on taking Tse’s
To everyone’s unspoken relief,

fiance of proper procedure, Mallory insisted

hand and egressing with her.
the tandem descent was accomplished without incident.
Once the entire landing party had left the repair craft, Mallory moved clear of the group and sought to establish his
bearings. If the larger vessel was positioned exactly the same
as his lifeboat had been when he had been marooned here,
then there ought to be a hill resembling a broken tooth approximately forty degrees to his right. Turning in that direc-

he was gratified to see that the landmark was exactly
where and how he remembered it. Approximately fifty meters
from where he was standing there would be a small, shallow
crater. As he paced off the span, the others followed at a respectful distance. No one watched his movements with more

tion,

intensity than Irene Tse.

The crater was a little farther than he remembered it, but it
was unarguably the same depression. To make certain, he
walked off the diameter. Seven meters, more or less. Remembrances were lining up like winning numbers on a gambling
machine, with a jackpot payoff at the end no bigger than a fingernail. Looking back at the hovering repair craft to properly
orient himself, he

drew a mental

line in the

rock between

and the snaggle-topped hill. Walking to the halfmeter-high rim of the crater, he looked down at its edge,
searching for the large, flat rock he had placed there. It had a
distinctive triangular shape, which was why he had chosen it.
the ship

The rock was not there.
Frowning behind the faceplate of his suit, he followed the
crater’s rim to the right. Still no sign of the marker he had
carefully left behind. When he had walked perhaps a fifth of
the way around the crater he retraced his steps and began
searching in the other direction. Tse advanced to join him.
The consequent intimacy was only physical. Anything they

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

226

said to one another could be overheard clearly

by everyone

by the crew of the repair craft and,
via relay, everyone listening back on board the dreadnought.
“It’s here.” Mallory paused long enough to look over at
else in the group, as well as

Tse, their faceplates nearly touching. “I

“Of course

it

is,”

she told

him

know it’s here.”

reassuringly. “It’s only

you to be a little disoriented. It’s been a long time,
and you had other things on your mind when you hid it.”

natural for

“I’m not disoriented!” Seeing her flinch behind the faceplate he hastened to apologize. “Really, I know exactly where
I am. Sometimes my words still get all mixed up, but not my
actions. Everything is just as I remembered it.” Turning, he
indicated the location and position of the repair craft, the
jagged hilltop looming in the distance, the shallow circular
crater. “This is all correct. Everything is where it should be.
Except for that damn rock.”
“Which damn rock?” she inquired quietly. “I’ll help you
look for it.” Turning her head, she glanced back in the direction of the assembled group. “We’ll all help.”
Mallory hesitated. It was his rock, his potential vindication, and he wanted to find the damn thing. But it wasn’t
where it was supposed to be. Maybe he was forgetting something. Or maybe he was imagining it after the fact. Maybe
maybe the Pitar who had visited him in the hospital room had
been right all along and his brain was inventing elaborate
cover-ups for his debased memory. Panic threatened to rise in
.

.

.

his throat like vomit.

“Okay, sure.
portant thing

is

Why not? Everyone can have a look. The imnot

who

finds the rock but finding

it,

right?”

Smiling tenderly behind her faceplate, Tse nodded encouragement. The others gathered around.
“We’re looking for a flat stone about this big.” Mallory
used his hands to trace size and shape in the vacuum. “About
eight centimeters thick.

“What color is

No other distinguishing features.”

asked one of the techs from the ship.
Mallory had to laugh. “Look around. You’ve got a choice of
two: dark gray and darker gray. It’s the shape that’s significant.”

The party

it?”

split,

half searching to the

left,

the other half

DIRGE

227

marching methodically in the opposite direction. When they
met unsuccessfully on the other side of the crater they passed
each other and kept going. By the time they met again, back
at the original starting point, discouragement and the first
flickerings of serious mistrust were beginning to make their
psychological presence felt among several of the searchers.
“Are there any other identifying landmarks?” Nadurovina
probed as gently as she could. It would not do to challenge
the patient too forcefully or say anything accusatory. Upsetting him could only have deleterious mental consequences.

She need not have worried. Mallory was already actively
upsetting himself. The strain showed clearly on his face.
If he had imagined burying the molly sphere, then maybe he
had imagined having it. If he had imagined having it, who
knows what else his mind had invented? The presence of the
Pitar? Not the devastation of Treetrunk
that was real enough.
All too much proof of the atrocity was hanging in the sky on
the other side of the small moon. Under incredible psychological pressure and mental stress, had he written on the blank
sheet of his memory an elaborate scenario that had never taken
place, that was the product of an overheated imagination instead of cold, composed reportage?
He could see the faces of his companions through the
transparencies of their faceplates, could see the skepticism
stirring in their expressions. Outwardly they remained committed and supportive, but within themselves they were beginning to question, to wonder, and he lay square at the nexus
of their mounting uncertainties.
Where was that damn rock? A man could contrive any
number of chimeras, but a rock was a real thing: solid and unforgiving, a piece of stellar matter made hard and cold. Ignoring the accusing stares, he focused on the surface on both
sides of the crater: scanning, searching, scrutinizing. There
were plenty of rocks, hundreds of rocks. Some were the right
size, but none were quite the proper shape, and not one was
where it had been when he’d first decided on the hiding spot.
“We have to go back.” The voice of the tech reverberated

—

like a bell in Mallory’s helmet: tolling failure, ringing fiasco.

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

228

studying a gauge. “Overall, group air is down to fifteen percent. Return to ship is standard security procedure.”

He was

Tse remained

at

Mallory’s side.

“It’s

okay, Alwyn.

the suits are recharged we’ll have something to eat

and drink.

and you can collect your thoughts. Then
again.” She smiled hopefully. “Maybe all you need

We’ll talk about
we’ll try
is

While

a fresh

it,

start.”

was not required of her, Nadurovina did her best to encourage him. “If you stepped out of the
ship facing the wrong way, you could have started off on the
wrong tangent right at the beginning.”
“We’ll recheck the location and orientation of the repair
“That’s right.”

Though

it

boat, too.” Rothenburg’s tone belied the helpfulness of his

words. “If

it’s

off even a few degrees

it

would mess every-

thing up.”

Everything was already messed up, Mallory thought apprehensively. The repair craft was properly positioned. He
knew that was the case because the cracked hill stood exactly

So did the crater. He knew it was the
right crater not only because it was situated precisely where
it belonged, but because it was the proper size, shape, and
depth. He remembered. There was nothing wrong with his
memory unless he was so seriously impaired that his imaginings had become that real to him. If that was the case, then
maybe what he thought was reality was in fact the foundation
of his madness. Maybe he wasn’t even here, on this runt rock
of a satellite. Maybe he was lying in a hospital somewhere
back on Earth, with a solicitous but otherwise disinterested
Tse bending over him. He’d been given a lot of medication, he
knew. Maybe his return to Treetrunk was drug-induced instead of Kurita-Kinoshita powered.
“Alwyn, don’t look like that!” Tse was at his side, gripping
his suit and shaking him. “You’re scaring me.”
Blinking, he nodded slowly as he met her gaze. “It’s nice to
have company. I’m scaring me, too.” Gently disengaging his
arm, he turned to look at and past the crater rim. “This is
where

it

ought

to be.

—

right.

Everything

is right. It’s

just as I

remember it. The rock

should be here. The recording should be under it.”

DIRGE

He became aware

229

two techs were now flanking
him. “Mr. Mallory, sir,” one of them was saying inside his
helmet, “we’re running low on air. Regulations require that

we return to the
Angry and

that the

ship for recharging.”

conftised,

he allowed himself to be led back

toward the waiting repair boat. Aware that their words were
common currency via the suit channel, none of his companions voiced their thoughts or feelings. Vacuum helped to dis-

growing tension, but could not banish it entirely.
Halfway back to the ship, Mallory halted as if shot. When

sipate the

he whirled to confront Rothenburg, the officer recoiled slightly
but held his ground. He did not care for the look on the
patient’s face.

“When

the technicians

from the Ronin retrieved

my

what method did they use?”
“Excuse me?” Taken aback by the abruptness of the question as well as the confrontation, Rothenburg stalled for time.
“How did they reclaim it?” Mallory was in a fit of impatience, not madness. “Did they use a tractor beam from the
lifeboat,

big ship, did service personnel adjust
naling for

its

position before sig-

be taken aboard, did they try to fire the boat’s
engine? What recovery techniques were employed?”
“I don’t know,” the major admitted. “But I can find out.”
Switching to suit to boat to mothership relay, Rothenburg
conveyed the query while Mallory and the rest of the party
it

to

Not in silence, though, or in contentment.
“Really, Mr. Mallory,” the tech standing on his

waited.

clared. “Suit air is

approaching ten percent.

We

right de-

absolutely

must return to the boat.”
“You go on if you want to.” All of Mallory’s attention was
focused on Rothenburg, waiting for a reply, waiting for an explanation. “I’m not finished here yet. Ten percent is more
than I need.” At his side, a hesitant but supportive Tse stood
with him. With an effort of will, she avoided looking down at
her own suit gauge.

Rothenburg

manned

finally

repair craft

switched back to

were used

to

suit-to-suit.

move your

“Two

old boat from

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

230

here to the Ronin. They were smaller than the one

we came

down on, but larger than your lifeboat.”
“Propulsion systems.” With that Mallory turned and began
to retrace their original line from the repair ship, not walking

moving in long, bounding strides
through the low gravity. Each time he touched down his feet
kicked up a cloud of slow-settling dust dust and small rocks.
Nadurovina was visibly concerned, and Tse’s expression
bordered on the frantic; but Rothenburg saw and understood.
By running Mallory was not just returning as rapidly as possible to the crater: He was delivering a lesson in physics. Ignoring the rising plaints of the technicians, the major raced
deliberately this time but

—

after the retreating patient.

Arriving at the crater’s edge he found Mallory once more
searching the terrain. Not along the crater’s rim this time, but

beyond. Well beyond. Without a word he moved off to one side
and commenced hunting on his own. He heard Nadurovina
long before she reached him.

“What’s going on? You heard the tech.

We have to return to

the ship!”

“Five minutes,” the excited officer told her. “Another five
minutes.

Then we’ll all go back together.

“Right,” the spirited reply came.

Right, Mallory?”

Some

private epiphany

had restored the patient’s spirits even as they had revived
Rothenburg ’s enthusiasm for the mission. “Five minutes.
And if we don’t find it then, we’ll come back and spend some
real

time looking for

it.

Everybody,

five minutes!

Look

for

the rock.”

Tse fell to searching alongside him. “I thought you told us
that you placed it on the rim of the little crater, Alwyn. In a
line between your lifeboat and the broken hill.”
“I did.” Not looking up, he continued moving methodically
over the airless landscape, head down, searching, searching.
“But when repair craft came from the Ronin to recover my
lifeboat, one of them might have positioned itself with its
grapplers facing that way.” He rose just long enough to point
directly behind them, back toward the waiting boat. “When it
fired its thrusters to

commence

the return to the cruiser, the

DIRGE
exhaust blast would have

around

come

231
this way.”

One arm swept

swooping arc that terminated with his hand
pointed toward the ragged promontory. “It would have blown
dust and debris in the direction of the hill.”
Her eyes widened slightly. “And rocks.”
He nodded vigorously. “Maybe even a few big rocks.
Maybe even one shaped like a triangle.”
They found it with six percent air remaining in their suits.
There was nothing under it. Another man might have been
crushed by the sphere’s absence, but not Mallory. He recogin a wide,

nized every

every pore, every crack. It was
his rock, the one he had positioned as a marker over the container holding the recording. Half mad at the time he might
rill

in the stone,

have been, but the sane half had known what

was doing. Of
that infinitely priceless little sealtight there was no sign.
“It’s here.” Carefully he put the rock down. “For God’s
sake, everyone watch where you step.” His head was in conit

stant motion, minutely scrutinizing the surface

around the

of his companions as well as his own.
Nadurovina studied the gently rolling, dust- and grit-covered
terrain. “We’ll need dozens of searchers. Even with numbers it
could take months to find anything in this.”
“If the exhaust blast from the repair vehicle blew a rock
feet

from the crater’s rim, the container holding the
recording would have been blown ten times as far.” Rothenburg was looking not at his feet, but off in the distance.
“Not necessarily,” Mallory argued. “It could have been
blasted down into the dust, or become caught up against another rock, or the rim of one of these smaller craters. It could
be an arm’s length from here, or a hundred.”
The major was nodding. He was doing what he did best,
what he most enjoyed: organizing. “Everyone will be properly instructed. We’ll bring shape sensors in, and have some
simple mesh boxes made up for sifting dust. We’ll find it.”
His tone was decisive.
“Unless it was blown off into space,” one of the techs contended. “The gravity here is so weak.”
“That is a possibility.” The ever-rational Rothenburg was
this size so far

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

232

compelled to entertain the unthinkable. “But to push away
from the surface the thrusters on the repair craft that retrieved
his lifeboat would have been directed downward. I would lay
odds that the container is still here somewhere, buried in the
dust or jammed up against a redeeming rock.” The muscles of
his face were tight. “We have to believe that.”

Had

Unop-Patha chanced to return to the inner moon of
Argus V they would have been astonished to find more than a
hundred space-suited humans busying themselves like ants
on a portion of the insignificant satellite’s surface. Finding
the

humans more than a

little

baffling anyway, the frenetic ac-

being carried out in the complete silence of the void
would only have added to their bewilderment.
tivity

Responding to Rothenburg’s directive, the task force was
prepared to remain on station for a month. Settling in for a
long, monotonous stay proved unnecessary.
The young ensign who entered the cafeteria two days later
had not even taken the time to remove her sweat-stained
undersuit. Accompanied by two companions and a senior officer she made her way to the table in the far comer and presented herself to a questioning Nadurovina with a crisp salute.
Without further ado she swung a small metallic bag from her
side to her front, unsealed it, reached inside, and removed an
object that she placed gently on the table.
“Is this it?” she asked without preamble.

Resting on the table, between a chicken sandwich on
cracked wheat and a rangeweed salad, was the most important single object in the

Arm.

It

did not look like much.

The

had taken from the back blast of the rescuing repair
craft’s thrusters had left its surface pitted and one comer
cmmpled. The seal, however, was intact.
Mallory was surprised at how steady his fingers were as he
reached across table and food to pick it up. Almost casually,
he disregarded the seal. The lid flipped open. Inside lay a
tumble

it

small, gleaming, one-centimeter-in-diameter silvery sphere
that glistened metallically beneath the overhead lights of the
cafeteria,

even though there was no metal in it.

Unable

DIRGE

233

to contain herself, Irene

Tse threw her arms around

Mallory’s neck and shoulders and hugged him so hard that the
psychiatrist feared he would drop the container. There was

chance of that. For the foreseeable future

was wedded
to the patient’s hand: a small, square, silvered sixth digit. The
former patient, she corrected herself. Standing by the side of
the table, the ensign who had found the box beamed proudly.
No one had acknowledged her question. No one had to.
A somber Tse stared at the unprepossessing contents of the
box. “So much tragedy in such a tiny space.”
Mallory nodded. “It’s full of death. Death, and justification. I wish the two weren’t joined.” Putting it back in the
little

it

he closed the lid but did not try to reactivate the
container. Frankly, he was unsure if the battered seal could be
repowered. “Intelligent beings are going to die because of
sealtight,

what’s on that mollysphere.
“I

hope

so, sir,”

A lot of intelligent beings.”

one of the other soldiers

who had accom-

panied the ensign declared. Standing at attention, he was not
smiling. “One of my cousins and his family were colonists on
Treetrunk.”
“Better no one

jumps

any conclusions.” Pushing back
from the table, Nadurovina rose. “We must go inform Rothenburg and the rest of the staff. Meanwhile, let’s pray that the
sphere is still functional and that it contains more than tridee
of Argusian fauna and scenes of settlement life.” She started
to

for the doorway.

Mallory and Tse followed. She was leaning against him. “I
don’t care what happens now, or if the sphere operates, or
what’s on it. Finding it vindicates you, Alwyn.”
“I know. But I don’t care if I’m absolved. I want what I saw
and experienced to be vindicated. Not me.” In what should
have been a moment of triumph, his expression was forlorn,
his tone bleak. “The psyche is exonerated. Let’s hope the

same holds

true for the technology.”

17

I

I

erringale

had been chosen by

lot

from the pool of quali-

with a physical
profile from which all the rough edges had long since been
buffed by time, he was one of those faceless but professional
bureaucrats who do most of the work for little of the recognition. An engraved plaque now and again or an extra day’s paid
vacation were all the extra reward someone of his position
and demeanor could reasonably expect.
Now he was waiting to receive Suin-Bimt, the ranking
Pitar on Earth. He was not nervous, and in fact was looking
forward to it. He would control himself, he knew. His life had
fied candidates. Inoffensive, gentle voiced,

been spent in controlling himself. It was one of the reasons he
had been chosen to conduct the interview.
The conference chamber was very large for two. An enormous curved window, seemingly poured in one piece and unsupported by braces throughout its length, overlooked the
Bodensee. Ancient castles were visible along the lakeshore,
and snow crowned the majestic rampart of the northern Alps.
Gleaming golden, a meeting table capable of seating thirty in
comfort shone behind him. He and Suin would not need it.
They would use two comfortable chairs and a small round
table instead.

The

from the far corridor, the doors sliding
silently apart to admit him. Locating Herringale as his host
rose, Suin altered course toward him. When he extended a
hand in the customary human fashion, the much smaller
Pitar entered

human took it politely, then gestured that they both should sit.
Outside, pleasure boats cruised the calm waters of the im-

234

DIRGE
mense

The sun shone brightly, filtered by the
small table between them stood two tall glasses

alpine lake.

On the

glass.

235

and a citrine pitcher
view and smiled.
“This
here, so

is
I

filled

very pleasant.

I

with ice water. Suin took in the

was told my presence was required

came. Not for long,

I

hope.

I

have a

full

schedule

today.”
“It

shouldn’t take

much of your time.” Fingering the arm of

his chair, Herringale activated the player.

A large rectangular

heads-up display darkened in the center of the window,
blocking out a portion of the villatic view of the lake and
mountains. “I’ve been asked to watch a recording with you
and seek your comments. It’s been cleaned up a little, but I’m

more or less identical to the original. There’s water,
and glasses. If you need anything else, ask me.”
“What kind of recording?” The Dominion’s ambassador
settled back in the easy chair. “One of your frenetic entertainment features? Or is it music? I quite like your music.”
“There’s no music,” Herringale told him quietly, “and it’s
told

it’s

not entertainment.”

The

display flickered briefly.

An

added

title

appeared,

giving time, date, and length as well as other relevant

Herringale was watching the

Pitar,

not the display.

vitals.

He had al-

ready seen the recording. More than once.
Everything that appeared was from the point of view of a
moving recorder. The images drifted dreamily in the air in
front of the window, rendered in soft tridee or what the an-

would have called bas-relief. Adjusting the display
controls would have brought them forward in full three dimensions, but Herringale and his superiors saw no need for
that. There was enough to comprehend in the reduced format.
Suin watched for a while without commenting. Insofar as
cients

Herringale could

tell,

the Pitar’s expression did not change.

Twice, he turned slightly to pour himself a glass of water.

Only when the recording reached its end did the alien turn to
regard his host. During the replay the ambassador had shown
no emotion, had offered no comment.

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

236

“Very imaginative.

And very

insulting. I

am

forced to in-

quire as to the rationale behind such an expensive travesty.

Your entertainment people are very clever, but this is not in
any wise amusing.”
“We are in agreement on that,” Herringale informed him
stiffly. “It is not amusing. Nor was what you have just seen
the product of our ‘entertainment’ people. It is a tridee media
recording, broadcast on Treetrunk at the time of its invasion
and recorded by an alert citizen who had access to more professional equipment than the average resident.”

“Absurd.” The Pitar’s voice was unchanged.

“No

record of

the devastation of that unfortunate world exists. If

it

did,

it

would have come to light long before now.”
“It was hidden,” Herringale explained. “And only recently
recovered.”

The

Pitar shifted his position in the cradling chair. “I

had

been given to understand that your people had scoured the
surface of Argus Five and continue to do so without finding
anything remotely like what you have just forced me to
watch.”

However, this recording was not found on
Treetrunk. It lay buried and unnoticed on Treetrunk One, the
smaller of that martyred world’s two moons. A refugee who
fled during the invasion concealed it there. He is the same
“That

is so.

person who made the recording.”
Ambassador Suin was repeatedly making the Pitarian ges-

“No one escaped the destruction. Your own people say so.” He shifted his legs preparatory
ture that signified negativity.

to rising. “I

do not

like this

game, and

I

have important work

to supervise.”

“Oh, please.” Herringale leaned forward sharply. “Humor
me a moment longer. This really is very important.”
Impatient and reluctant, the ambassador retained his seat.
“I disagree, but very well. A few moments more, and then I
really must go.”
“Yes. Just a few moments. Does the name Alwyn Mallory
mean anything to you?”

DIRGE

237

The Pitar’s expression rippled. “No.

Is this

person attached

to the diplomatic mission here?”

“Hardly. He’s not even attached to the government. One of
your people on the other side of the planet, a diplomatic at-

tache
“I

named Dmis, has met him.”
do not know that name, either.

I

am

not expected to

know the names of everyone

assigned to duty on your world,
any more than you would be required to identify everyone
working in the diplomatic arm of your government.”
Herringale nodded. “Maybe you should contact and converse with Dmis. He met Mr. Mallory, so he knows that he is a

We also know that Mr. Mallory is a real person
an unusually independent and resourceful one. Among other
real person.

things,

Alwyn Mallory is an ex-starship engineer. As a hobby,

he obtained and restored a ship’s lifeboat of antiquated design.
It was adequate to convey him to the far side of the moon in
question, together with a copy he had made of this remote

media broadcast. To ensure its safety, he buried the recording
on the moon. It has only recently been recovered.”

“A very

disturbing story.” Suin pressed outer edges of his
hands together in the formal Pitarian manner. Like all his

kind he was an extraordinarily handsome individual, tall and
regal. Granted unlimited access to the skills of Earth’s finest
cosmetic surgeons, Herringale
so imposing.

knew he could never look half

“The recording has been authenticated. Among the methods
employed to do this was the extensive excavation of the specific locales imaged in the tridee. Everything matches up, from
the ruined buildings to the traces of blood found in the city of

Weald’s central square.”

He found

take a swallow of cold water. “I
tensive.

he was compelled to
am told that such traces are exthat

Having viewed the recording several times previously,

even as a nonexpert I can understand this.”
“I am leaving now.” The ambassador moved to rise. Herringale rose with him. The Pitar towered over the soft-bodied,
middle-aged diplomat.

“We have many questions.” Herringale ’s voice was as calm
as when he had first greeted the alien. “Foremost among these

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

238
is

know the reason behind the careful evisceramany females and the concurrent careful preser-

the desire to

tion of so

admit that I am personally
have two daughters of approximately the same

vation of their reproductive organs.
interested. I

I

age as the young women who are shown in the recording being disemboweled while still alive.” Without realizing
what he was doing, he reached out to pluck at the ambassador’s sleeve. “Please, won’t you explain? I’m really, really
curious.”

Suin stared down at him. “I intend to register a formal
protest with my government. To waste my time with such
nonsense is bad enough, but to subject me to additional
slander borders on wanton malice.”

Herringale told him. Something
was rising within the career diplomat, and he fought hard to
suppress it. Professional self-control was a major reason,
after all, why he had been chosen for this morning’s work. “It

“Go ahead and

is

register,”

possible your complaint will arrive before

my

govern-

ment’s formal declaration of war.”

The ambassador finally showed some emotion, though it
was as subdued as all such Pitarian reactions. “What kind of
joke are you making? You can’t mean that your people would
begin a war based on a single recording purportedly made by
a lone human?”
“The recording has been validated. Mr. Mallory’s reminiscences have been validated. The decision of the world council
was unanimous. The colonies have been informed, and their
respective individual councils wholeheartedly concur. In effect, the

war has already begun.

It

will be interesting to ob-

serve the consequences. There are those pundits
that interstellar

war

is

an oxymoron.

We

who

insist

are about to find

out.” Despite efforts to control himself, his tone

darkened

somewhat. “Your people are about to find out.”
“Is there no stopping this travesty?”
Herringale gazed up at the much taller alien. He found that
he was not intimidated. “Beginning at six o’clock tonight,
Greenwich mean time, the recording made by Mr. Mallory
will be broadcast across the planet and on all the colonies. It

DIRGE

239

be flanked by detailed information explaining the nature
of the recording and how it came to be. The program will be
followed by the official announcement of mobilization. Rewill

servists are already reporting to their positions

and

their

have been asked to conclude this meeting, Ambassador Suin, by informing you that you and your entire staff
are under arrest, and heretofore should regard yourselves as
prisoners of war.” This time it was the sallow-faced human
ships.

I

who smiled.
“You cannot

reciprocate, of course, since

you have never
allowed us to establish a formal mission on either of the Twin
Worlds. In the light of what we now know, such puzzling decisions on your part strike us as ever more suspicious.”
“Are there to be no ends to these insults?” Suin drew himself up to his full, impressive height. “By your own laws, my
staff and I have diplomatic immunity.”
“I’m sorry, but after viewing that recording there is little
inclination

among any of my people, be

they

members of the

diplomatic corps or the local janitorial staff or the general
populace, to grant any kind of immunity to any Pitar. In fact, I

can honestly say that

were bestowed upon me,
I would take great pleasure in cutting you into smaller and
smaller pieces of raw meat right here in this room, even at the
risk of permanently staining a very expensive and historically
if the privilege

important floor covering.”

Suin was striding toward the doorway. “I refuse to stand
here and be subjected to continued insult and innuendo.”

“You don’t have to,” Herringale called after him. “You can
keep going and be subject to continued insult and innuendo
later.”

Herringale was not quite finished with the ambassador.

Confronted beyond the doorway by a quartet of heavily armed
and armored security personnel, the Pitar surprised them
by drawing a weapon of unknown type from a hidden compartment within his left pants leg. It must have been a
well-shielded compartment in order for the diplomat to have
successfully blinded the security scanners that monitored

comings and goings

to the inner chancellery.

all

There was no

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

240

need for a diplomat to carry a weapon, Herringale mused as
he ducked down behind one of the chairs, unless the possessor
had something to fear or was particularly paranoid.
They never found out in Suin’s case because, after wounding two of the guards, the Pitarian ambassador died in a blaze
of gunfire as he attempted to flee the building. An offer to remand the remainder of his colleagues into protective custody
was declined with disdain. Following the general broadcast of
the Mallory record, as it came to be known, a mob stormed the
building housing the Pitarian embassy in Zurich. Defending
themselves, the Pitar killed several dozen people before the

—

military could intervene.

The

aliens perished to the last.

Similar confrontations took place wherever Pitar could be
found, from the supposedly inviolate compound on Bali to

and Lala.
Within twenty-four hours of the worldwide broadcast of the
unexpurgated recording, not a Pitar was left alive on Earth.
At the time, there were two Pitarian vessels in orbit. In attempting to flee, one was blown apart while the other managed

more

isolated urban facilities in Brisbane, Delhi,

being impossible to track a ship in space-plus, the
pursuing humans terminated the chase halfway between the
moon and distant Mars.
All the while, warships and supply vessels were in the pronot only in the vicinity of Earth, but
cess of assembling
to escape.

It

—

around

its

far-flung colonies as well.

From Proycon

to

Cen-

from New Riviera to Mantis, ships and personnel
gathered. There was no singing of patriotic songs, no mass
rallies of fervid supporters. It was all business, serious business, and was organized and conducted accordingly.
Some hoped that the Pitar would admit their crime and
capitulate, following which suitable punishment and penalization could be decided upon. Others prayed that the aliens
would resist. As the Twin Worlds of the Dominion did not
lie that far from either the galactic plane or the expanding
human sphere of influence, an answer to these questions was
taurus,

expected soon.
Once they had been informed of Pitarian responsibility for
the Treetrunk atrocity, outrage

was general among every other

DIRGE

241

The
quarrel was between humankind and Pitar, and it would be
left to those two civilizations to settle the matter. The Quillp,
civilized species.

It

did not translate into action, however.

the Unop-Patha, and everyone else expressed their regret and

sorrow and then stood back to see which species would prevail. In this regard the AAnn proffered their condolences
as fervently as anyone else, while quietly hoping that both
powerful space-going races would permanently and severely
incapacitate one another in the coming conflict.
Among the thranx the reaction was one of subdued fury.
Arising as they did from an ancient line that had succeeded
partly by venerating a single egg-laying queen, they were especially sensitive to any violation of the reproductive system.
What the Pitar had done to and with human females sent a
ripple of rage through every hive. Even as the humans methodically assembled a vast force to attack the Twin Worlds,
vexatious debate seethed

spond

to the

among the thranx on how best to re-

unimaginable barbarity.

does not involve us.”
Sprawled atop a convenient log, Wirmbatusek regarded
the lake. It was a small body of water surrounded by dense
tropical forest, a refuge high in the mountains of Lombok.
Nearby, Asperveden was waltzing with a birdwing butterfly,
letting it flutter from one truhand to another. Perhaps the
huge, iridescent green omithop recognized a distant alien
cousin. More likely it just found the thranx ’s chitinous digits
“It

a convenient place to

rest.

“Of course it involves us.”
Raising a truhand, Asperveden examined the exquisite

Compound eye met compound eye. Beautiftil, the
attache mused. What the butterfly felt was not recorded.
Eventually it tired of the game and flew off, soaring up into
creature.

the

tall

vine-draped hardwoods, a pair of thin emerald slabs

throwing back the sun.

Wirmbatusek turned his head and antennae in the direction
of his friend and coworker. “Keeping a constant watch on the
A Ann is enough to worry about. Why would the Grand Council

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

242

choose to weaken our own defenses to support a massive effort
to punish a race that has done nothing to us?”
Exhibiting uncharacteristic daring, Asperveden walked for-

four trulegs were in the water. Astonished at his
boldness, he stood and watched as the tepid, algae-

ward until

own

all

stained green liquid swirled gently around his limbs.

Where

he was standing the lake was perhaps ten centimeters deep.
Wirmbatusek’s antennae twitched nervously. “Are you insane? Get out of there! Suppose the soil is soft and you begin
to sink? Don’t expect me to pull you out.”

companion to
be calm. “Have no fear. The surface underfoot is firm and un-

The

slightly smaller thranx gestured for his

These Pitar have violated every accepted norm of
civilized behavior”
“No one disputes that.” Wirmbatusek watched a line of
ants marching along the base of the log. To a single ant, the
insectoid thranx might well have been a vision of God. “No
one disagrees with the humans’ urge to seek revenge. We
would doubtless react similarly, albeit less noisily, if the barbarity had been visited upon us. But it was not. What happened on Argus Five does not concern us.”
“Why not? Because only mammals died? Because only
human females were dishonored?”
“It is too facile to say that we should help the humans.”
Sliding off the log, Wirmbatusek settled himself on his
trulegs. Using all four hands he daintily picked bits of bark
and other debris from his gleaming blue-green exoskeleton
and the thorax pouch that hung from his second major body
segment. “First, they have not asked us, or any other species,
for assistance. Next, it is not incumbent on the thranx to aid
them because there is no treaty or agreement between our two
races particularizing any such action. There are no reasons
for us to become involved and many why we should keep our
distance. For one thing, like so much else about them the
martial capability of these Pitar is unknown. We could end up

yielding.

having allied ourselves with the losing side.”
fallen leaf from his

abdomen.

He

flicked a

DIRGE

243

would not bet against the humans in a war.” Finally
starting to grow uneasy at the feel of water lapping around his
legs, Asperveden carefully backed out of the shallows.
“Nor would I, but neither would I choose to gamble with
“I

the neutrality that preserves our civilization unscathed.
is not a lark, and gambling on it not entertainment.”

One

War

Asperveden shook water from his im“The estimable Desvendapur would have

foot at a time,

permeable

chitin.

much to say about this situation ”
“No doubt, if he was living. I wish

could have seen him
perform. To my knowledge none of his poetry dealt with war,
despite the gravity of his clan and family history.” The larger
thranx followed a pair of hombills as they glided across the
lake.

“What makes you

help even if it were to

I

humans would accept our
be offered? A great many of them dethink the

and cannot even stand to be in our presence. Those of
us here and at the Amazon hive are isolated from such indispise us

vidual conflicts.”
“I realize that our relations are

still

developing.” Feeling

pangs of morning hunger, Asperveden began to remove food from his own pouch. “I am not naive. Much work
remains to be done to bring our two peoples together to the
point where trust is accepted instead of debated, and genuine
friendship is not an isolated occurrence.” Biting into a starch
loaf with all four opposing jaws, he chewed reflectively.
“This conflict would be a perfect opportunity to do just that.”
Approaching his friend, Wirmbatusek waited to be offered
the

first

food, withholding his

made

own

offering until the smaller thranx

the appropriate gesture.

“More than

concerns
are involved in this. As many thranx are suspicious of the humans as they are of us. It is hard enough to arrange for meetings, for cultural exchanges, for agreements on minor matters.

An

strategic

alliance that includes provisions for mutual defense lies

far in the future.”

need not require a formal association.” Asperveden
executed the appropriate hand gestures, following which his
friend responded in kind. They exchanged food. “The arrangement could be temporary, and understood as such by
“It

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

244

both sides. Assistance in time of and solely for the duration of
conflict, superseding all current agreements, after which the
previous status is resumed.”

Wirmbatusek considered. “I am envisioning several fully
armed hive warships emerging from space-plus at safe distance beyond the orbit of this world’s moon. I am envisioning the human reaction. I am not sanguine about what I am
seeing.”

“Hive ships need not enter this system. A mutual rendezvous point elsewhere could be agreed upon.” Asperveden
refused to acknowledge the impossibility of his hypotheti-

“The humans would be grateful. It would
advance our relationship and improve our mutual prospects
cal proposal.

immeasurably.”

Swallowing, Wirmbatusek began to hunt in his pouch for
the spiral-spouted drink bottle. “If
Pitar should win,

we would have

we

are victorious. If the

acquired their enmity for

nothing.”

Asperveden argued. “We would still have
gained the gratitude of the humans.”
“Would we?” Slipping the decorated drinking tube between his jaws, the larger worker began to sip sugary, nutritious liquid. “You ascribe to humans a quality of gratefulness

“Not

true,”

have yet to see demonstrated.” He passed the bottle over.
“First I would like to see one invite me into its home without
an expression of disgust on its face. Then I might consider

I

rendering

it

some

assistance. If we

tached in the eyes of Pitar and

remain neutral we are de-

human alike. We risk nothing.

what the Quillp, and the Unop-Patha, and even the
AAnn are doing. Why should we do any differently?”

That

is

Asperveden contemplated the tranquil lake, the intriguingly different indigenous wildlife, the warm, clear, morning
air, and felt himself troubled. “I do not know. Perhaps be-

we are better than they?”
Wirmbatusek chose to comment via a sequence of circum-

cause

spect clicks. “Anything else?”

“Nothing that could be construed as conclusive. Only that,

DIRGE
unlike

many who count themselves

245
true progeny

Queen, I happen to like humans.”
“So do I,” Wirmbatusek confessed
not mean

and

life

I

freely.

of the

“But

First

that does

am ready to march out of the hive to sacrifice limb

alongside them.”

18

he armada was unlike anything that humankind, or for that
matter any of the other species that happened to dwell in that
same portion of the Arm, had seen before. Less what was
necessary to protect and defend Earth and its other colonies,
every armed vessel propelled by a KK-drive was assigned a
position and time to rendezvous on the outskirts of the DoI

was believed that the Pitar would meet them there,
somewhere in the vicinity of their system’s twelfth and outermost world. It was also conceded that Pitarian vessels ranging far and wide would at least make an attempt to assault one
or more of the human populated worlds, if only to divert atminion.

It

tention from their own.

Human

were perplexed. The xenologists who had studied the Pitar were not.
Levi was one of those who was not. Others like him had
been assigned to the armada, one to a ship so that in the event
of catastrophe all the members of his group and the valuable
knowledge they represented could not be lost in a single
blow. If not the fleetest of mind or the most experienced
member of the team that had studied the Pitar since first contact, he was acknowledged the senior member of the group.
His opinion was solicited and respected. He found himself on
the Wellington seconded to the general staff.
It was subsequent to a meeting where the plan of first attack was being finalized that he found himself, thoroughly
preoccupied with the critical matters at hand, strolling aimlessly through the great ship. As big as anything mobile that
mankind had yet put in space, the Wellington was an impresNeither threat materialized.

,

246

strategists

DIRGE

247

sive achievement.

Four rings of armaments located in evenly
spaced weapons blisters girdled the main body of the dreadnought. The KK-drive generating fan that spread out before it
and pulled it through space-plus was the size of a small town.
Between fan, hydrogen spark plug, and the main body of the
ship were five defensive-screen generators. No more powerful or fearsome ship cruised the cosmos. It was a supreme
example of contemporary human technology, an other-thanlight vessel representing a confluence

of all that human civili-

zation had thus far accomplished.

That

it

was designed expressly

to

squarely in the mainstream of
achievement.
it

blow things up placed

human

technological

Meyer Levi was a civilian attached to a military expedition. He was an old man who ought to have been reclining in a
soft chair in a library, fronted

by a

tridee screen

and

sur-

rounded by real books, a hot drink steaming on a nearby
table, and a rumpled dog lying at his feet. Instead he found
himself inconceivably far from home and anything akin to
such imaginary comforts.
Despite the absence on the system’s outer fringes of any
armed confrontation, no one believed that the Pitar were
simply going to allow the invading humans to put punishing
landing parties

down on the

Twin Worlds unopposed. The timing and manner of their resistance was yet to be
determined. But one by one, the warships of Earth and its
colonies had emerged from space-plus into Pitarian space, uncontested and unchallenged. Now fully assembled in normal
space, the armada was ready to take the next step of moving
toward the system’s sun and positioning itself around the Twin
surface of the

Worlds.

Nor had the Pitar sent ships to attack Earth itself or any of
its more lightly defended colonies. There had been no reacfrom the tall, elegant humanoids. Their representaon Earth and elsewhere had died fighting, refusing to

tion at all
tives

suffer imprisonment. All remaining Pitar, the entire population,

was on

their

two homeworlds, presumably cognizant of

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

248

and awaiting the arrival of a vast assemblage of ships crewed
by tens of thousands of angry, revenge-minded humans.
What were they overlooking? Levi found himself wondering. Surely the Pitar were going to resist, were not going to
commit racial suicide. But that was essentially what their isolated representatives on Earth had done. Did the entire species
have a death wish that humankind had been put in the position
of inadvertently satisfying?
The armada was in motion, a great swath of ships and science, when the answer came to him. Rushing as fast as his
aged legs would carry him, he hurried toward the bridge. In
the vastness of the great ship he lost his way several times,
despite the instructions available to him in each lift.

When

succeeded in finding his way to the central, shielded core of the Wellington, he had to identify himself several times before he could gain access to Fouad. She
was seated in the captain’s command chair, in charge of the
ship but not the strategy it would execute. That was the province of the group of general officers seated off to one side,

he

finally

facing one another across a wide, oval table from which projected

upward a perfect three-dimensional

Pitarian system.

portrait

of the

A

cloud of glowing pinpoints was moving
its center, each pinpoint a ship. Levi was put

toward the sun at
in mind of midges attacking a dog.
“Hello, Mr. Levi.” Her musician’s hands rested on controls;
her trained soprano voice commanded more destructive power
than humankind had ignorantly unleashed upon itself since the
beginning of its struggling civilization. “Feeling well?”
“Tired,” he told her. “Tired, and worried.”
“We’re all worried,” she replied. Before her hovered a tridimensional image similar to the one being closely scrutinized
by the general staff, only somewhat reduced in scale. “Everyone
is waiting for something to happen.”
“What will you do if the Pitar do not respond?” Fascinated
as always by technology he did not understand, Levi stared at
the perfect, hovering representation of the space in which the
ship was moving.
“Place ourselves in orbit around the first of the Twin Worlds.

DIRGE

249

Deliver the ultimatum drawn up by the world council.” She
shrugged without smiling. “React to their reaction. If they con-

do nothing, the first landing parties will go down.
These will be backed by heavy armor and orbital firepower.
Once our forces have acquired a beachhead on the surface the
tinue to

choices remaining to the Pitar will be considerably reduced.
Basically, they’ll have to decide whether to opt for capitulation
or seppuku. After securing the outer of the Twin Worlds, the ar-

mada

will

move on

to the

second and hopefully repeat the

process.”

Levi nodded. “What happens

if

they do submit without a

fight?”

Fouad looked at him closely. “Is that what you think is
going to happen?”
“No, but at this point the possibility cannot be entirely
discounted.”

She turned away from him, back
representation. “That’s not

general staff

tells

me

my

to do.

to the glowing, in-depth

department.

They

in turn

I’ll

do what the

have their orders

from the world council. All I know is that there’s a predetermined sequence of actions whose degree of reaction is calibrated according to

how

the Pitar respond.”

Her jawline

firmed. “To one extent or another, they are to be punished for
what they did on Treetrunk.”

“You asked me what I thought was going to happen.” Levi
watched her expectantly.
The captain’s interest was piqued. “You have an idea?”
“I think so. You know, among the original Twelve Tribes
the Levites were the scholars. I do not feel like I belong here,
on a warship, preparing to engage in mass destruction.”
“Your unhappiness
what you think.”

is

noted,” she replied curtly. “Tell

“I’ve studied the Pitar ever since they

first

arrived

me

on Earth

aboard the ChagosV

know

Her tone was impatient. “Get to the point,
old man. In case you haven’t noticed, there’s an invasion in
“I

progress.”

that.”

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

250

“Sorry. There are a
cally,

but

I

number of ways

I

could put

it

scientifi-

see no need to couch an opinion in complex sys-

tematic jargon. Suffice to say that the Pitar are homebodies.”
“They don’t colonize. They told us that from the first.”

Fouad tried to divide her attention between the clustered general staff, the view tridee before her and its accompanying
heads-up displays, and the lugubrious sage standing next to
her seat. “It was one of the reasons their complicity in the
massacre was so hard for so many to accept.”
“They’re not just homebodies. They’re fanatical about the
Twin Worlds. Except for occasional excursions to places like
Earth and Hivehom, and deviate adventures such as Treetrunk, they

do not leave

their

home

system.

Not only are they

not colonizers, they are not big on straightforward explora-

They simply do not like to leave home.”
“Which means what? You do have a point, don’t you?”

tion.

What I am trying to say is that all the energy, and
and advanced technological development we have put

“I think so.
effort,

have focused inward.”
She frowned and idly adjusted the neural jack above her
left ear that allowed her direct communication with the rest of
into spreading ourselves outward, they

the armada, her
center.

own

staff,

and the Wellington's intelligence

“So you’re saying that

.

.

.

?”

A little anxious himself now, Levi interrupted her in order
to state the thought. “Everything

they

we have

put into offense,

may have concentrated on defense.”

was not long thereafter that the Wellington was rocked by
explosion and near catastrophe, and the armada found itself
It

and desperately engaged.
Extending in their respective orbits outward from Pitar’s
star were three worlds of various mien, none suitable for per-

fully

manent habitation. Then the closely aligned planets numbered
four and five, the Twin Worlds of the Pitarian Dominion. Between the fifth planet and the sixth, which happened also to be
the first of four gas giants, was not one but two asteroid belts.
While one lay in the normal plane of the ecliptic, the second
occupied an orbit almost perpendicular to the

first.

Among

DIRGE
this

251

mass of planetary debris were a good many planetoidal

objects of considerable size.

Every one of which had been transformed by the
an armed and shielded attack-and-support station.
In those

first

lunatic

moments

frantic

cheted between ships at the speed of light.

Pitar into

commands ricoHumans and their

machines slipped instantly into battle mode, each functioning
efficiently and effectively. In this it was difficult to say who
had the greater advantage. Machines offered speed and reliability,

humans

the ability to improvise in response to the un-

expected. Organic and inorganic had spent several hundred
years evolving in tandem to perfect the art of combat.

On the other hand, in spite of the unprecedented ferocity of
the

human

assault

and despite

all their racial

introspection

and paranoia, the Pitar did not fold up and slink quietly back
to their homeworlds.
Interstellar space is unimaginably vast. Even between
planets there is room enough to lose a thousand ships. But the
physics that can follow the tracks of tiny comets and minuscule asteroids are also adept at locating the operational drives
designed to push vessels through space-plus. And a vessel

by anything less takes months to journey
from one planetary body to another.
So while humans and Pitar swam in inky nothingness, their
respective machines utilized far more sensitive instruments
than eyes and ears to plot each other’s courses. Every time a
ship of the armada attempted to pass within the orbits of the
intersecting asteroid belts it found itself confronted by two or
more Pitarian warcraft. Each human vessel was parsecs from
that is propelled

home

while support for the defending ships was, astronomically speaking, an eye blink away.

And

the Pitar were capable. Avoiding confrontation wher-

ever possible, they concentrated exclusively on countering
any approach to the Twin Worlds. Initially, fear of active
counterattack dominated
thinking.

became

As

the days

much of the

general staff’s strategic

became weeks and

the

weeks months

it

clear that Pitarian tactics included such thrusts only

insofar as they related to their defense.

No attempt was made,

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

252

even by a single suicidal ship, to threaten Earth or any of the
colony worlds. Everything the Pitar had, every armed vessel
they could throw into the conflict, remained close to home.
Not one ventured beyond the Pitarian heliosphere.
The attacking humans tried everything. When a deliberate
concentration of forces in one place was met by an energetic

and equivalent Pitarian response, the battle planners went to
the opposite extreme by suggesting an attempted englobement of one of the Twin Worlds. Reacting aggressively and
quickly, the Pitar promptly dispersed their forces in precisely
the most opportune fashion to counter the widespread assault. Probes of sectors presumed weak were beaten back by
Pitarian forces of unexpected strength.
Missiles launched at the fifth world were detected, tracked,
intercepted and destroyed. The residents of the Dominion
suffered no casualties as a result of the invasion of their
system. Requests to parley were met with strident animosity.
It became clear that while humans had originally taken an immediate liking to the Pitar, the humanoid aliens felt very differently about their smaller mammalian counterparts. This
did not take the form of outright loathing: The Pitar were too
courtly for that. It was more on the order of a general contempt for the human species as a whole. The Pitar would not
talk, would not discuss any sort of armistice with the lowly
humans, until every last ship of the armada had left the sacred

system of the Twin Worlds.
It

didn’t matter, since they refused to apologize for

what

they had done on Treetrunk or discuss handing over those re-

One Pitar spoke for all, and all Pitar spoke for one.
Admitting no guilt, they therefore dispersed it among themselves and repeatedly commanded the disgusting, detestable
sponsible.

invading beings to depart, as their very presence constituted a
corruption in the sight of the hallowed Dominion.

Their attitude helped Levi and his colleagues to unravel the
rationale behind

many

prior enigmas:

why no embassy had

been allowed to open on either of the Twin Worlds, for example, and why visits to the Dominion had been prohibited. It
had nothing to do with racial shyness or reticence. The Pitar

DIRGE

253

—

were not coy they were overbearing. Nasty, uncouth humans
could not be allowed to defile the purity of the homeworlds.
To what end their plundering force had removed the reproductive organs of thousands of human females from Treetrunk continued to remain a mystery. Here it was left to an
admixture of Levi’s people and researching biologists to
speculate on possible reasons. Many were put forth, some
fantastic, not a few revolting. Among the facts that were assembled in the ongoing attempt to build an explanation was
the realization that from the moment the Pitar had been contacted until the day when the armada had emerged from
space-plus on the outskirts of the Dominion, no one had ever
seen a Pitarian child.

Had some

factor

still

unknown, psychological or bio-

caused them to stop reproducing? In carrying out the
atrocity on Treetrunk, were they seeking a means for ensuring the continuation of their species? Had that means been
found and implemented, and if so, did humankind really want
to be infonned of the methodology? Many people on Earth
and elsewhere had relatives who had perished in the extermination of intelligent life on Argus V Levi and his colleagues
were not so sure that they would be happier or otherwise
logical,

better off to learn precisely
their

what had happened

to

some of

deceased relations.

Certainly the Pitar did nothing to enlighten their attackers.
Even tentative requests for explanations were dismissed out

of hand. They would not talk, coldly refusing all attempts at
communication with what they could now openly admit to regarding as an inferior life-form. Levi and the rest of the scientists and researchers who accompanied the armada grew
increasingly frustrated.

The uniformed masses who crewed

no such mental strain. Some of them,
too, had lost friends or kin on Treetrunk. Their interests were
much more focused: They did not need to understand; all they
wanted to do was kill Pitar.
Five months into the attack the ships of the armada and their
frustrated personnel began to be rotated. New ships arrived
from Earth and the colonies crewed by eager, fresh enlistees.
the ships labored under

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

254

They opposed an enemy whose soldiers faced no long journeys
through space-plus, who could find ease and relaxation within a
day’s flight of their duty station. In battle they found themselves
confronting concentrations of ships that could be quickly and
easily repaired

and restocked.

It

was the classic battlefield situa-

tion of an overextended attacker trying to break

down

the

defenses of a determined and well-entrenched enemy, translocated to an interstellar environment.

Eight months passed without any change in the line of

would not permit a single human vessel of
any size to cross beyond the orbits of the intersecting asteroid
belts. The attacking humans would not give up. Determination and not skill or strategy became the defining factor on
battle.

The

Pitar

both sides.

While ships might stand still, weapons research did not. For
every new means of attack the humans refined and threw into
combat, the Pitar developed a counter. High-energy beams
were met with high-energy deflectors. Subatomic particle
guns designed to disrupt communications on board opposing
vessels were intercepted and shunted harmlessly into spaceplus by low-power versions of deep-space drives. Larger, faster
missiles were met with small interceptors that were faster and
more agile still. Space was filled with the scattering of shattered matter from fusion weapons that never reached their intended targets.

Now and then a ship engaged in skirmishing would take a
damage or on rare occasions, implosion. At
such moments hundreds, even thousands of lives would be

hit,

suffering

snuffed out of existence, vanishing into the icy limbo of the

Each such loss made the Pitar more intractable and
the humans more unforgiving.
Finally admitting after ten months of failed attack that they
were unable to break through the defenses of the Dominion,
void.

the general staff debated

how

best to proceed. Breaking off

was unthinkable: Now spread across a number
of worlds, humankind would not hear of it. Ending the confrontation would imply that the Pitar had won, that they had

the offensive

DIRGE

255

consummated their barbarism without suffering any penalty.
Such an abomination could not be tolerated.
It was remarked that while no human warship had been
able to reach either of the Pitar homeworlds, neither had any
of the aliens’ craft been able to travel a sufficiently safe distance from those twin planets to safely engage its full drive
and make the jump to space-plus. Trapped in the glare of

human

vigilance, the Pitar were effectively confined to their

homeworlds. Other species, however, were not.
On the face of it, the notion of a blockade in space seemed
unworkable. Even the comparatively tiny distances between
planets allowed ample room for a ship to enter into or emerge
from space-plus. Once back in normal space, however, any
and every such vessel was vulnerable.
The word was passed, though not without trepidation.
How would neutral intelligences such as the Quillp react to
being banned from an entire system with which they had no
quarrel? More importantly, how would the combative and
powerful AAnn react to a unilateral attempt to restrict their
access to a people with whom they enjoyed amicable if not
affectionate relations?

Before such a tactic could be tried, it was the turn of
the diplomats to go on the offensive. The Quillp were
puzzled. But while the ornithorps were expansionists, colonizing empty worlds in the manner of humankind, they
were by nature inherently unaggressive. As might have
been expected, the Unop-Patha wanted nothing whatsoever
to do with the ongoing conflict, preferring to stay as far away
from both the arrogant Pitar and the demonstrably demented

humans
to

minor species, each confined
a single inhabitable world, were not important enough to
as possible. Several

enter into the equation.

Among known intelligences with enough strength to affect
the balance, that left the AAnn and the thranx. The insectoids
were not only amenable to the pronouncement, but had from
the start been quietly supportive of the human attack on the
Dominion.
The AAnn were more difficult to factor. Following intense

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

256

lobbying by

human diplomats, they agreed not to send any of

system until the military impasse there had been resolved in favor of one side or the
other. Their understanding was marked by repeated thranx
warnings to the effect that if the Pitar should succeed in seriously degrading humankind’s military capability, it would
not be past the AAnn to take advantage of the situation. In
such an event, probing AAnn attacks on one or more human
colonies could reasonably be anticipated.
The world council and the general staff separately advised
the distressed thranx that even in the event of an unanticitheir vessels into the Pitarian

pated catastrophic human defeat in battle, sufficient forces
had been held in reserve to ensure the safety of Earth and
every one of its colonies. The thranx accepted this reassurance with a certain aplomb, but remained privately watchful

was wonderful to observe the passionate confidence displayed by the humans, but confidence had never
and troubled.

It

been of much use against the AAnn.
With every species that could possibly be impacted having
been contacted and dealt with, the general staff formally announced the imposition of the blockade. Safe and assured on
their twin homeworlds, the Pitar were neither impressed nor
intimidated. Tens of thousands of individuals on hundreds of
ships actively supported by the populations of multiple
worlds maintained and strengthened the stalemate.
It was not a static standoff. From time to time specially designated components of the blockading human fleet would attempt to penetrate the seemingly immutable Pitarian defenses.
Each time, utilizing newly conceived tactics and weaponry,
their crews would set off full of faith and in high spirits. Each
time they would return, thwarted and dispirited. And there
were those terrible times when some did not return at all.
Wars of attrition are not always won by the besiegers, no
matter how resourceful and resolved. Having nowhere to
go, no hidden retreat, no refuge held in reserve, the Pitar
fought with incredible tenacity and determination. Though
their ships would hurl themselves entire, crew and all, into an
enemy attacking pattern in order to disrupt it and preserve

DIRGE

257

possession of a seemingly minor, insignificant asteroid, they
would not commit a single vessel to an attack. Their phi-

losophy of war was wholly defensive, to protect the twin
homeworlds at all cost but not to otherwise directly challenge
an invader.

The members of

the armada’s

commanding

general staff

were rotated along with enlisted personnel and low-ranking
civilian affiliates, but they were united in their frustration. As
one admiral put it, the blockade was war conducted entirely
under cover of night, where night covered nothing. There could
be no surprise attacks launched on an alerted, technologically
sophisticated species. Instrumentation that never slept
that.

Mind could

only do so

much

before

it

saw

was necessary

to

for

machine to take over. For a soldier it was hard to sustain the energy and alertness demanded of a fight with an enemy one could
not see.

Even

the enemy’s worlds were

no more than another

bright couple of points of light in the galactic sky.

Yet no one thought of giving up. Treetrunk could not be forgotten. Even so, despite the comparative recentness of the outrage,

was already

minds of a
small but growing segment of the population. The media
strove to maintain interest, but a blockade is not like a series of
dramatic encounters in space. The battle for control of stasis
did not play as well on the evening tridee as an invasion.
Something had to be done. Something had to happen to
change the unacceptable status quo, and both military and
civilian strategists realized that in that regard sooner would be
better than later. By now more than a year had passed since the
Wellington and the rest of the armada had entered the system of
the Pitarian Dominion to the cheers and vengeful shouts of the
majority of humankind. Almost that much time had passed
since there had been any perceptible change in that status. In
the interim, the cheers had given way to grudging acceptance
of the blockade, and the vengeful shouts to orchestrated growiings of support. The military was aware of the threat of germinating discontent, but there was nothing more they could do
than what they were already doing.
Others, however, had different ideas.
it

starting to fade a

little

in the

19

“Why should we help them any more than we

already

have? Why should the hives, cruJdck, get involved?”
“Yes,” another member of the circle agreed. “There is no
compelling reason for putting thranx lives at risk.” Leaning
back, the speaker raised all four hands in order to gesture simultaneously. “These humans do not even like us!”
a third sarcastically declared, “these
humans risking their own lives to aid us if the situation were
reversed. Put them in a tunnel with only us facing danger, and
“I

can just see,”

still

they will turn and run the other way.”

When

had had their say, the Tri-Eint Debreljinav activated the pickup before her and was respectfully
conceded queen’s dominance. Since the advent of hormonal
extracts that had enabled any thranx female to lay fertile
eggs, the lineage of hereditary queendom had vanished from
thranx civilization. Subsequent to the enforced abdication of
procreative royalty, many heraldic vestiges of those primitive
times had assumed highly formalized places in thranx culture. One such was the rotating speaking position of queen’s
dominance.
No member of the Grand Council was more respected than
Debreljinav. Not many were older; few were as perceptive.
Chosen leader of both the hive Jin and the clan Av, she had advanced to the exalted position of eint at an unusually early
age, retaining the post while acquiring honor and prestige
over the years. Now she could rise no higher, being one of
those the great mass hive of thranx had chosen to govern not
only

the dissenters

Hivehom but the colony worlds as well.
258

DIRGE

259

what benefits accrue to us if we remain neutral,
like the Quillp. But what might we lose by doing so,
and what
more might we gain by becoming actively involved?”
‘

clear

It is

An

eint seated

hesitation.

“We

among

the opposition responded without

lose nothing because

we have

nothing to

gain.

Sympathetic stridulation by those of like mind momentarily filled the room with the din of a hundred improperly tuned violas.
“Nothing?” a supporter of intervention argued. “We have
cordial relations with the

humans. Aiding them in their war
would, if not make formal allies of them, leave them in our
debt.

When

the next serious confrontation with the AAnn
arises
and make no mistake, it will arise we will be able to
call upon these tumultuous mammals for assistance. Just
the

—

ability to

—

do that will give even the most belligerent among the

emperor’s court pause.”

“Who

says the

AAnn

from the other side.

humans?” a voice shouted
“What makes you think the scaled people
fear the

mammals into their equations?”
“Because while the AAnn may be malicious and

factor the

cious, they are not stupid.” This time
lations that rose in

it

was supportive

rapa-

stridu-

volume from the other side of the table.

The racing noise receded

as Debreljinav prefigured her
speech with an appropriate gesture. “Do the humans truly
hate us so much that they would even refuse our help?”

A
rose.

representative of one of the technical classifications

He was

number

not an eint and was present, along with a
of others, because he possessed the ability to con-

tribute special insight into specific aspects

of the debate.
“Only a small number of xenophobes and fanatics among

the bipeds actually hate us.

Among

the rest there are

many

who openly enjoy our company and are not afraid to say so.”
Compound eyes swept the attentive chamber. “The vast maof humans belong to neither grouping. This mass
mains unsure of us and our motives.”

jority

re-

“Ingrates!” a leader of the opposition bellowed. There was
discord until the Tri-Eint Sevrepesut could restore order and
return dominance to the patient female standing off to his left.

”

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

260

Intimidated, the specialist waited for Debreljinav’s gesture
of encouragement to respond to the interruptive expletive.

“Humans have

short memories but

—

“Fine candidates for allies in time of trouble!” another representative of the skeptical shouted.

“But they are capable of grand kindnesses and

gratitude. I

who

advocate intercession are correct. In
so doing we would gain valuable allies against the AAnn, and
against any others who might one day threaten the great
hive.” Whistles of derision and rising stridulation threatened

believe that those

to

drown him

out, but this time the specialist

would not be

denied.

“The

AAnn Empire

by the day!

If

we

is

strong and growing

will not aid the

humans

more powerful

in their just fight

make them our allies, then we must aid
them so that the AAnn cannot. Or is that a possibility that the
against the Pitar to

distinguished eints prefer not to ponder?”

The

reaction from supporters of intervention as well as

those of the opposition showed that it was a notion that had not

been much discussed. Everyone hoped that in an ideal cosmos
the humans would ally themselves with the thranx against the
AAnn. Few cared to contemplate the consequences should the
aggressive, militaristically accomplished mammals choose to
take the side of the predacious reptilians instead.
“The humans would never support the AAnn in a disagree-

ment with us.” The eint who ventured this observation did not
sound very convincing even to herself.
“Why not?” a supporter of intervention countered. “One of
your own has just pointed out how much they dislike us.”
“We must make them like us.” Debreljinav’s declaration
carried the full force and weight of her considerable personality. “We cannot afford it to be otherwise.”
“It will not be any easy task.” The Eint Jouteszimfeq was
anything but encouraging as he looked around the circle. “I
have tried to study everything there is to be known about the
humans. Individually they are sound, but their mass psychology is unstable. Small, insignificant things can induce
vast swings in their collective consciousness. Worse, these

DIRGE

261

can in themselves be meaningless and unsupported. But by the time realization sets in, the damage has
critical effectives

already been done.” His antennae parted to sense the greatest
possible number of his fellow debaters.

We

must move actively to prevent this from happening.
Although it does not sound in and of itself especially scientific, making the humans ‘like’ us should be among
our very
Simultaneously,

first priorities.

we must endeavor

to deal

with those thranx who have difficulty tolerating the sight,
sound, and presence of humans.”

“Don’t you mean the smell?” someone who wished not to
be identified interjected. General whistling followed, eventually to be suppressed by Debreljinav’s four-armed gesturing.
“I myself am rather more concerned with the eventual disposition of human muscle than their scent.” Respectful quiet
again filled the chamber. “If we cannot induce the humans to

become our

allies,

friends. Since
cestry,

of

which

human

then

we must

strive to

make them our

we can do

is

nothing about our shape and anwhat appears to constitute the principal basis

dislike for us,

we must

ways of conwe are worthy of their trust.” Antennae
spread and at the ready, she gazed around the chamber. “As a
tri-eint among you, I am open to suggestions.”
There were almost as many positive suggestions as there
find other

vincing them that

were opposing views. Unlike in ancient times, those in the
minority did not suffer to have assorted limbs amputated as a
consequence of losing an argument. In place of jaws and
teeth and primitive weapons, only sharp words were employed. In

Field

many instances, these cut deeply enough.

Marshal

MacCunn was

conversing with Admiral
Yirghiz when a comtech interrupted them. Yirghiz accepted
the missive, perused it briefly, and then passed it on to Mac-

Cunn. The field marshal’s face featured the protuberant, bony
brows of a very early Cro-Magnon. It saddled him with an
unfortunate countenance that was the source of many jokes
among those within his command. Having risen from the

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

262

ranks himself, he was delighted to so painlessly be of service
to his troops.

“What’s

this

about an alien task force entering Pitarian

space?”
Yirghiz rose as general quarters sounded. “I haven’t a clue,
Hamish but I have a feeling we’re about to find out. I only

—

hope that it’s neutral, or if not,

that

it

isn’t materializing in re-

sponse to a coordinated effort with the Pitar.”
The bandy-legged MacCunn had to employ a longer stride
to keep pace with the lanky admiral. “That would imply some
sort of offensive gesture on the part of the Pitar, something
totally out

of character for them.”

“I concur.” Yirghiz

we can

nodded

“Which doesn’t mean
lightly. Hence the auto-

sharply.

afford to take the possibility

matic call to general quarters.”

reached the bridge at
the center of the Tamerlane, the great warship and the rest of
the blockading fleet on this side of the Dominion’s sun were

Long before

the

two senior

officers

ready to extend a polite, formal welcome
to the as yet unrecognized newcomers, or to blow them out of
the firmament, as the occasion demanded.

on

full battle alert,

MacCunn

took up his position alongside the admiral.
Yirghiz was barking orders before his backside contacted the
contoured

—

command chair. “Incoming

identification!”

Captain Coulis was ready with a response. “Not ours. Not
Pitar.” A generally subdued murmur of relief sighed its way

around the bridge at this announcement. “Thranx.”
Both senior officers frowned. Their confusion had plenty
of company among the rest of the bridge complement. “WTiat
are the bugs doing here?” MacCunn wondered aloud. “And
with a task force, albeit a small one.” He glanced in the captain’s direction. “It is

a small one?”

Coulis was studying a fully dimensional tridee replete with
brightly

hued embedded analyses. “One dreadnought. Not

Wellington-class, taking into account that thranx design differs

Nothing else appears to be bigger than destroyercruisers, no smaller escorting craft.”

from

ours.

class.

No

DIRGE

“Odd

263

configuration.” Yirghiz frowned.

ticipate in a serious fight,

quired for a social call.”

“Too weak

to par-

much more impressive than is reHe raised his voice as he again

addressed Coulis. “Hail them, Captain, and find out what
they’re doing here. They’re aware of the quarantine. See if

you can find out what they want.”
“Initial intership communications protocol is already being
delimited, sir,” the captain replied. At the moment her eyes
were as busy as her fingers.
Answer and explanation arrived simultaneously mere moments later. Coulis swiveled around in her seat to address the
two senior officers. Her expression effectively communicated her confusion.

“The vessels are indeed thranx, gentlemen. They are carrying a representative of the Grand Council of the Great
Hive.” Her gaze traveled from one senior officer to the other.
wants to come aboard.”
This was not the sort of decision either of the two men had
expected to have to make when they had arisen at the start of
“It

the current shift. Yirghiz responded while

MacCunn

elo-

quently said nothing.

your ship, Captain. Not being a strategic judgment,
the decision whether or not to receive visitors is entirely
“This

is

yours.”

“I’m a starship captain,” Coulis

replied. “This is a matter

for diplomats.”

Now MacCunn spoke up. “Not when a vessel is on combat
No, it’s your call, Captain.”
Coulis rubbed at an uncooperative eyebrow. “No ship of
the armada has seen any action for several weeks now. The
next tactics are still in the process of being schematized. I
see no reason to refuse such a request from a neutral power.”
She smiled laconically. “If it’s secrets of military technology
station.

the thranx are after there are far easier ways to steal them.”

“I’ve never

met a

thranx.

Walked around

tridee holos, but

never encountered one in the flesh.” Yirghiz was curious.
“Let’s see what they want here.”

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

264

MacCunn grunted softly. “To
ning,

I

would imagine.

If that’s

and ascertain who’s winthe case, they’ll need to use
try

their imaginations.”

Both men and everyone else on the Tamerlane and within
the armada who obtained a good look at the thranx craft were
suitably impressed. The KK-drive type vessels were sleek and
well fitted out, their design and construction bespeaking a
technology as advanced as anything humankind could devise.
Nor just because the alien dreadnought massed almost as
much as the Wellington or the Tamerlane could it be assumed
that it was the most powerful ship in the thranx arsenal.
Insisting that any formalities be kept to a minimum, the insectoid emissary transferred to one of the flagship’s locks via
a small shuttle. There was some confusion resulting in a delay
in the visitor being welcomed when it was discovered that he
had a personal escort, but the matter was quickly resolved
without rancor. As Coulis pointed out, it was natural to expect
so high ranking an individual of any species to be accompanied by attendants. It was explained by the thranx that the
emissary’s two escorts were necessary to look after her health
and not her security, and those on board the flagship could
well believe it as soon as that worthy was helped from the
shuttle’s lock.

The thranx was very

old.

One of her

ovipositors

had been

consequence of a disease that was not
mentioned. The other double-curled egg-laying appendage had
lost so much of its natural spring that it lay nearly flat against
her back. Instead of the familiar smooth blue-green, her exoskeleton was a rich, deep purple, the chitin worn rough and
pebbly in places. The golden compound eyes did not shine as
brightly as did those of her solicitous escorts, but the antennae
were ever-moving and alert. The characteristically soft thranx
voice was strong, spilling words and clicks and whistles withsurgically removed, the

out vacillation.

MacCunn and Yirghiz met her with translator in tow. That
individual’s presence

was not

required.

The emissary spoke

very good Terranglo. For his part, Yirghiz looked forward to
trying out his stock of memorized Thranx phrases. He was

DIRGE
terrible at

265

grammar and could not

figure out

how to

properly

integrate the requisite gestures into the conversation, but he

was a good whistler and an excellent mimic. Becoming truly
fluent in the combination of Terranglo words and Thranx expressions that was evolving into a kind of mutual patois
among the young of both species was beyond an old soldier
like himself, but he had felt bound to try. He had also memorized a cache of stock AAnn phrases and could manage brief
declarations in the single Pitar dialect.

By

contrast, the field

marshal was a linguistic mute. But then, Yirghiz reminded
himself with a hidden smile, MacCunn wasn’t much of a conversationalist in his

own tongue.

“Welcome

aboard.” Stepping forward, the admiral introduced himself and the field marshal before extending a hand

palm down,

fingers slightly spread

and inclined upward. The

elderly alien’s antennae dipped forward to brush his fingertips.

am

“I

the Di-Eint Haajujurprox.

From

the Great Hive

I

bring you greetings and the taste of friendship.”

“We are pleased to receive you.” A delighted Yirghiz waved
off the translator who was standing by, a young woman who
was

would not be
necessary. The bug’s Terranglo was mellifluous and only
slightly inflected. The insectoids had a much easier time with
the simpler human tongue than humans did with the complex
combination of words, clicks, whistles, and gestures that constituted High Thranx.
plainly relieved that her skills apparently

Alongside him, he observed MacCunn striving to appear
inconspicuous as he inhaled repeatedly of the air in the lock.
In the vicinity of the three thranx it had become suffused with
the aromatic essence of a complex perfume. In respect of
scent, age had not dimmed the emissary’s personal bouquet.
“Won’t you please walk with us?” Turning, Yirghiz led
the way.

As

they strolled toward the

lift

that

would take them

to a

comfortable and private room he noted that unlike the images
of thranx he had seen, the emissary never rose up on her
four trulegs. She required the use of all six to ambulate adequately.

Though wondering how

old, in

human

terms, the

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

266

might be, he was too polite to ask. Among the thranx
such a question might be regarded as normal and natural, or it
might be considered intrusive. He did not know. Regardless,
it had nothing to do with conventional diplomacy. But he was
visitor

still

curious.

They made small

talk until they arrived at the senior of-

was cleared, and the diplomatic party
made itself comfortable. While the di-eint settled herself onto
a makeshift couch of cushions placed end to end on the floor,
her escorts remained standing. So did the four armed soldiers
who had escorted MacCunn and Yirghiz. While their supeficer’s

lounge. This

riors conversed, the

common

soldiers eyed

one another with

unfettered interest.

no place for a casual call,” MacCunn began
without further preamble. “Your government is aware of the
quarantine that we have placed around the inhabited worlds
of this system, and the conflict that is ongoing here.” He
started to cough and reached for a glass of water. When he
had recovered sufficiently, he continued.
“We know that your ships are not simply ‘passing through.’
No one travels through space-plus without a definite destination in mind. So I think
we think that it’s safe to assume
you came here to speak with us.” He gestured absently,
wishing he had Yirghiz’s command of alien gesticulation. “We
have to ask, Why here, when all previous diplomatic contact
has taken place between your representatives and ours on
“This

is

—

—

Earth or Hivehom?”
“It

was

decided,” the elderly di-eint replied evenly, “that

most directly involved the
unfortunate situation here, it would be best to communicate
directly with those of your kind who are most intimately involved.” Her antennae dipped sharply forward. Somewhat
startled, MacCunn drew back slightly. Yirghiz did not move.
“You know that we are outraged at what the Pitar did to
since the matter to be discussed

your colony of Treetrunk. As sentient beings, their actions
there horrified every hive. Ever since, there has been much
discussion among my kind as to whether it would be appropriate for us to make our displeasure known in a more proac-

DIRGE
tive fashion.”

one human

267

Her finely shaped head continually shifted from

to the other,

even though the exceptional periph-

eral vision

provided by her compound eyes meant that she
could survey nearly the entire room without moving it at all.

The

cranial posturing

was

two senior humans
that she was indeed focusing her attention on them.
Glancing in MacCunn’s direction, Yirghiz saw no enlightenment there. Perhaps the field marshal was preoccupied
with his persistent bowel problems, the admiral mused. That
was not the case. MacCunn simply had nothing to say and
was content to let his colleague take the lead in composing
their response. It did not mean he was not paying attention.
‘Could you be more specific as to what you mean when
you say ‘more proactive’?”
“I have come here on behalf of the Great Hive authorized
to assure the

propose a formal military alliance between our peoples.
We want to help you in your fight against these Pitar,” the dito

eint stated.

This time MacCunn was quick to respond. “Why?” he
asked curtly. “So you were outraged by what they did on
Treetrunk. All intelligent species were outraged. Only you
are offering to help. Outrage

is

by

itself an insufficient

engaging in interstellar warfare.”
Many-lensed eyes shifted to face the

reason

for actively
“Is it?”

field marshal.

When

he did not respond the di-eint gestured acknowledgment. “Very well. It is as you say. There are other reasons.

While a large faction

finds the outrage sufficient for us to re-

spond, they are not a majority.

It

was necessary

to build

an

adequate consensus, corollary by corollary.” She shifted her
awkward position on the queue of cushions.
“As you know, we have been locked in an ongoing battle
with the Empire of the AAnn since before your kind encountered ours.

The

AAnn

are a devious, ruthless, expansionist

race.”

“We’ve had no trouble with the AAnn,” Yirghiz

felt

com-

pelled to point out.

“The AAnn are also very patient. They are evaluating your
resources.” The elderly alien leaned toward them. “They are

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

268

While they are too
they are delighted to watch

especially interested in the present conflict.

clever to aid the Pitar directly,

them deplete your resources.”

MacCunn
you

say,

“Why

should they care

who wins? As

they are completely neutral.”

“On the

AAnn

frowned.

face of it, they are. But the Pitar have nothing the

want and pose no threat

to their strategies.

The

Pitar

very much so. As are the
AAnn. As both spheres of influence continue to expand, they
will inevitably begin to overlap. There will come a time when
are not colonizers.

tenancy of a

Humans

new world falls

are,

into dispute. If the Pitar

succeed

weakening you, or are still tying down a large portion of your military strength, the AAnn will not hesitate to
take advantage of the situation that results.”
The field marshal was nodding slowly. This was an explanation he had heard before and could understand. “So by
helping us against the Pitar you hope to ensure that our
strength is not diminished, and that it will be available as a
in severely

counterweight to future AAnn expansion.”
She did not nod. Adoption of human gestures was a habitude
for the young. But she did indicate her acknowledgment. “We
also expect this alliance to operate in the opposite direction.”

“Of course you

do.”

As much was obvious

to Yirghiz. “If

your government is going to send its citizens to risk their lives
on our behalf, it would be unreasonable not to expect the
same from us. If the AAnn attack you, you’d want to be able
to ask for our help.”
“It’ll never happen.” MacCunn was darkly assured. “The
world council will never vote to send ships and personnel to
help defend—” He started to say what was in his mind, and
“
your kind.”
hastily substituted something else.
With their fixed exoskeleton the thranx were incapable of
smiling. Nor were the relevant inflections detectable even to

—

the

more

di-eint’s

linguistically adept Yirghiz.

It

did not matter.

The

response contained sufficient inherent sarcasm.

“Bugs, you mean.”

MacCunn replied calmly.
“You do not have

to. It

“I didn’t say that.”

doesn’t matter.”

The

di-eint’s an-

DIRGE
tennae dipped and bobbed.

269

“My

government is prepared to
leave the question of what degree of response your kind would
provide should such a confrontation arise for future discussion. Our overriding concern is to assist you now.”
“Before the Pitar can weaken us to the point where we
might be unable to effectively resist the incursions of the

AAnn.”
“You may draw your own conclusions. The important thing
is that you accept. And there is another reason.”
Yirghiz was growing impatient to return to the bridge.
“What else?”
“We happen to like you. Not all of my kind feel thusly, but
a great many do. We do not like the Pitar. Not after what they
have done, showing neither remorse nor repentance. But for
an accident of biology it might have been a thranx world they
despoiled.

On

a more informal level,

I

am

compelled to say

that /like you.”

Yirghiz ’s instinct was to reply in kind, but he found he
could not. However convivial it might be, the creature seated

him was

buggy. That was not a
rational, scientific response, he knew, but he could not help it.
opposite

Like so

still

simply too

.

.

many he knew, he remained

.

a prisoner of his racial

of memories of thousands of years of competing with
far smaller distant cousins of the thranx for food, for space,
for very existence.
That would not prevent him, however, from accepting

history,

their help.
“It’s

not within

proposition.”

He

“No one on this
me,

I

my

purview to agree

to so

momentous a

gestured in the field marshal’s direction.

ship or in the

armada has

that power. Believe

personally would be glad to accept

all

and any addi-

of its origin.”
“Because you are going nowhere here,” Haajujurprox
told him.
MacCunn bridled. “We are making progress. With each
engagement the Pitar lose ships and fighters. We’re wearing
them down.”
“And they are wearing you down. We are quite capable of
tional assistance, regardless

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

270

monitoring

human opinion.

In a

war of attrition conducted

the vastness of interstellar space,

fenders

who

usually win.

it is

in

the well-emplaced de-

With the forces

at

your

command

you cannot break through their defenses.”
“Our land-based production plants and orbital assembly facilities are turning out newer and better ships and weapons.”
The field marshal’s voice was tight.
“As are the Pitar, who have the advantage of bringing them
to bear sooner and more easily than you can. It is not unreasonable to imagine that they might succeed in out-producing
you. They have the resources of two planets as highly developed as Earth operating in close proximity to one another,
whereas your subsidiary colony worlds are widely scattered.
The raw resources of not one but two extensive asteroid belts
are theirs to draw upon. Your position here becomes less, not
more, tenable over time.”
MacCunn swallowed hard. “Denigrating the efforts of the
people you propose to help strikes me as a peculiar way to
initiate an alliance.”
“Truth is not denigration,” the elderly thranx countered.
“Mathematics is not prejudiced and does not take sides.”
Glancing down, she consulted a delicate device strapped to
the forepart of one truhand. “By this time your world council
should have reached a decision on our offer. Our arrival here,
you see, was timed to coincide with the very secret debate
that has been taking place within your government for several
of your weeks.”
MacCunn and Yirghiz exchanged a startled glance. The
look was sufficient between friends to convey the awareness
that neither man knew something relevant that he had neglected to

As

if

tell

the other.

choreographed, both senior officers’ private readers

Removing

two
men read in silence. Despite herself, Haajujurprox was impatient to receive more than visual reactions from the humans.
Sighing heavily, Yirghiz slipped his recorder back into its
holster. “The actual communication was received before you
set foot on this ship. It took the time we have spent talking to

vibrated for attention.

the instruments, the

DIRGE

271

decode, recheck, and decode the recheck. If your skills in
battle are as precise as the timing of your diplomacy, your
help will be most welcome indeed.”

The di-eint interpreted this promptly. “Then your government is agreed?”
MacCunn nodded briskly. “Any help you want to give us is
hereby accepted. Details of a

full alliance will

continue to be

discussed and debated. But in the interim, if you should
happen to extirpate a Pitarian warship or two, the people of

Earth and

colonies will be pleased not to look too deeply
into questions of your motivation.”
its

“Excellent.” Haajujurprox started to rise, began to tremble,

and slumped back toward the cushions. Her twin escorts
rushed to assist the elderly di-eint.
Without realizing it, Yirghiz had started to do the same. It
had been an instinctive gesture. Now he stood more slowly,
watching as the two younger thranx assisted their elder in

One helped to support her while the other carefully removed the line of cushions from beneath the aged abdomen
rising.

would not have to step awkwardly over them.
had he started to go to her aid? The admiral found

so that she

Why

himself caught in a welter of unexpected emotions. Intelligent beyond doubt she was, but the emissary was still virtually a giant bug.

very

He didn’t like bugs. But he found that he was

much starting to like this one.

Not a bug, he

told himself firmly.

— or

nore the shape

learn to see

it

It’s

only the shape. Ig-

differently.

MacCunn was speaking softly in his usual, clipped, formal
tones. “We will work with the commanders of your vessels to
them in our general battle schematics. We certainly
don’t expect them to lead any thrusts, but their status as active
reserves will be most welcome.”
The di-eint rotated her head to a greater extreme than any
human could manage in order to look back at the senior officer. “Don’t you trust us, Field Marshal MacCunn? Or do
you need to first see dead thranx bodies floating in space to
include

be convinced of our earnestness in

this

matter?”

When

he

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

272

started to reply, she raised a

quietly

amazed to

see

hand to forestall him. Yirghiz was

him comply.

“No, do not try to explain yourself. Though I have not experienced them personally, I am well aware of human feelings toward my kind. You cannot help it. In this and many
other ways you are still prisoners of your primitive past.
Given time and effort, we hope to be able to effect changes in
that.”

Yirghiz stepped into the uncomfortable breach. “Blowing
a few Pitarian warships out of existence would be an excellent

way to begin.”

Haajujurprox gesticulated acknowledgment, not pausing
to wonder if any of the humans in the room understood the
meaning of the gesture.
Flanking their superiors, the two thranx and four human
soldiers formed up an escort. The meeting concluded, they

found themselves eying each other very differently than they
had been when it had first commenced. The thranx studied
the flexible, flowing movements of their bipedal counterparts
with bemused curiosity, while the human soldiers could not
keep themselves from inhaling deeply and repeatedly. Of
such small exchanges are great events fashioned.
MacCunn was constitutionally unable to keep himself from
discussing strategy, even during what should have been a walk

marked by casual conversation.
“Your task force will complement our ships nicely in
sector twelve. We’ve been weaker there than I would like for
nearly two months now.”
“Task force?” Haajujurprox adjusted her valentine-shaped
head to peer up at him.
“The one dreadnought you brought and the escorts that are
accompanying it.” MacCunn smiled, wondering if the venerable thranx knew the meaning and intent of the expression.
“My dear Field Marshal MacCunn, cllrrik that is no task
force. That is our scouting force. Subsequent to the final approval by your full government of the terms of our mutual arrangement, a substantial portion of the Hive fleet will arrive
here within days. Less what is required to maintain the ade-

DIRGE

273

quate defense of Hivehom, Trix, Willow- Wane, and Calm
Nursery, of course. While the AAnn wait in hopes of seeing

you weakened, they would be more eager
tage of any perceived frailty on our part.”

MacCunn
elated.

looked

at Yirghiz,

“Then we can expect

still

who was

to take

advan-

silent but visibly

the assistance of a few

more of

your warships?”
“It is

recognized that

defense of Pitar is to be broken,
any adjustment in the balance of forces must be significant.
if the

Otherwise the effort would be wasted.”

The two senior

officers indicated their agreement, reiter-

ating that the blockading force

would be

grateful for

any

no matter how limited or unobtrusive.
Six days later two hundred and sixty-five thranx warships
dropped out of space-plus around Pitar’s sun.

help,

20

he arrival of the unexpectedly impressive thranx forces
was met with a unanimity of cheers and a spontaneous outpouring of warmth among the humans who crewed the ships
charged with enforcing the quarantine around the defiant and
venomous Dominion. The reaction on Earth and throughout
I

the colonies

was

homogenous. While delighted at the
a good deal of suspicion was voiced over

less

of assistance,
the terms of the proposal.
The opposition to any formal agreement was led by the
highly visible and equally vocal xenophobe faction. Dubious
at having to deal on equal terms with giant bugs, the prospect
of fighting alongside them and possibly at some point in the
future for them drove the most extreme groups into paroxysms of fury. Consequent outbreaks of violence protesting
the agreement, while distressing, were effectively contained
by the world government. Despite vigorous attempts to do so,
these could unfortunately not be concealed from an active
and perceptive media. Agitated debate over the virtues and
drawbacks of the understanding continued even as thranx
warships prepared to go into battle alongside their human
offer

counterparts.

The reaction among
deliberated
desires
vailed:

was equally divisive, but
with considerably more restraint. In the end the
the thranx

and self-serving rationales of both governments preThranx warships would fight alongside those of the

armada.

was a moment in time fraught with significance when the
order for the first combined attack was transmitted. Several
It

274

DIRGE
dozen ships began
front,

275

probe forward on a wide astronomical
their movement and positioning coordinated by hastily
to

forged closed communications. Throughout the armada tension ran higher than usual. No one knew how well human
forces would operate alongside those of the insectoids.
Activity in normal space exposed ships and personnel to

counterattack by Pitarian forces.

was impossible to conduct
any kind of fight in space-plus, a realm of nonconforming
physics where the customary definitions of matter and energy
no longer held sway. But on low drive power, conventional
weapons could wreak havoc in minutes. Ships could be damaged or destroyed, and thousands could lose their lives. Advancing to within accurate bombardment range of a target
world in space-plus was of course impossible. The stress of
It

emerging into a planet’s gravitational field, even at a distance
where its effects would be greatly reduced, would impact on
the sensitive alignment of a ship’s KK-drive field and tear

it

emerged back into normal space.
So the commingled fleets advanced as rapidly as was feasible, knowing that the Pitar could not shift ships to meet
them any faster than they were already traveling. Computaapart as soon as

it

tion systems stood ready to orchestrate flights of explosives

and high-energy weapons. All personnel were at battle stations and on full alert. Over the previous year many such confrontations had riven space in the vicinity of the twin asteroid
belts and the innermost gas giant. Everyone hoped this battle
would be different than those.
Detecting the incoming ships, the Pitar promptly allocated
a force large enough to counter the incursion. As soon as farranging instrumentation descried this enemy

activity,

another

human-thranx battle group began to move inward from its
position on the far side of the Dominion’s sun. As before,
their location and movement was noted by the Pitar, and as
previously, a sufficiency of warships was reassigned to intercept them.

Within an hour the entire armada, augmented by the substantial thranx force, was in motion, as were all available

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

276

was very much

a gigantic chess game,
one that involved hundreds of pieces of varying strength enPitarian craft.

It

like

gaged in simultaneous motion on an interplanetary scale.
Aboard the Tamerlane as aboard every ship in the armada,
there was hope that the final and deciding battle might at last
be at hand: that with the addition of the thranx force the
blockaders might at last have enough strength to overwhelm
and beat their way past the Pitarian defenders.
It was not to be.
Watching the constantly shifting readout within the flagship’s main battle tridee, the lowliest ensign saw what was
happening at the same time as general officers like Yirghiz and
MacCunn. At first no one could believe it. The ship’s battle
instrumentation, which automatically compensated for far
punier human senses, was quickly checked for error. Nothing
was malfunctioning, and subsidiary instruments confirmed
the accuracy of all primary modalities.
Pinpoints of light were rising from the vicinity of both the
Twin Worlds. Ascending and racing outward along the appropriate vectors to support existing Pitarian defenders.

were prodigal

They

number, not staggeringly so but still disappointingly abundant. The Pitar had been holding a substantial
number of perfectly good ships in reserve, not employing
them even for routine patrol or to help rotate ships and crews.
Designed to furnish an entirely unsuspected line of defense
for the Twin Worlds, their masters were now forced to use
them in order to counter the unexpectedly augmented human
in

attack.

MacCunn,

for one, did not have to wait for the official re-

port from remote sensors.
to count, but

The

The moving pinpoints were difficult

he could estimate.

was called off before any ships could engage. There was no point in risking personnel and material
to fight to yet another draw. The efficacy of Pitarian ships,
weapons, and tactics had already been amply demonstrated.

No

offensive

one wished to risk thousands of lives to secure a reiteration of what was already well known.
No one died in the aborted sortie, but the sense of disap-

DIRGE

277

pointment that spread throughout the armada was crushing.
Expecting a decisive battle, the ships had instead withdrawn
without either side having loosed a single missile or fired so

much as a ranging shot. The thranx had broken the status quo,
and the Pitar had promptly reestablished it. The thranx commander, a di-eint himself, was apologetic. They would try
harder next time. But no more thranx vessels could be expected to participate than those that had already arrived. The
rest of the thranx fleet was obliged to remain on home station
to defend their respective worlds.
The government of Earth and its colonies tried to minimize
the aftermath. No ships had been lost in the most recent engagement, and not a single soldier had died. Furthermore, the
clandestine strength of the Pitar had been exposed. They had
been forced to reveal the extent of their reserves. As a military argument it was a good one, but it carried little weight
with the discontented people of Earth and associated worlds.
Besides, what proof was there that the Pitar were not concealing still additional martial capacity? That the next assault, however greatly enhanced, would not be met by a
similar counteraction? What if the Pitar had yet to divulge
their full strength? These were questions a cautious military
could not answer. The reaction on Earth and elsewhere, once
more led by the xenophobes, was not salutary.
To break the deadlock around the Twin Worlds of the
Pitarian Dominion a radical improvement in weaponry or
change in tactics was obviously required. But what?
The one development no one expected was that both would
occur simultaneously and as a consequence of the same research, or that it would be the thranx who first hit upon the
singular idea.
In addition to the cultural and diplomatic exchanges that had

permeated relations between human and thranx since the
time of first contact, there was a quiet but continuous exchange of scientific information. Discovering that the human
interstellar KK-drive was more efficient than their own, the
thranx promptly adopted and incorporated into their own
r

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

278

vessels specific aspects of

its

design.

Human

engineers and

researchers also benefited from the results of thousands of

years of thranx research. Largely ignored and overlooked by

by the fanatics on
both sides, the scientists went about their work in stolid, systematic fashion. Which is to say they mutually engaged in the
monotonous, boring, dull, everyday work that constitutes the
vast bulk of what ordinary people think of as science.
Space-minus communications delivered information and
accepted cautious propositions. Arcane theories were debated and hypotheses scrutinized. Good things arose from
these communications, though nothing very dramatic.
their respective governments, as well as

Until a small group of thranx physicists decided to broach

an idea to a visiting party of human colleagues.
The engineers were on Hivehom to explain certain aspects
of KK-drive manufacture to their thranx counterparts. They
were practical men and women who were far more interested
in application than theory. As such, they were bemused by the
physicists’ insistence; for that matter, so were their thranx
counterparts.
It

a senior member of the local research group to
the presentation. Humans and thranx alike had gathered

was

make

to hear

left to

him

in the casual surroundings

of an underground es-

planade. Organized water spilled in a systematic, tranquil

manner from the ceiling, suffusing the air with the music of its
falling while saturating the circumscribed

sizable

lighted

atmosphere of the

chamber with additional moisture. The thranx dein its feel. Wearing as little as mutual modesty would

human

humidity
as best they were able, having long since learned that working
with the thranx on one of their worlds meant sweating not just
while at work, but every minute of every day.
Couvinpasdar was aware of all the eyes on him, compound
and single-lensed alike. He could not interpret many of the
multitudinous human facial expressions but would not have
been wrong in supposing that they were the fleshy equivalent
of the progressive gestures of skepticism being propounded by
his fellow thranx. While humans and hive members chatted in
allow, their

visitors tolerated the incredible

DIRGE

279

the increasingly convenient and maturing language of Symbo-

speech, the young physicist set up the small image generator he
had brought with him. When he was ready, he was forced to
gesture and call for attention, so indifferent to his proposed
presentation were the members of his audience.
k

extend gratefulness to all who have taken time from
their busy schedules to grant me a few moments worthy of
their contemplation, especially our visiting human friends,
‘I

whom

I

know

find the controlled climate here in the inner

of the hive less than homelike.” Perspiration pouring
down their bodies, the watching, slightly impatient bipeds
could only agree.
levels

Activating the projector that was attuned to his voice pat-

Couvinpasdar walked around and occasionally through
the images it generated as he spoke, pointing out specific details and occasionally using a truhand to manipulate them.
Some of his audience granted him their full attention, while
that of others wandered. Around them, unaware that an important demonstration of combat physics was being presented in their midst, thranx strolled and clicked and whistled
in pairs or small groups. To one of the humans who also happened to be something of a historian, reflecting later on the
demonstration, it was as if Robert Oppenheimer had exposed
the design and schematics of the first atomic bomb on a busy
day in New York’s Central Park. Few of the busy, preoccupied
thranx gave the unusual gathering more than a passing
glance. Those who did look ignored the shifting, shimmering
projection in favor of scrutinizing the loose-limbed, gangly
terns,

bipeds.

“We have found

your kind are very good at conceptualizing basic scientific breakthroughs,” Couvinpasdar was
saying. One of the attendant humans murmured something,
and a couple of her companions responded with soft coughing
noises
human laughter, the young physicist knew. He did
not let it distract him. “Thranx are very good at finding improvements in existing engineering and other practical applithat

—

cations that

humans often overlook.” No

laughter this time.

“My research group has been studying the problem of how it

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

280

might be possible to break the defenses that surround the Pitar.
Very early in our discussions we came to the conclusion that
this could not be done with existing weapons, not as long as the
Pitar match ship for ship. Furthermore, any vessel mounting a
radical and potentially advantageous new weapon would immediately be set upon by the Pitar in all their strength. Therefore it was decided that any new weapon must also incorporate
into its scheme and make use of a corresponding shift in
strategy.”

The projection mutated.

Floating before the assembled audience
smallest ships any of

them had ever

seen.

was one of the
It

was, in

fact,

smaller than the lifeboats that were carried about most ships.

was neither lifeboat nor repair vessel nor intership
shuttle. There was the KK-drive field projection fan, severely
shrunken and modified, and behind it—absurdly close behind it the main body of the vessel. A single tiny weapons
blister on a standard body-girdling belt ran around the meBut

it

—

dian of the ship.
fensive.

Atop

Its

diminutive size rendered

the craft

was a

it

virtually inof-

structure that at first glance

resembled a lifeboat launcher. In the context of the ship’s
ridiculously small size it struck several of the onlookers as a
structural extravagance.

Speaking in a mixture of Low Thranx, Terranglo, and
Symbospeech, Couvinpasdar elaborated on the design. “We
call this a stingship. As you can see, it is quite an unpretentious design. It is designed to carry a crew of two: one
human and one thranx.” He indicated the locations on the
schematic. “One here, and the other here, on opposite sides
of the vessel. They are intended to complement, not back up,
one another. To carry out its intended mission with maximum
efficiency, the stingship is designed to be flown by two pilots
operating in tandem.”
“Doing what, currukkT a thranx member of the audience
inquired. “The vessel is too small to do any real damage.
Even a small Pitarian or AAnn warship would easily blast it
out of the sky.” The questioner gestured at the center of the
model. “It is not even large enough to generate its own defen’

sive screen.”

DIRGE
“The stingship

on

relies

281

agility for its defense,”

Couvin-

pasdar replied.

“With a drive attenuated
pointed out, “the vessel
“It is

is

to that size,”

one of the humans

not capable of interstellar travel.”

not intended to be,” the physicist explained. “Sting-

ships are

meant to be

carried, in sizable

numbers,

in the holds

of larger craft. Dreadnought-class ships, or preferably, a new
class of vessels specially built for the purpose.”

“How

you work out the physics of a KK-drive that
size?” another of the humans wanted to know.
“Engineering on the subatomic level is an art among my
did

colleagues,” Couvinpasdar informed her. “However, the pro-

posed stingship propulsion system is still not the smallest
drive we have contemplated. This is.”
So saying he ran his fingers through the projection. The
stingship model gave way to something appreciably smaller.
If it was another diminutive ship, several members of the audience felt, it would function well only as a joke.

“By

the Final Tunnel,” the senior thranx scientist in the

gathering clicked, “what

is

that supposed to be?”

“Maybe it’s a KK-drive powered coftin,” one of the humans commented drily, “for commending bodies to space

who want to

say their final farewells to their surviving com-

rades in a great big hurry.” This time the laughter, both

human and thranx, was more general.
Couvinpasdar gestured polite acknowledgment of the
amusement, but his tone did not change. “The KK-drive unit
you see here is only theoretically possible. Something of this
reduced size has never been brooded before, much less built.”
His blue-green, hard-shelled fingers shuffled within the projection. “This is not a ship. Fitted behind the miniature drive
is a sizable thermonuclear device. As you can see, the drivedriven explosive fits into the launcher on top of the stingship.
Because of size considerations, and to preserve the exceptional maneuverability of the two-person vessel, only one
such device is carried by each craft.”
Laughter had given way to contemplative quiet. “So the
stingship, hypothetically avoiding the attention of an enemy’s

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

282

weapons systems, penetrates

its

defenses as far as possible

before releasing or firing this drive-driven missile. What’s to
prevent the enemy from simply blowing it out of the void?”

not a normal missile,” the young thranx physicist
reminded his questioner. “It is powered not by conventional

“This

is

propulsion systems, but by a

KK

drive.

Furthermore,

it

is

KK-drive driven.
Some shells may indeed be intercepted and destroyed.” Subdued light glinted off enthusiastic compound eyes. “But
imagine the effect of several thousand such weapons deployed simultaneously across a wide sphere of conflict. It
would be impossible for an enemy to detect, far less predict
and intercept, the course of every single incoming munition.
One of the thranx who had not yet spoken now ventured a
question. “The defense screens generated by Pitarian ships
are very good. At distance, they can disperse even the energy
released by a fusion explosion.”
Couvinpasdar efficiently adjusted the projection. Ship
models vanished, to be replaced by more intimate schematics
decorated with fancies of mathematics. “That is so, but the
thermonuclear device that rides behind the drive is only part
of the effectiveness of the system. Once the SCCAM shell
detects a target, at a safe distance from its launching stingship
so as not to compromise that vessel’s drive field, its own field
warps into deliberate and irrevocable overdrive. This means
it will be attracted to the nearest gravity well of size. In this
instance, that would be the corresponding drive field of the
target vessel.” His eyes roved his now very solemn and attentive audience from which all suggestion of humor had fled.
“The computations have been crunched many times, and the
being launched from a craft that

is itself

consequences are inescapable. No defensive screen known can
resist the effect of a
drive on overload. Impacting on the active field of an enemy vessel, the resultant sudden and exces-

KK

sive gravitational distortion

would rend both asunder. At the

would be permanently disabled, rendering
the ship unable to move and effectively helpless.”
One of the humans had an objection. “Then all an enemy
vessel has to do to avoid such a hazardous interaction is shut
very least

its

drive

DIRGE

down

283

whenever closing stingships or these SCCAM
shells are detected. Without a substantial gravity well to attract it, at combat distances the shells are likely to speed right
on past.”
Couvinpasdar gestured to indicate that this objection too
had been anticipated. “Except that the shell’s sensors have already locked in on the coordinates and course of the target. A
ship’s defensive screens are powered by its KK drive. Turn off
the drive to eliminate the attracting gravity well, and you also
lose your screens. With screens down, a ship is then open and
its

drive

vulnerable to the effects of the thermonuclear device carried
by the
shell.” He watched his audience for reaction.

SCCAM

“By either means
or

or both, the

enemy

is

completely destroyed
rendered incapable of further maneuvering.”

A

long, thoughtful pause followed before another of the

thranx spoke up. “The system

is

is

not perfect. Their proposed

exceptional maneuverability notwithstanding,

some of these
encounter enemy fire that

unscreened stingships will still
they cannot evade. Ships and pilots will be hit.”
“Two crew per ship. A far more acceptable
even a single cruiser is lost.”

The human woman who had

ratio

than

if

spoken had set aside her
sarcasm. “Why one human and one thranx pilot? Why not
two humans or two thranx?”
“Because research has shown that our minds and bodies

work in

first

Because under the duress of combat,
studies prove that humans do certain things well and thranx
other things better. Because we complement one another.”
The assembled scientists fell to arguing. Some debated
different ways.

with quiet intensity while others clustered around Couvinpasdar, bombarding him with questions that arrived as fast as

were propelled by downsized KK drives of their own.
The discussion consumed the remainder of the day and ran on
into and through the night, the majority of the group forgetting or disdaining to eat. By morning everyone was exhausted. But out of acrimony and skepticism and doubt had
if they

come hope.

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

284

Following the designs and delimitations of Couvinpasdar’s
research group, a single stingship

was

fabricated.

Out

at the

beyond a moon of Hivehom’s largest gas giant,
it was activated. It did not succumb to the peculiar distortions
of space-plus, nor did it tear itself to pieces and kill its two pilots. Others were built, the inaugural design tightened and re-

testing station

fined in the process.

The first symbiotically cached concussive armed missile
was built. True to the predictions of Couvinpasdar and his associates, when its absurdly tiny drive system was sent into depromptly threw itself at a drone
target vessel programmed to avoid and escape. The drone did
not. When their drive fields intersected, both ship and shell
vanished in an entirely satisfactory and supemally bright dissolution of energy-encumbered particles. It was a very gratiliberate overload, the shell

fying demonstration.

Couvinpasdar and his colleagues accepted the honors and
commendations bestowed upon them by both thranx and human
authorities with quiet grace

—and

in traditional thranx fashion,

promptly returned to their work. Though they had earned
and were entitled to a rest, they replied with an old thranx
metaphor to the effect that “no burrow was ever finished.”
Eight years after humankind had taken pleasure in its first
contact with the imposing Pitar and three years following the
destruction of the colony of Treetrunk, the commingled
human-thranx armada once more threw its combined strength
against the defenses surrounding the Twin Worlds of the
Pitarian Dominion. But this time the probe by hundreds of

was augmented by a prodigious swarm of tiny
each armed with a single self-propelled SCCAM

capital warships

stingships
shell.

Caught

in the annihilation sphere of hundreds

of explosive

by devastating beams of coherent energy,
dozens of stingships and their pilots evanesced out of existence, many before they even had a chance to launch their
weapons. Dozens more accomplished their runs and were dedevices, or swept

stroyed before they could escape.

DIRGE

285

But Pitarian warships found themselves riven and ruptured
from the aftereffects of their own overloaded drives, while
others switched off their fields and screens only to be annihilated by precision-targeted thermonuclear devices. On the opposite side of the sun

from the Twin Worlds, the hitherto
impenetrable defensive sphere protecting the Dominion began
to implode under the unexpected new kind of assault. In the
end it collapsed like a balloon. Once a single hole had been

punctured in the curvature, the rest of the orb simply caved

MacCunn was not there to
shal

The

exhort his troops.

had died six months before, a victim of his

field

in.

mar-

failed digestive

when the outcome of the conflict was as much in doubt
it had been when the first assault had been launched against

system,
as

Twin Worlds. His friend and colleague Admiral Hyargas
Yirghiz was present at the final Pitarian collapse, however.
Standing before the main battle tridee on the bridge of the
damaged but still very battle-worthy Tamerlane he watched in
the

,

silent satisfaction as the surviving stingships returned to their

mothercraft and the main body of the armada advanced to
within orbital bombardment range of both worlds.

After three years of struggle there was no wish

among the

attackers to annihilate the population. Different degrees of

punishment to be applied as circumstances dictated had been
worked out by the world council of humankind and the Grand
Council of the thranx. All depended on how the Pitar reacted
to their defeat.

They reacted

had not been defeated. From the
surfaces of both planets, ground-based missiles fired from
hardened launchers streaked upward toward the assembled
invaders. A few did damage, but most were easily knocked
down or brushed aside. One by one, their flight paths were
tracked, traced, and the launching facilities destroyed. Small
red flowers erupted on the surface of both the Twin Worlds,
blossoms of nuclear death.
as if they

And still the Pitar fought on.
It

ality

was

deemed necessary

an eventuthe senior officers had hoped to avoid. Unrelenting
finally

to land troops,

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

286

Pitarian hostility left

them with no choice. The thranx partici-

pated in this exercise only as observers. Their alliance with
humankind did not extend to providing support for ground
action. Thranx enough had died crewing ships of the armada,
as well as aboard the tiny, seemingly insignificant but ulti-

mately lethal stingships that had

at last altered the

course of

battle.

To dispassionate observers the concluding consequences
were inconceivable. The Pitar would not surrender. Every
community was armed. Those who capitulated did so only as a
convenience of deception, turning on and slaughtering their
captors the instant the humans’ guard was down. Even Pitarian
progeny knew how to pick up and fire a small weapon or rush a
pod of human soldiers with explosives strapped to their bodies.
Scientists wished to preserve at least a remnant of Pitarian
civilization in hopes of being able to study and perhaps understand their rabid xenophobia. It proved impossible. Whenever
cornered and weaponless, the Pitar always managed to find a

way to kill themselves,

if not their

enemies. Remembering the

of Treetrunk, individual human soldiers were not inclined to go out of their way to ensure the survival of any Pitar.
Still, through the use of stun guns, soporific gas, and other
nonlethal weapons, a small number were captured alive. They
refused to be studied. Noncooperative and virulent to the last,
they turned on their captors when possible, committed suicide
when they could not, or retreated into a kind of voluntary madness until their minds and bodies finally expired of natural
atrocity

causes.

In the end, three habitable but unpopulated worlds re-

mained
Pitarian.

as a

— one human, two

consequence of the conflict

They are not often visited.

of the
clues they could from the ruins of
Pitarian civilization. What they found was not so much that
the Pitar had been incontrovertible xenophobes as they had
been irredeemable narcissists. Unable to countenance the ongoing existence of any intelligent life-form but their own,
they had deliberately set out to steal as much knowledge as

The research teams
armada gleaned what

that followed the departure

DIRGE

287

they could from humankind before turning on Earth and
colonies.

Hivehom and

the thranx

would have been

its

next, or

possibly the inoffensive and blandly expansionist Quillp. But
the Pitar had a problem.

Every other sentient species was capable of outbreeding
them. Unlike humans or thranx, Pitarian females ovulated
only once a year. It helped to explain why no children were
present on any of the ships that visited Earth or its colony
worlds, why none participated in any of the infrequent cultural

exchange programs. The occasional Pitarian progeny

was precious.
The stolen reproductive organs of

human females on

Treetrunk

—

cerated were found

the several thousand

who had been

surgically evis-

floating in carefully maintained tank

rank upon rank of disembodied uteruses, ovaries,
and fallopian tubes. The eggs of human females were re-

batteries,

moved, their DNA modified; they were then inseminated with
Pitarian sperm and were replaced
returned to their natural
cavities to follow the “normal” progression of plenteous hu-

—

man pregnancy. Once

sufficiently matured,

each embryo was

then removed and implanted in a suitable Pitarian female for
the sole purpose of giving birth.

Surrogate mothership of Pitarian offspring by living
human females, even if it had been proposed to and accepted

by

qualified

women, was

a thought no Pitar could counte-

nance. So they attempted to thieve the organs and eggs they

needed
Worlds

hopes of enlarging the population of the Twin
to the point where they could successfully challenge
the more prolific species that infested an otherwise unpolluted galaxy. The complete destruction of Treetrunk had been
in

carried out to

How

mask their real

intentions.

awful for a noble Pitar to have to

live in

a cosmos

swarming with lesser humans and thranx, Quillp and AAnn,
Unop-Patha and other debased species. But having confined
themselves to their two perfect worlds, they could not begin
to cleanse their portion of the galaxy until they had significantly increased their numerical strength. It was decided that

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

288

a naive, biologically similar

provide the means.

humankind would unknowingly

And might

have, had not a single sullen

and solitary human succeeded in escaping the holocaust with
proof of what had taken place.
The armada was disbanded, its constituent vessels returning to Earth or to their respective colony worlds.

The vast

majority of surviving stingships were decommissioned

—but

Mindful of the expanding empire of the AAnn, who
had watched the conflict with the Pitar with pitiless, impenitent interest, an active fleet and its buttressing reserve was
not

all.

own interests.
of human gratitude for the

maintained. The thranx returned to their

Following an

initial

outpouring

insectoids’ assistance in defeating the Pitar, there

came a

gradual return to normalcy, to the business of living lives and
devoting time to more insular concerns. Colonies continued to

expand, and potential colonies continued to develop. Worlds

such as Wolophon

and Amropolus that technically fell
within the human sphere of exploration but were too redolent
of greenhouse effect for human comfort were conceded to the
busy thranx, while humankind’s chitinous friends willingly
III

turned over to the more cold-tolerant bipeds information

on planets they found too frigid to conveniently accommodate their kind. Given an extensive technological effort, each
species could colonize the other’s preferred worlds, of course,

but the mutual trade-off in climatological comfort zones

made

more sense. Interstellar distances being what they
were, there was no real perception of one species intruding on
infinitely

the space of another.

The AAnn watched these developments unhappily. Unable
to challenge the

maturing human-thranx axis

directly,

they

pondered less confrontational means of impeding the resolution of a deeper, stronger alliance. There were many ways of
doing this, at which the insidiously artful AAnn were masters. Their advantage lay in the fact that a great many humans
and thranx remained ultimately suspicious of one another,
and of any expansion of intimate contact.
With a little luck, and much shrewd manipulation of op-

DIRGE
portune circumstances, sagacious
allies

AAnn

nobles and their

might even be possible to bring
into open conflict with one another.

skillful xenologists felt

both transient

289

The AAnn set to work.

it

r

r
V

..

A

-

i*

r

f

'

~

Please turn the page
for a

sneak preview of the next

Pip and Flinx novel by

Alan Dean Foster

REUNION
Coming

A

Del

in

hardcover

in

June 2001.

Rey® Book published by

The Ballantine Publishing Group.

W

hen bad people are chasing you, life is dangerous. When
good people are chasing you, life is awkward. But when you
are chasing yourself, the most simple facts of existence become disturbing, destabilizing, and a source of unending
waking confusion.
So it was with Flinx, who in searching for the history of
himself, found that he was once again treading upon the hallowed, mystic soil of the spherical blue-white

had given

womb among

whole species. Only, the
soil he was treading presently was being treated by those
around him with something other than veneration, and a
means of sourcing the information he hoped to uncover was
still to be found.
Tacrica was a beautiful place in which to be discouraged.
Sensitive to his frustration, Pip had been acting fidgety for
days. An iridescent flutter of pleated pink-and-blue wings
and lethal, diamond-backed body, she would rise from his
shoulder to dart aimlessly about his head and neck before
settling restlessly back down into her customary position of
repose. As active as she was colorful, the mature female
minidrag was the only thing he was presently wearing.
His nudity did not excite comment because every one of
the other sun and water worshipers strolling or lying about
on the seashore was similarly unclothed. In the human beach
culture of 554 a. a., the superfluity of wearing clothing into
the sea or along its edge had long been recognized. Protective sprays blocked harmful UV rays without damaging the
skin, and frivolous, transitory painted highlights decorated
the stars that

birth to his

293

bodies both attractive and past their prime. It was these often
elaborate anatomical decorations that were the focus of ad-

miring attention, and not the commonplace nakedness that
framed them.
Flinx flaunted no such artificial enhancements, unless one
counted the Alaspinian minidrag coiled around his neck and
left shoulder. Such contemporary cultural accoutrements
were as alien to him as the primeval grains of sand beneath

he was an utter
and complete stranger here. Nor was he comfortable among
the throngs of people. With its still unsettled steppes and un-

his feet. Culturally as well as historically,

explored reaches, Moth, where he had grown up, was far
more familiar to him. He was more at home in the jungles
of Alaspin, or among the blind Sumacrea of Longtunnel, or

even in the aggressive world-girdling rain forest of Midworld. Anyplace but here. Anywhere but Earth.
Yet it was to Earth he had finally come for a second time, in
search of himself. All roads led to Terra, it was said, and it
was as true for him as for anyone else. Beyond Earth, the
United Church had placed a moral imperative lock, an elaborate Edict, on all information about the Meliorares, the
society of renegade eugenicists responsible for whatever
bastard mutation he had become. Travels and adventures
elsewhere had left him with hints as to their doings, with
fragmentary bits and pieces of knowledge that tantalized
without satisfying. If he was ever going to unravel the ultimate secrets of his heritage, it was here.
Even so, he had been reluctant to come. Not because he
was fearful of what he might find: He had long since matured
beyond such fears. But because it was dangerous. Not only
did he want to learn

all

the details of his origins: so did others.

Because of contacts he had been compelled to make, the
United Church was now aware of him as an individual instead
of merely as an overlooked statistic in the scientific record.
As high-ranking an official as thranx Counselor Second Dru-

venmaquez had taken a personal interest in the red-haired,
bright-eyed young man Flinx had become. The novice beachgoer smiled to himself. He had left the irascible, elderly

thranx on Midworld, slipping away quietly when the science
counselor had been occupied elsewhere. When he eventually

human had taken surreptiwould be irked. He would

discovered that the singular young
tious flight, the venerable thranx

have to be satisfied with what little he had already learned,
because neither his people nor anyone else would be able to
track Flinx’s ship, the Teacher through space-plus.
Ever cautious, Flinx had decided for the moment to hew to
the hoary principle that the best place to hide was in plain
,

What

do that than on one of the Commonwealth’s twin world centers of government and religion,
where he had come looking for information years ago? It
was where he needed to be anyway, if he was ever going to
find out the truth about himself. In addition to his burgeoning
curiosity, there had come upon him in the past year a new
sense of urgency. With the onset of full adulthood looming
over him, he could feel himself changing, in slow and sometimes not-so-subtle ways. Each month, it seemed, brought a
sight.

better place to

new revelation. He could not define all the changes, could not
quarantine and assess every one of them, but their periodic
nebulosity rendered them no less real. Something was hap-

pening to him, inside him. The self he had known since infancy was becoming something else.
He was scared. With no one to talk to, no one to confide in
save a highly empathetic but nonsapient flying snake, he
could look only to himself for answers answers he had always wished for but had never been able to acquire. It was for
those reasons he had taken the risk of coming back to Earth.
If he was going to find what he needed to know, it lay buried
somewhere deep within the immense volume of sheer accumulated knowledge that was one of the homeworld’s greatest

—

treasures.

But if he was home as every human who came to Earth
was supposed to be, then why did he feel so much like an
alien? It bothered him now even more than it had when last he
had visited here some five years ago.
He tried to wean himself from the troubling chain of
thought. Belaboring the accumulated neuroses of twenty
,

years would solve nothing.

He was

mission; nothing more, nothing

here on a fact-finding

less.

It

was important

to

focus his attention and efforts, not only in hopes of securing
the information he sought, but in order to avoid the attention

of the authorities. With the exception of the thranx Druvenmaquez and his underlings, who were specifically looking for
him, what other agencies and individuals might also be interested in one Philip Lynx he did not know. It did not matter.
Until he left the homeworld, a little healthy paranoia would
help to preserve him but not if he allowed his thoughts to
float aimlessly, adrift in a distraught sea of incomplete
memories and internal conflicts.
Of course, he might well secure answers to all the questions that tormented him by the simple expedient of turning
himself in. Druvenmaquez or a specialist in some other relevant bureau would gladly take the plunge into the secrets of
him. But once committed to such research, he would not be
allowed to leave whenever it might please him. Guinea pigs
had no bill of rights. Revealing himself might also expose
him to the scrutiny of those he wished to avoid—the great
trading houses, other private concerns, the possible remnants
of certain heretical and outlawed societies, and others. Becoming a potentially profitable lab subject carried with it
dangers of its own a long, healthy, and happy future not
necessarily being among them.
Somehow he had to discover himself by himself, without
alerting to his presence the very authorities who might help
alleviate his seemingly illimitable anxieties. And he had to do
it quickly, before the changes he was experiencing threatened

—

—

to

overwhelm him.

For one thing, the unpredictable, skull -pounding headaches he had suffered from since childhood—the ones that

—

caused blinding flashes of light behind his eyes were
growing worse, in intensity if not frequency. When and if it
occurred, would he be able to tell the difference between a
common headache and a cerebral hemorrhage? Would he be
able to deal with the physical as well as the mental consequences of the changes he was undergoing? He needed an-

swers to

all

the old questions about himself, as well as to the

new ones, and he needed them soon.
Of all the billions of humans on all the

settled

worlds scat-

tered across the vast length and breadth of the Commonwealth, no one could claim that “nobody understands me”

with the depth of veracity of a tall young redhead
Phillip Lynx, who was called Flinx.

named

Before setting his small transfer craft down at the Nazca
shuttleport north of Tacrica, he had spent much time in free
space planning his approach to the grand library that was

had tried accessing the Shell, the free and omnipresent information network that spanned the globe, from one
of the numerous orbiting stations that circled the planet. Unsurprisingly, the small segment he was able to access from
orbit had been devoid of all but the most fundamental, freely
available birth information on the subject of himself save
for one small historical reference to the destruction of the outlawed Meliorare Society in 530, three years before his birth.
That information was already known to him. For what he
wanted, for data that was no doubt restricted, banned, or even
under Church Edict, he would have to probe much deeper.
That meant accessing in person one of the intelligence
hubs that sustained the Shell. The Commonwealth Church
and Science hub on Bali would have been ideal, but presenting himself at a highly visible and tightly secured site that
offered only restricted access to the general public would
have been asking for trouble especially since he had entered its corridors once before, seeking information then only
on the specifics of his birth. Ignorant of how widely and well
his current physical description might have been disseminated to local authorities, it behooved him while conducting
his research on Terra to keep as low a profile as possible. That
meant avoiding the most famous and closely monitored centers of research.
Names and faces from his past congealed in the mirror
that was his memory. Did a padre named Namoto still roam
the depths of Genealogy Sector on Bali? Was Counselor
Second Joshua Jiwe still in charge of security there? And
Earth. First he

—

—

where might a certain lissome thranx named Sylzenzuzex be
working these days? On the other side of the vast ocean that
lapped against his feet, which humans called the Pacific, remembrances lay like driftwood on a beach, waiting to be
reexamined. He forced all such thoughts from his mind.

He

could not afford to present himself at the entrance to
Church science headquarters for a second time in five years.
Like it or not, whatever research he chose to conduct would

have to be done from afar.
Roaming the Shell from the comparative anonymity of the
orbiting station, he had reduced the number of suitable hubs
he might safely visit to three. From centers in the Terran
provinces of Kalahari, Kandy, and Cuzco, he chose the Shell
hub at Surire, on the western slope of the mountain range
called Andes. On-site access to the physical core
rally off-limits to all but qualified personnel.

was

natu-

But as with

many such impressive, meaningful facilities, tours of its outer,
were offered to the public. They were

less sensitive areas

deemed educational.
be educated, Flinx had taken one such
tour. As expected, internal security, to which the tour guide
casually alluded, was conspicuous. To penetrate both the facility and the knowledge it hopefully contained, he would
need help. In order to secure it, he for one of the few times in
his life prepared to use his talent not simply to receive, but to
project. To perceive, and to then act upon those perceptions.
Previously, he had done so only to defend himself against
those intending to do him harm.
This time it made him feel, well, dirty.

Wanting ardently

to

Alan Dean Foster has written

a variety of genres,

in

including hard science fiction, fantasy, horror, detective,

western, historical, and contemporary

the author of

numerous

fiction.

He

is

also

nonfiction articles on film,

science, and scuba diving, as well as novel versions of
several films, including Star Wars, the
films,

and Alien Nation. His novel Cyber

Southwest Book Award

three Alien

first

Way won

the

for Fiction in 1990, the first

science fiction work to ever do so.
Foster’s love of the far-away

and exotic has

travel extensively. He’s lived

in

Tahiti

led

him to

and French

Polynesia, traveled to Europe, Asia, and throughout the
Pacific,

and has explored the back roads

and Kenya. He has rappelled

into

New

of Tanzania

Mexico’s fabled

Lechugilla Cave, panfried piranha (lots of bones, tastes
a lot like trout)

in

Peru, white-water rafted the length of

the Zambezi’s Batoka Gorge, and driven solo the length

and breadth

of Namibia.

Foster and his wife,
Arizona,

in

JoAnn

Oxley, reside

a house built of brick that

several

new

Prescott,

was salvaged from

a turn-of-the-century miners’ brothel. He

work on

in

is

presently at

novels and media projects.

.

.

Dean Foster

Bestselling author Alan

has written an exciting Humanx
Commonwealth adventure that
delves deeper into the fragile early

made

years when humans

first

contact on this unforgettable world.
In

.

the second half of the twenty-

fourth century, diplomatic relations

proceed cautiously between thranx
and humans. But the insectlike
beings are nearly forgotten with the

sudden discovery
colonize— Argus

of an ideal planet to

V— and

the startling appearance of a

new

race of spacefaring aliens. People are dazzled by the
beautiful,

glamorous

pitar.

Then tragedy

strikes.

The entire human population on Argus V is brutally
slaughtered. Not a single clue remains to identify the
tiny inner

moon

of

that insignificant

chunk

of rubble

unseen executioners. But from a

V comes
lies

a faint signal.

On

the key to the crime

—

setting

in

Argus

motion a cataclysmic

chain of events with deadly consequences for thranx,

and human

alike.

For their worlds

by a colossal battle that

is

will

their future

pitar,

be changed forever

and

their destiny

