The Citadel of the Autarch
GENE WOLFE

The Dead Soldier
I had never seen war, or even talked of it at length with someone
who had, but I was young and knew something of violence, and so
believed that war would be no more than a new experience for me,
as other things—the possession of authority in Thrax, say, or my
escape from the House Absolute—had been new experiences.

War is not a new experience; it is a new world. Its inhabitants are
more different from human beings than Famulimus and her friends.
Its laws are new, and even its geography is new, because it is a
geography in which insignificant hills and hollows are lifted to the
importance of cities. Just as our familiar Urth holds such
monstrosities as Erebus, Abaia, and Arioch, so the world of war is
stalked by the monsters called battles, whose cells are individuals
but who have a life and intelligence of their own, and whom one
approaches through an ever-thickening array of portents.
One night I woke long before dawn. Everything seemed still, and I
was afraid some enemy had come near, so that my mind had stirred
at his malignancy. I rose and looked about. The hills were lost in the
darkness. I was in a nest of long grass, a nest I had trampled flat for
myself. Crickets sang.
Something caught my eye far to the north: a flash, I thought, of
violet just on the horizon. I stared at the point from which it seemed
to have come. Just as I had convinced myself that what I believed I
had seen was no more than a fault of vision, perhaps some lingering
effect of the drug I had been given in the hetman's house, there was
a flare of magenta a trifle to the left of the point I had been staring
at.
I continued to stand there for a watch or more, rewarded from time
to time with these mysteries of light. At last, having satisfied myself
that they were a great way off and came no nearer, and that they did
not appear to change in frequency, coming on the average with each
five hundredth beat of my heart, I lay down again. And because I
was then thoroughly awake, I became aware that the ground was


shaking, very slightly, beneath me.
When I woke again in the morning it had stopped. I watched the
horizon diligently for some time as I walked along, but saw nothing
disturbing.
It had been two days since I had eaten, and I was no longer hungry,
though I was aware that I did not have my normal strength. Twice
that day I came upon little houses falling to ruin, and I entered each
to look for food. If anything had been left, it had been taken long
before; even the rats were gone. The second house had a well, but
some dead thing had been thrown down it long ago, and in any case
there was no way to reach the stinking water. I went on, wishing for
something to drink and also for a better staff than the succession of
rotten sticks I had been using. I had learned when I had used
Terminus Est as a staff in the mountains how much easier it is to
walk with one.
About noon I came upon a path and followed it, and a short time
afterward heard the sound of hoofs. I hid where I could look down
the road; a moment later a rider crested the next hill and flashed past
me. From the glimpse I had of him, he wore armor somewhat in the
fashion of the commanders of Abdiesus's dimarchi, but his windstiffened cape was green instead of red and his helmet seemed to
have a visor like the bill of a cap. Whoever he was, he was
magnificently mounted: His destrier's mouth was bearded with foam
and its sides drenched, yet it flew by as though the racing signal had
dropped only an instant before.
Having encountered one rider on the path, I expected others. There
were none. For a long while I walked in tranquillity, hearing the


calls of birds and seeing many signs of game. Then (to my
inexpressible delight) the path forded a young stream. I walked up a
dozen strides to a spot where deeper, quieter water flowed over a
bed of white gravel. Minnows skittered away from my boots—
always a sign of good water—and it was still cold from the
mountain peaks and sweet with the memory of snow. I drank and
drank again, and then again, until I could hold no more, then took
off my clothes and washed myself, cold though it was. When I had
finished my bath and dressed and returned to the place where the
path crossed the stream, I saw two pug marks on the other side,
daintily close together, where the animal had crouched to drink.
They overlay the hoofprints of the officer's mount, and each was as
big as a dinner plate, with no claws showing beyond the soft pads of
the toes. Old Midan, who had been my uncle's huntsman when I
was the girl-child Thecla, had told me once that smilodons drink
only after they have gorged themselves, and that when they have
gorged and drunk they are not dangerous unless molested. I went on.
The path wound through a wooded valley, then up into a saddle
between hills. When I was near the highest point, I noticed a tree
two spans in diameter that had been torn in half (as it appeared) at
about the height of my eyes. The ends of both the standing stump
and the felled trunk were ragged, not at all like the smooth chipping
of an ax. In the next two or three leagues I walked, there were
several score like it. Judging from the lack of leaves, and in some
cases of bark, on the fallen parts, and the new shoots the stumps had
put forth, the damage had been done at least a year ago, and perhaps
longer.


At last the path joined a true road, something I had heard of often,
but never trodden except in decay. It was much like the old road the
uhlans had been blocking when I had become separated from Dr.
Talos, Baldanders, Jolenta, and Dorcas when we left Nessus, but I
was unprepared for the cloud of dust that hung about it. No grass
grew upon it, though it was wider than most city streets.
I had no choice except to follow it; the trees about it were thick set,
and the spaces between them choked with brush. At first I was
afraid, remembering the burning lances of the uhlans; still, it
seemed probable that the law that prohibited the use of roads no
longer had force here, or this one would not have seen as much
traffic as it clearly had; and when, a short time later, I heard voices
and the sound of many marching feet behind me, I only moved a
pace or two into the trees and watched openly while the column
passed.
An officer came first, riding a fine, champing blue whose fangs had
been left long and set with turquoise to match his bardings and the
hilt of his owner's estoc. The men who followed him on foot were
antepilani of the heavy infantry, big shouldered and narrow waisted,
with sun-bronzed, expressionless faces. They carried three-pointed
korsekes, demilunes, and heavy-headed voulges. This mixture of
armaments, as well as certain discrepancies among their badges and
accouterments, led me to believe that their mora was made up of the
remains of earlier formations. If that were so, the fighting they must
have seen had left them phlegmatic. They swung along, four
thousand or so in all, without excitement, reluctance, or any sign of
fatigue, careless in their bearing but not slovenly, and seemed to


keep step without thought or effort.
Wagons drawn by grunting, trumpeting trilophodons followed. I
edged nearer the road as they came, for much othe baggage they
carried was clearly food; but there were mounted men among the
wagons, and one called to me, asking what unit I belonged to, then
ordering me to him. I fled instead, and though I was fairly sure he
could not ride among the trees and would not abandon his destrier
to pursue me on foot, I ran until I was winded.
When I stopped at last, it was in a silent glade where greenish
sunlight filtered through the leaves of spindly trees. Moss covered
the ground so thickly that I felt as if I walked upon the dense carpet
of the hidden picture-room where I had encountered the Master of
the House Absolute. For a while I rested my back against one of the
thin trunks, listening. There came no sound but the gasping of my
own breath and the tidal roar of my blood in my ears.
In time I became aware of a third note: the faint buzzing of a fly. I
wiped my streaming face with the edge of my guild cloak. That
cloak was sadly worn and faded now, and I was suddenly conscious
that it was the same one Master Gurloes had draped about my
shoulders when I became a journeyman, and that I was likely to die
in it. The sweat it had absorbed felt cold as dew, and the air was
heavy with the odor of damp earth.
The buzzing of the fly ceased, then resumed—perhaps a trifle more
insistently, perhaps merely seeming so because I had my breath
again. Absently, I looked for it and saw it dart through a shaft of
sunlight a few paces off, then settle on a brown object projecting
from behind one of the thronging trees.


A boot.
I had no weapon whatsoever. Ordinarily I would not have been
much afraid of confronting a single man with my hands alone,
especially in such a place, where it would have been impossible to
swing a sword; but I knew much of my strength was gone, and I
was discovering that fasting destroys a part of one's courage as well
—or perhaps it is only that it consumes a part of it, leaving less for
other exigencies.
However that might be, I walked warily, sidelong and silently, until
I saw him. He layed sprawled, with one leg crumpled under him and
the other extended. A falchion had fallen near his right hand, its
leather lanyard still about his wrist. His simple barbute had dropped
from his head and rolled a step away. The fly crawled up his boot
until it reached the bare flesh just below the knee, then flew again,
with the noise of a tiny saw.
I knew, of course, that he was dead, and even as I felt relief my
sense of isolation came rushing back, though I had not realized that
it had departed. Taking him by the shoulder, I turned him over. His
body had not yet swelled, but the smell of death had come, however
faint. His face had softened like a mask of wax set before a fire;
there was no telling now with what expression he had died. He had
been young and blond—one of those handsome, square faces. I
looked for a wound but found none.
The straps of his pack had been drawn so tight that I could neither
pull it off nor even loosen the fastenings. In the end I took the coutel
from his belt and cut them, then drove the point into a tree. A
blanket, a scrap of paper, a fire-blackened pan with a socket handle,


two pairs of rough stockings (very welcome), and, best of all, an
onion and a half loaf of dark bread wrapped in a clean rag, and five
strips of dried meat and a lump of cheese wrapped in another.
I ate the bread and cheese first, forcing myself, when I found I could
not eat slowly, to rise after every third bite and walk up and down.
The bread helped by requiring a great deal of chewing; it tasted
precisely like the hard bread We used to feed our clients in the
Matachin Tower, bread I had stolen, more from mischief than from
hunger, once or twice. The cheese was dry and smelly and salty, but
excellent all the same; I thought that I had never tasted such cheese
before, and I know I have never tasted any since. I might have been
eating life. It made me thirsty, and I learned how well an onion
quenches thirst by stimulating the salivary glands.
By the time I reached the meat, which was heavily salted too, I was
satiated enough to begin debating whether I should reserve it
against the night, and I decided to eat one piece and save the other
four.
The air had been still since early that morning, but now a faint
breeze blew, cooling my cheeks, stirring the leaves, and catching
the paper I had pulled from the dead soldier's pack and sending it
rattling across the moss to lodge against a tree. Still chewing and
swallowing, I pursued it and picked it up. It was a letter—I assume
one he had not had the opportunity to send, or perhaps to complete.
His hand had been angular, and smaller than I would have
anticipated, though it may be that its smallness only resulted from
his wish to crowd many words onto the small sheet, which appeared
to have been the last he possessed.


O my beloved, we are a hundred leagues north of the place from
which I last wrote you, having come by hard marches. We have
enough to eat and are warm by day, though sometimes cold at night.
Makar, of whom I told you, has fallen sick and was permitted to
remain behind. A great many others claimed then to be ill and were
made to march before us without weapons and carrying double
packs and under guard. In all this time we have seen no sign of the
Ascians, and we are told by the lochage that they are still several
days' march off. The seditionists killed sentries for three nights,
until we put three men on each post and kept patrols moving outside
our perimeter. I was assigned to one of these patrols on the first
night and found it very discomforting, since I feared one of my
comrades would cut me down in the dark. My time was spent
tripping over roots and listening to the singing at the fire—
"Tomorrow night's sleep
Will be on stained ground,
So tonight all drink deep,
Let the friend-cup go round.
Friend, I hope when they shoot,
Every shot will fly wide,
And I wish you good loot,
And myself at your side.
Let the friend-cup go round,
For we'll sleep on stained ground."

Naturally, we saw no one. The seditionists call themselves the
Vodalarü after their leader and are said to be picked fighters. And
file:///J|/sci-fi/Nieuwe%20map/Gene%20Wolfe%20-%20...20Sun%2004]%20-%20The%20Citadel%20of%20the%20.html (9 of 342)15-2-2006 23:22:13


II
The Living Soldier
I put aside the half-read letter and stared at the man who had written
it. Death's shot had not flown wide for him; now he stared at the sun
with lusterless blue eyes, one nearly winking, the other fully open.
Long before that moment I should have recalled the Claw, but I had
not. Or perhaps I had only suppressed the thought in my eagerness
to steal the rations in the dead man's pack, never reasoning that I
might have trusted him to share his food with the rescuer who had
recalled him from death. Now, at the mention of Vodalus and his
followers (who I felt would surely assist me if only I were able to
find them), I remembered it at once and took it out. It seemed to
sparkle in the summer sunlight, brighter indeed than I had ever seen
it without its sapphire case. I touched him with it, then, urged by I
cannot say what impulse, put it into his mouth.
When this, too, effected nothing, I took it between my thumb and
first finger and pushed its point into the soft skin of his forehead. He
did not move or breathe, but a drop of blood, fresh and sticky as that
of a living man, welled forth and stained my fingers.
I withdrew them, wiped my hand with some leaves, and would have
gone back to his letter if I had not thought I heard a stick snap some
distance away. For a moment I could not choose among hiding,
fleeing, and fighting; but there was little chance of successfully


doing the first, and I had already had enough of the second. I picked
up the dead man's falchion, wrapped myself in my cloak, and stood
waiting.
No one came—or at least, no one visible to me. The wind made a
slight sighing among the treetops. The fly seemed to have gone.
Perhaps I had heard nothing more than a deer bounding through the
shadows. I had traveled so far without any weapon that would
permit me to hunt that I had almost forgotten the possibility. Now I
examined the falchion and found myself wishing it had been a bow.
Something behind me stirred, and I turned to look.
It was the soldier. A tremor seemed to have seized him—if I had not
seen his corpse, I would have thought him dying. His hands shook,
and there was a rattling in his throat. I bent and touched his face; it
was as cold as ever, and I had the impulsive need to kindle a fire.
There had been no fire-making gear in his pack, but I knew every
soldier must carry such things. I searched his pockets and found a
few aes, a hanging dial with which to tell time, and a flint and
striking bar. Tinder lay in plenty under the trees—the danger was
that I might set fire to all of it. I swept a space clear with my hands,
piling the sweepings in the center, set them ablaze, then gathered a
few rotten boughs, broke them, and laid them on the fire.
Its light was brighter than I had expected—day was almost done,
and it would soon be dark. I looked at the dead man. His hands no
longer shook; he was silent. The flesh of his face seemed warmer.
But that was, no doubt, no more than the heat of the fire. The spot
of blood on his forehead had nearly dried, yet it seemed to catch the
light of the dying sun, shining as some crimson gem might, some


pigeon's blood ruby spilled from a treasure hoard. Though our fire
gave little smoke, what there was seemed to me fragrant as incense,
and like incense it rose straight until it was lost in the gathering
dark, suggesting something I could not quite recall. I shook myself
and found more wood, breaking and stacking it until I had a pile I
thought large enough to last the night.
Evenings were not nearly so cold here in Orithyia as they had been
in the mountains, or even in the region about Lake Diuturna, so that
although I recalled the blanket I had found in the dead man's pack, I
felt no need of it. My task had warmed me, the food I had eaten had
invigorated me, and for a time I strode up and down in the twilight,
brandishing the falchion when such warlike gestures accorded with
my thoughts but taking care to keep the fire between the dead man
and myself.
My memories have always appeared with the intensity, almost, of
hallucinations, as I have said often in this chronicle. That night I felt
I might lose myself forever in them, making of my life a loop
instead of a line; and for once I did not resist the temptation but
reveled in it. Everything I have described to you came crowding
back to me, and a thousand things more. I saw Eata's face and his
freckled hand when he sought to slip between the bars of the gate of
the necropolis, and the storm I had once watched impaled on the
towers of the Citadel, writhing and lashing out with its lightnings; I
felt its rain, colder and fresher far than the morning cup in our
refectory, trickle down my face. Dorcas's voice whispered in my
ears: "Sitting in a window… trays and a rood. What will you do,
summon up some Erinys to destroy me?"


Yes. Yes, indeed, I would have if I could. If I had been Hethor, I
would have drawn them from some horror behind the world, birds
with the heads of hags and the tongues of vipers. At my order they
would have threshed the forests like wheat and beaten cities flat
with their great wings… and yet, if I could, I would have appeared
at the final moment to save her—not walking coldly off afterward in
the way we all wish to do when, as children, we imagine ourselves
rescuing and humiliating the loved one who has given us some
supposed slight, but raising her in my arms.
Then for the first time, I think, I knew how terrible it must have
been for her, who had been hardly more than a child when death
had come, and who had been dead so long, to have been called back.
And thinking of that, I remembered the dead soldier whose food I
had eaten and whose sword I held, and I paused and listened to hear
if he drew breath or stirred. Yet I was so lost in the worlds of
memory that it seemed to me the soft forest earth under my feet had
come from the grave Hildegrin the Badger had despoiled for
Vodalus, and the whisper of the leaves was the soughing of the
cypresses in our necropolis and the rustle of the purple-flowered
roses, and that I listened, listened in vain for breath from the dead
woman Vodalus had lifted with the rope beneath her arms, lifted in
her white shroud.
At last, the croaking of a nightjar brought me to myself. I seemed to
see the soldier's white face staring at me, and went around the fire
and searched until I found the blanket, and draped his corpse with it.
Dorcas belonged, as I now realized, to that vast group of women
(which may, indeed, include all women) who betray us—and to that


special type who betray us not for some present rival but for their
own pasts. Just as Morwenna, whom I had executed at Saltus, must
have poisoned her husband and her child because she recalled a
time in which she was free and, perhaps, virginal, so Dorcas had left
me because I had not existed (had, as she must unconsciously have
seen it, failed to exist) in that time before her doom fell upon her.
(For me, also, that is the golden time. I think I must have treasured
the memory of the crude, kindly boy who fetched books and
blossoms to my cell largely because I knew him to be the last love
before the doom, the doom that was not, as I learned in that prison,
the moment at which the tapestry was cast over me to muffle my
outcry, nor my arrival at the Old Citadel in Nessus, nor the slam of
the cell door behind me, nor even the moment when, bathed in such
a light as never shines on Urth, I felt my body rise in rebellion
against me— but that instant in which I drew the blade of the greasy
paring knife he had brought, cold and mercifully sharp, across my
own neck. Possibly we all come to such a time, and it is the will of
the Caitanya that each damn herself for what she has done. Yet can
we be hated so much? Can we be hated at all? Not when I can still
remember his kisses on my breasts, given, not breathing to taste the
perfume of my flesh—as Aphrodisius's were, and that young man's,
the nephew of the chiliarch of the Companions—but as though he
were truly hungry for my flesh. Was something watching us? He
has eaten of me now. Awakened by the memory, I lift my hand and
run fingers through his hair.)
I slept late, wrapped in my cloak. There is a payment made by
Nature to those who undergo hardships; it is that the lesser ones, at


which people whose lives have been easier would complain, seem
almost comfortable. Several times before I actually rose, I woke and
congratulated myself to think how easily I had spent this night
compared to those I had endured in the mountains.
At last the sunlight and the singing birds brought me to myself. On
the other side of our dead fire, the soldier shifted and, I think,
murmured something. I sat up. He had thrown the blanket aside and
lay with his face to the sky. It was a pale face with sunken cheeks;
there were dark shadows beneath the eyes and deeply cut lines
running from the mouth; but it was a living face. The eyes were
truly closed, and breath sighed in the nostrils.
For a moment I was tempted to run before he woke. I had his
falchion still—I started to replace it, then took it back for fear he
would attack me with it. His coutel still protruded from the tree,
making me think of Agia's crooked dagger in the shutter of Casdoe's
house. I thrust it back into the sheath at his belt, mostly because I
was ashamed to think that I, armed with a sword, should fear any
man with a knife.
His eyelids fluttered, and I drew away, remembering a time when
Dorcas had been frightened to find me bending over her when she
woke. So that I should not appear a dark figure, I pushed back my
cloak to show my bare arms and chest, browned now by so many
days' suns. I could hear the sighing of his breath; and when it
changed from sleep to waking, it seemed to me a thing almost as
miraculous as the passage from death to life.
Empty-eyed as a child, he sat up and looked about him. His lips
moved, but only sound without sense came forth. I spoke to him,


trying to make my tone friendly. He listened but did not seem to
understand, and I recalled how dazed the uhlan had been, whom I
had revived on the road to the House Absolute.
I wished that I had water to offer him, but I had none. I drew out a
piece of the salt meat I had taken from his pack, broke it into two,
and shared that with him instead.
He chewed and seemed to feel a little better. "Stand up," I said. "We
must find something to drink." He took my hand and allowed me to
pull him erect, but he could hardly stand. His eyes, which had been
so calm at first, grew wilder as they became more alert. I had the
feeling that he feared the trees might rush upon us like a pride of
lions, yet he did not draw his coutel or attempt to reclaim the
falchion.
When we had taken three or four steps, he tottered and nearly fell. I
let him lean upon my arm, and together we made our way through
the wood to the road.

III
Through Dust
I did not know whether we should turn north or south. Somewhere
to the north lay the Ascian army, and it was possible that if we came
too near the lines we would be caught up in some swift maneuver.
Yet the farther south we went, the less likely we were to find
anyone who would help us, and the more probable it became that
we would be arrested as deserters. In the end I turned northward; no


doubt I acted largely from habit, and I am still not sure if I did well
or ill.
The dew had already dried upon the road, and its dusty surface
showed no footprints. To either side, for three paces or more, the
vegetation was a uniform gray. We soon passed out of the forest.
The road wound down a hill and over a bridge that vaulted a small
river at the bottom of a rock-strewn valley.
We left it there and went down to the water to drink and bathe our
faces. I had not shaved since I had turned my back on Lake
Diuturna, and though I had noticed none when I took the flint and
striker from the soldier's pocket, I ventured to ask him if he carried
a razor.
I mention this trifling incident because it was the first thing I said to
him that he seemed to comprehend. He nodded, then reaching under
his hauberk produced one of those little blades that country people
use, razors their smiths grind from the halves of worn oxshoes. I
touched it up on the broken whetstone I still carried and stropped it
on the leg of my boot, then asked if he had soap. If he did, he failed
to understand me, and after a moment he seated himself on a rock
from which he could stare into the water, reminding me very much
of Dorcas. I longed to question him about the fields of Death, to
learn all that he remembered of that time that is, perhaps, dark only
to us. Instead, I washed my face in the cold river water and scraped
my cheeks and chin as well as I could. When I sheathed his razor
and tried to return it to him, he did not seem to know what to do
with it, so I kept it.
For most of the rest of that day we walked. Several times we were


stopped and questioned; more often we stopped others and
questioned them. Gradually I developed an elaborate lie: I was the
lictor of a civil judge who accompanied the Autarch; we had
encountered this soldier on the road, and my master had ordered me
to see that he was cared for; he could not speak, and so I did not
know what unit he was from. That last was true enough.
We crossed other roads and sometimes followed them. Twice we
reached great camps where tens of thousands of soldiers lived in
cities of tents. At each, those who tended the sick told me that
though they would have bandaged my companion's wounds had he
been bleeding, they could not take responsibility for him as he was.
By the time I spoke to the second, I no longer asked the location of
the Pelerines but only to be directed to a place where we might find
shelter. It was nearly night.
"There is a lazaret three leagues from here that may take you in."
My informant looked from one of us to the other, and seemed to
have almost as much sympathy for me as for the soldier, who stood
mute and dazed. "Go west and north until you see a road to the right
that passes between two big trees. It is about half as wide as the one
you will have been following. Go down that. Are you armed?"
I shook my head; I had put the soldier's falchion back in his
scabbard. "I was forced to leave my sword behind with my master's
servants—I couldn't have carried it and managed this man too."
"Then you must beware of beasts. It would be better if you had
something that would shoot, but I can't give you anything."
I turned to go, but he stopped me with a hand on my shoulder.


"Leave him if you're attacked," he said. "And if you're forced to
leave him, don't feel too badly about it. I've seen cases like his
before. He's not likely to recover."
"He has already recovered," I told him.
Although this man would not allow us to stay or lend me a weapon,
he did provide us with something to eat; and I departed with more
cheerfulness than I had felt for some time. We were in a valley
where the western hills had risen to obscure the sun a watch or more
before. As I walked along beside the soldier, I discovered that it was
no longer necessary for me to hold his arm. I could release it, and he
continued to walk at my side like any friend. His face was not really
like Jonas's, which had been long and narrow, but once when I saw
it sidelong I caught something there so reminiscent of Jonas that I
felt almost that I had seen a ghost.
The gray road was greenish-white in the moonlight; the trees and
brush to either side looked black. As we strode along I began to
talk. Partially, I admit, it was from sheer loneliness; yet I had other
reasons as well. Unquestionably there are beasts, like the alzabo,
who attack men as foxes do fowls, but I have been told that there
are many others who will flee if they are warned in time of human
presence. Then too, I thought that if I spoke to the soldier as I might
have to any other man, any ill-intentioned persons who heard us
would be less apt to guess how unlikely he was to resist them.
"Do you recall last night?" I began. "You slept very heavily."
There was no reply.
"Perhaps I never told you this, but I have the facility of recalling


everything. I can't always lay hands on it when I want, but it is
always there; some memories, you know, are like escaped clients
wandering through the oubliette. One may not be able to produce
them on demand, but they are always there, they cannot get away.
"Although, come to think of it, that isn't entirely true. The fourth
and lowest level of our oubliette has been abandoned—there are
never enough clients to fill the topmost three anyway, and perhaps
eventually Master Gurloes will give up the third. We only keep it
open now for the mad ones that no official ever comes to see. If
they were in one of the higher levels, their noise would disturb the
others. Not all of them are noisy, of course. Some are as quiet as
yourself."
Again there was no reply. In the moonlight I could not tell if he was
paying attention to me, but remembering the razor I persevered.
"I went that way myself once. Through the fourth level, I mean. I
used to have a dog, and I kept him there, but he ran away. I went
after him and found a tunnel that left our oubliette. Eventually I
crawled out of a broken pedestal in a place called the Atrium of
Time. It was full of sundials. I met a young woman there who was
really more beautiful than anyone I've ever seen since—more lovely
even than Jolenta, I think, though not in the same way."
The soldier said nothing, yet now something told me he heard me;
perhaps it was no more than a slight movement of his head seen
from a corner of my eye.
"Her name was Valeria, and I think she was younger than I,
although she seemed older. She had dark, curling hair, like Thecla's,
but her eyes were dark too. Thecla's were violet. She had the finest


skin I have ever seen, like rich milk mixed with the juice of
pomegranates and strawberries.
"But I didn't set out to talk about Valeria, but about Dorcas. Dorcas
is lovely too, though she is very thin, almost like a child. Her face is
a peri's, and her complexion is flecked with freckles like bits of
gold. Her hair was long before she cut it; she always wore flowers
there."
I paused again. I had continued to talk of women because that
seemed to have caught his attention. Now I could not say if he were
still listening or not.
"Before I left Thrax I went to see Dorcas. It was in her room, in an
inn called the Duck's Nest. She was in bed and naked, but she kept
the sheet over herself, just as if we had never slept together—we
who had walked and ridden so far, camping in places where no
voice had been heard since the land was called up from the sea, and
climbing hills where no feet had ever walked but the sun's. She was
leaving me and I her, and neither of us really wished it otherwise,
though at the last she was afraid and asked me to come with her
after all.
"She said she thought the Claw had the same power over time that
Father Inire's mirrors are said to have over distance. I didn't think
much of the remark then—I'm not really a very intelligent man, I
suppose, not a philosopher at ail-but now I find it interesting. She
told me, 'When you brought the uhlan back to life it was because the
Claw twisted time for him to the point at which he still lived. When
you half-healed your friend's wounds, it was because it bent the
moment to one when they would be nearly healed.' Don't you think


that's interesting? A little while after I pricked your forehead with
the Claw, you made a strange sound. I think it may have been your
death rattle."
I waited. The soldier did not speak, but quite unexpectedly I felt his
hand on my shoulder. I had been talking almost flippantly; his touch
brought home to me the seriousness of what I had been saying. If it
were true—or even some trifling approximation to the truth—then I
had toyed with powers I understood no better than Casdoe's son,
whom I had tried to make my own, would have understood the giant
ring that took his life.
"No wonder then that you're dazed. It must be a terrible thing to
move backward in time, and still more terrible to pass backward
through death. I was about to say that it would be like being born
again; but it would be much worse than that, I think, because an
infant lives already in his mother's womb." I hesitated. "I… Thecla,
I mean… nevebore a child."
Perhaps only because I had been thinking of his confusion, I found I
was confused myself, so that I scarcely knew who I was. At last I
said lamely, "You must excuse me. When I'm tired, and sometimes
when I'm near sleep, I come near to becoming someone else." (For
whatever reason, his grip on my shoulder tightened when I said
that.) "It's a long story that has nothing to do with you. I wanted to
say that in the Atrium of Time, the breaking of the pedestal had
tilted the dials so their gnomons no longer pointed true, and I have
heard that when that happens, the watches of day stop, or run
backward for some part of each day. You carry a pocket dial, so you
know that for it to tell time truly you must direct its gnomon toward


the sun. The sun remains stationary while Urth dances about him,
and it is by her dancing that we know the time, just as a deaf man
might still beat out the rhythm of a tarantella by observing the
swaying of the dancers. But what if the sun himself were to dance?
Then, too, the march of the moments might become a retreat.
"I don't know if you believe in the New Sun—I'm not sure I ever
have. But if he will exist, he will be the Conciliator come again, and
thus Conciliator and New Sun are only two names for the same
individual, and we may ask why that individual should be called the
New Sun. What do you think? Might it not be for this power to
move time?"
Now I felt indeed that time itself had stopped. Around us the trees
rose dark and silent; night had freshened the air. I could think of
nothing more to say, and I was ashamed to talk nonsense, because I
felt somehow that the soldier had been listening attentively to all I
had said. Before us I saw two pines far thicker through their trunks
than the others lining the road, and a pale path of white and green
that threaded its way between them. "There!" I exclaimed.
But when we reached them, I had to halt the soldier with my hands
and turn him by the shoulders before he followed me. I noticed a
dark splatter in the dust and bent to touch it.
It was clotted blood. "We are on the right road," I told him. "They
have been bringing the wounded here."

IV
Fever


I cannot say how far we walked, or how far worn the night was
before we reached our destination. I know that I began to stumble
some time after we turned aside from the main road, and that it
became a sort of disease to me; just as some sick men cannot stop
coughing and others cannot keep their hands from shaking, so I
tripped, and a few steps farther on tripped again, and then again.
Unless I thought of nothing else, the toe of my left boot caught at
my right heel, and I could not concentrate my mind—my thoughts
ran off with every step I took.
Fireflies glimmered in the trees to either side of the path, and for a
long time 1 supposed that the lights ahead of us were only more
such insects and did not hurry my pace. Then, very suddenly as it
seemed to me, we were beneath some shadowy roof where men and
women with yellow lamps moved up and down between long rows
of shrouded cots. A woman in clothes I supposed were black took
charge of us and led us to another place where there were chairs of
leather and horn, and a fire burned in a brazier. There I saw that her
gown was scarlet, and she wore a scarlet hood, and for a moment I
thought that she was Cyriaca.
"Your friend is very ill, isn't he?" she said. "Do you know what is
the matter with him?"
And the soldier shook his head and answered, "No. I'm not even
sure who he is."
I was too stunned to speak. She took my hand, then released it and
took the soldier's. "He has a fever. So do you. Now that the heat of
summer is come, we see more disease each day. You should have


boiled your water and kept yourselves as clean of lice as you could."
She turned to me. "You have a great many shallow cuts too, and
some them are infected. Rock shards?"
I managed to say, "I'm not the one who is ill. I brought my friend
here."
"You are both ill, and I suspect you brought each other. I doubt that
either of you would have reached us without the other. Was it rock
shards? Some weapon of the enemy's?"
"Rock shards, yes. A weapon of a friend's."
"That is the worst thing, I am told—to be fired upon by your own
side. But the fever is the chief concern." She hesitated, looking from
the soldier to me and back. "I'd like to put you both in bed now, but
you'll have to go to the bath first."
She clapped her hands to summon a burly man with a shaven head.
He took our arms and began to lead us away, then stopped and
picked me up, carrying me as I had once carried little Severian. In a
few moments we were naked and sitting in a pool of water heated
by stones. The burly man splashed more water over us, then made
us get out one at a time so he could crop our hair with a pair of
shears. After that we were left to soak awhile.
"You can speak now," I said to the soldier.
I saw him nod in the lamplight.
"Why didn't you, then, when we were coming here?"
He hesitated, and his shoulders moved a trifle. "I was thinking of
many things, and you didn't talk yourself. You seemed so tired.
Once I asked if we shouldn't stop, but you didn't answer."


I said, "It seemed to me otherwise, but perhaps we are both correct.
Do you recall what happened to you before you met me?"
Again there was a pause. "I don't even remember meeting you. We
were walking down a dark path, and you were beside me."
"And before that?"
"I don't know. Music, perhaps, and walking a long way. In sunshine
at first but later through the dark."
"That walking was while you were with me," I said. "Don't you
recall anything else?"
"Flying through the dark. Yes, I was with you, and we came to a
place where the sun hung just above our heads. There was a light
before us, but when I stepped into it, it became a kind of darkness."
I nodded. "You weren't wholly rational, you see. On a warm day it
can seem that the sun's just overhead, and when it is down behind
the mountains it seems the light becomes darkness. Do you recall
your name?"
At that he thought for several moments, and at last smiled ruefully.
"I lost it somewhere along the way. That's what the jaguar said, who
had promised to guide the goat."
The burly man with the shaven head had come back without either
of us noticing. He helped me out of the pool and gave me a towel
with which to dry myself, a robe to wear, and a canvas sack
containing my possessions, which now smelled strongly of the
smoke of fumigation. A day earlier it would have tormented me
nearly to frenzy to have the Claw out of my possession for an
instant. That night I had hardly realized it was gone until it was


returned to me, and I did not verify that it had indeed been returned
until I lay on one of the cots under a veil of netting. The Claw shone
in my hand then, softly as the moon; and it was shaped as the moon
sometimes is. I smiled to think that its flooding light of pale green is
the reflection of the sun.
On the first night I slept in Saltus, I had awakened thinking I was in
the apprentices' dormitory in our tower. Now I had the same
experience in reverse: I slept and found in sleep that the shadowy
lazaret with its silent figures and moving lamps had been no more
than a hallucination of the day.
I sat up and looked around. I felt well—better, in fact, than I had
ever felt before; but I was warm. I seemed to glow from within.
Roche was sleeping on his side, his red hair tousled and his mouth
slightly open, his face relaxed and boyish without the energy of his
mind behind it. Through the port I could see snow drifts in the Old
Court, new-fallen snow that showed no tracks of men or their
animals; but it occurred to me that in the necropolis there would be
hundreds of footprints already as the small creatures who found
shelter there, the pets and the playmates of the dead, came out to
search for food and to disport themselves in the new landscape
Nature had bestowed on them. I dressed quickly and silently,
holding my finger to my own lips when one of the other apprentices
stirred, and hurried down the steep stair that wound through the
center of the tower.
It seemed longer than usual, and I found I had difficulty in going
from step to step. We are always aware of the hindrance of gravity
when we climb stairs, but we take for granted the assistance it gives


us when we descend. Now that assistance had been withdrawn, or
nearly so. I had to force each foot down, but do it in a way that
prevented it from sending me shooting up when it struck the step, as
it would have if I had stamped. In that uncanny way we know things
in dreams, I understood that all the towers of the Citadel had risen at
last and were on their voyage beyond the circle of Dis. I felt happy
in the knowledge, but I still desired to go into the necropolis and
track the coatis and foxes. I was hurrying down as fast as I could
when I heard a groan. The stairway no longer descended as it should
but led into a cabin, just as the stairs in Baldanders's castle had
stretched down the walls of its chambers.
This was Master Malrubius's sickroom. Masters are entitled to
spacious quarters; still, this was larger by far than the actual cabin
had been. There were two ports just as I remembered, but they were
enormous—the eyes of Mount Typhon. Master Malrubius's bed was
very large, yet it seemed lost in the immensity of the room. Two
figures bent over him. Though their clothing was dark, it struck me
that it was not the fuligin of the guild. I went to them, and when I
was so near I could hear the sick man's labored breathing, they
straightened up and turned to look at me. They were the Cumaean
and her acolyte Merryn, the witches we had met atop the tomb in
the ruined stone town.
"Ah, sister, you have come at last," Merryn said. As she spoke, I
realized that I was not, as I had thought, the apprentice Severian. I
was Thecla as she had been when she was his height, which is to
say at about the age of thirteen or fourteen. I felt an intense
embarrassment—not because of my girl's body or because I was


wearing masculine clothes (which indeed I rather enjoyed) but
because I had been unaware of it previously. I also felt that Merryn's
words had been an act of magic—that both Severian and I had been
present before, and that she had by some means driven him into the
background. The Cumaean kissed me on the forehead, and when the
kiss was over wiped blood from her lips. Although she did not
speak, I knew this was a signal that I had in some sense become the
soldier too.
"When we sleep," Merryn told me, "we move from temporality to
eternity."
"When we wake," the Cumaean whispered, "we lose the facility to
see beyond the present moment."
"She never wakes," Merryn boasted. Master Malrubius stirred and
groaned, and the Cumaean took a carafe of water from the table by
his bed and poured a little into a tumbler. When she set down the
carafe again, something living stirred in it. I, for some reason,
thought it the undine; I drew back, but it was Hethor, no higher than
my hand, his gray, stubbled face pressed against the glass.
I heard his voice as one might hear the squeaking of mice:
"Sometimes driven aground by the photon storms, by the swirling of
the galaxies, clockwise and counterclockwise, ticking with light
down the dark sea-corridors lined with our silver sails, our demonhaunted mirror sails, our hundred-league masts as fine as threads, as
fine as silver needles sewing the threads of starlight, embroidering
the stars on black velvet, wet with the winds of Time that goes
racing by. The bone in her teeth! The spume, the flying spume of
Time, cast up on these beaches where old sailors can no longer keep


their bones from the restless, the unwearied universe. Where has she
gone? My lady, the mate of my soul? Gone across the running tides
of Aquarius, of Pisces, of Aries. Gone. Gone in her little boat, her
nipples pressed against the black velvet lid, gone, sailing away
forever from the star-washed shores, the dry shoals of the habitable
worlds. She is her own ship, she is the figurehead of her own ship,
and the captain. Bosun, Bosun, put out the launch! Sailmaker, make
a sail! She has left us behind. We have left her behind. She is in the
past we never knew and the future we will not see. Put out more
sail, Captain, for the universe is leaving us behind…"
There was a bell on the table beside the carafe. Merryn rang it as
though to overpower Hethor's voice, and when Master Malrubius
had moistened his lips with the tumbler, she took it from the
Cumaean, flung what remained of its water on the floor, and
inverted it over the neck of the carafe. Hethor was silenced, but the
water spread over the floor, bubbling as though fed by a hidden
spring. It was icy cold. I thought vaguely that my governess would
be angry because my shoes were wet.
A maid was coming in answer to the ring—Thecla's maid, whose
flayed leg I had inspected the day after I had saved Vodalus. She
was younger, as young as she must have been when Thecla was
actually a girl, but her leg had been flayed already and ran with
blood. "I am so sorry," I said. "I am so sorry, Hunna. I didn't do it—
it was Master Gurloes, and some journeymen."
Master Malrubius sat up in bed, and for the first time I observed that
his bed was in actuality a woman's hand, with fingers longer than
my arm and nails like talons. "You're well!" he said, as though I


were the one who had been dying. "Or nearly well, at least." The
fingers of the hand began to close upon him, but he leaped from the
bed and into water that was now knee high to stand beside me.
A dog—my old dog Triskele—had apparently been hiding beneath
the bed, or perhaps only lying on the farther side of it, out of sight.
Now he came to us, splashing the water with his single forepaw as
he drove his broad chest through it and barking joyously. Master
Malrubius took my right hand and the Cumaean my left; together
they led me to one of the great eyes of the mountain.
I saw the view I had seen when Typhon had led me there: The
world rolled out like a carpet and visible in its entirety. This time it
was more magnificent by far. The sun was behind us; its beams
seemed to have multiplied their strength. Shadows were alchemized
to gold, and every green thing grew darker and stronger as I looked.
I could see the grain ripening in the fields and even the myriad fish
of the sea doubling and redoubling with the increase of the tiny
surface plants that sustained them. Water from the room behind us
poured from the eye and, catching the light, fell in a rainbow.
Then I woke.
While I slept, someone had wrapped me in sheets packed with
snow. (I learned later that it was brought down from the
mountaintops by sure-footed sumpters.) Shivering, I longed to
return to my dream, though I was already half-aware of the
immense distance that separated us. The bitter taste of medicine was
in my mouth, the stretched canvas felt as hard as a floor beneath me,
and scarlet-clad Pelerines with lamps moved to and fro, tending
men and women who groaned in the dark.


V
The Lazaret
I do not believe I really slept again that night, though I may have
dozed. When dawn came, the snow had melted. Two Pelerines took
the sheets away, gave me a towel with which to dry myself, and
brought dry bedding. I wanted to give the Claw to them then—my
possessions were in the bag under my cot—but the moment seemed
inappropriate. I lay down instead, and now that it was daylight, slept.
I woke again about noon. The lazaret was as quiet as it ever
became; somewhere far off two men were talking and another cried
out, but their voices only emphasized the stillness. I sat up and
looked around, hoping to see the soldier. On my right lay a man
whose close-cropped scalp made me think at first that he was one of
the slaves of the Pelerines. I called to him, but when he turned his
head to look at me, I saw I had been mistaken.
His eyes were emptier than any human eyes I had ever seen, and
they seemed to watch spirits invisible to me. "Glory to the Group of
Seventeen," he said.
"Good morning. Do you know anything about the way this place is
run?"
A shadow appeared to cross his face, and I sensed that my question
had somehow made him suspicious. He answered, "All endeavors
are conducted well or ill precisely in so far as they conform to
Correct Thought."


"Another man was brought in at the same time I was. I'd like to talk
to him. He's a friend of mine, more or less."
"Those who do the will of the populace are friends, though we have
never spoken to them. Those who do not do the will of the populace
are enemies, though we learned together as children."
The man on my left called, "You won't get anything out of him.
He's a prisoner."
I turned to look at him. His face, though wasted nearly to a skull,
retained something of humor. His stiff, black hair looked as though
it had not seen a comb for months.
"He talks like that all the time. Never any other way. Hey, you!
We're going to beat you!"
The other answered, "For the Armies of the Populace, defeat is the
springboard of victory, and victory the ladder to further victory."
"He makes a lot more sense than most of them, though," the man on
my left told me.
"You say he's a prisoner. What did he do?"
"Do? Why, he didn't die."
"I'm afraid I don't understand. Was he selected for some kind of
suicide mission?"
The patient beyond the man on my left sat up—a young woman
with a thin but lovely face. "They all are," she said. "At least, they
can't go home until the war is won, and they know, really, that it
will never be won."
"External battles are already won when internal struggles are


conducted with Correct Thought."
I said, "He's an Ascian, then. That's what you meant. I've never seen
one before."
"Most of them die," the black-haired man told me. "That's what I
said."
"I didn't know they spoke our language."
"They don't. Some officers who came here to talk to him said they
thought he'd been an interpreter. Probably he questioned our
soldiers when they were captured. Only he did something wrong
and had to go back to the ranks."
The young woman said, "I don't think he's really mad. Most of them
are. What's your name?"
"I'm sorry, I should have introduced myself. I'm Severian." I almost
added that I was a lictor, but I knew neither of them would talk to
me if I told them that.
"I'm Foila, and this is Melito. I was of the Blue Huzzars, he a
hoplite."
"You shouldn't talk nonsense," Melito growled. "I am a hoplite. You
are a huzzar."
I thought he appeared much nearer death than she.
"I'm only hoping we will be discharged when we're well enough to
leave this place," Foila said.
"And what will we do then? Milk somebody else's cow and herd his
pigs?" Melito turned to me. "Don't let her talk deceive you—we
were volunteers, both of us. I was about to be promoted when I was


wounded, and when I'm promoted I'll be able to support a wife."
Foila called, "I haven't promised to marry you!"
Several beds away, someone said loudly, "Take her so she'll shut up
about it!"
At that, the patient in the bed beyond Foila's sat up. "She will marry
me." He was big, fair skinned, and pale haired, and he spoke with
the deliberation characteristic of the icy isles of the south. "I am
Hallvard."
Surprising me, the Ascian prisoner announced, "United, men and
women are stronger; but a brave woman desires children, and not
husbands."
Foila said, "They fight even when they're pregnant—I've seen them
dead on the battlefield."
"The roots of the tree are the populace. The leaves fall, but the tree
remains."
I asked Melito and Foila if the Ascian were composing his remarks
or quoting some literary source with which I was unfamiliar.
"Just making it up, you mean?" Foila asked. "No. They never do
that. Everything they say has to be taken from an approved text.
Some of them don't talk at all. The rest have thousands—I suppose
actually tens or hundreds of thousands—of those tags memorized."
"That's impossible," I said.
Melito shrugged. He had managed to prop himself up on one elbow.
"They do it, though. At least, that's what everybody says. Foila
knows more about them than I do."


Foila nodded. "In the light cavalry, we do a lot of scouting, and
sometimes we're sent out specifically to take prisoners. You don't
learn anything from talking to most of them, but just the same the
General Staff can tell a good deal from their equipment and physical
condition. On the northern continent, where they come from, only
the smallest children ever talk the way we do."
I thought of Master Gurloes conducting the business of our guild.
"How could they possibly say something like 'Take three
apprentices and unload that wagon'?"
"They wouldn't say that at all—just grab people by the shoulder,
point to the wagon, and give them a push. If they went to work,
fine. If they didn't, then the leader would quote something about the
need for labor to ensure victory, with several witnesses present. If
the person he was talking to still wouldn't work after that, then he
would have him killed—probably just by pointing to him and
quoting something about the need to eliminate the enemies of the
populace."
The Ascian said, "The cries of the children are the cries of victory.
Still, victory must learn wisdom."
Foila interpreted for him. "That means that although children are
needed, what they say is meaningless. Most Ascians would consider
us mute even if we learned their tongue, because groups of words
that are not approved texts are without meaning for them. If they
admitted—even to themselves—that such talk meant something,
then it would be possible for them to hear disloyal remarks, and
even to make them. That would be extremely dangerous. As long as
they only understand and quote approved texts, no one can accuse


them."
I turned my head to look at the Ascian. It was clear that he had been
listening attentively, but I could not be certain of what his
expression meant beyond that. "Those who write the approved
texts," I told him, "cannot themselves be quoting from approved
texts as they write. Therefore even an approved text may contain
elements of disloyalty."
"Correct Thought is the thought of the populace. The populace
cannot betray the populace or the Group of Seventeen."
Foila called, "Don't insult the populace or the Group of Seventeen.
He might try to kill himself. Sometimes they do."
"Will he ever be normal?"
"I've heard that some of them eventually come to talk more or less
the way we do, if that's what you mean."
I could think of nothing to say to that, and for some time we were
quiet. There are long periods of silence, I found, in such a place,
where almost everyone is ill. We knew that we had watch after
watch to occupy; that if we did not say what we wished to say that
afternoon there would be another opportunity that evening and
another again the next morning. Indeed, anyone who talked as
healthy people normally do-after a meal, for example—would have
been intolerable.
But what had been said had set me thinking of the north, and I
found I knew next to nothing about it. When I had been a boy,
scrubbing floors and running errands in the Citadel, the war itself
had seemed almost infinitely remote. I knew that most of the


matrosses who manned the major batteries had taken part in it, but I
knew it just as I knew that the sunlight that fell upon my hand had
been to the sun. I would be a torturer, and as a torturer 1 would have
no reason „ to enter the army and no reason to fear that I would be
impressed into it. I never expected to see the war at the gates of
Nessus (in fact, those gates themselves were hardly more than
legends to me), and I never expected to leave the city, or even to
leave that quarter of the city that held the Citadel.
The north, Ascia, was then inconceivably remote, a place as distant
as the most distant galaxy, since both were forever out of reach.
Mentally, I confused it with the dying belt of tropical vegetation
that lay between our own land and theirs, although I would have
distinguished the two without difficulty if Master Palaemon had
asked me to in the classroom.
But of Ascia itself I had no idea. I did not know if it had great cities
or none. I did not know if it was mountainous like the northern and
eastern parts of our Commonwealth or as level as our pampas. I did
have the impression (though I could not be sure it was correct) that
it was a single land mass, and not a chain of islands like our south;
and most distinct of all, I had the impression of an innumerable
people—our Ascian's populace—an inexhaustible swarm that
almost became a creature in itself, as a colony of ants does. To think
of those millions upon millions without speech, or confined to
parroting proverbial phrases that must surely have long ago lost
most of their meaning, was nearly more than the mind could bear.
Speaking almost to myself, I said, "It must surely be a trick, or a lie,
or a mistake. Such a nation could not exist."


And the Ascian, his voice no louder than my own had been, and
perhaps even softer, answered, "How shall the state be most
vigorous? It shall be most vigorous when it is without conflict. How
shall it be without conflict? When it is without disagreement. How
shall disagreement be banished? By banishing the four causes of
disagreement: lies, foolish talk, boastful talk, and talk which serves
only to incite quarrels. How shall the four causes be banished? By
speaking only Correct Thought. Then shall the state be without
disagreement. Being without disagreement it shall be without
conflict. Being without conflict it shall be vigorous, strong, and
secure."
I had been answered, and doubly.

VI
Miles, Foila, Melito, and Hallvard
That evening I fell prey to a fear I had been trying to put from my
mind for some time. Although I had seen nothing of the monsters
Hethor had brought from beyond the stars since little Severian and I
had escaped from the village of the sorcerers, I had not forgotten
that he was searching for me. While I traveled in the wilderness or
upon the waters of Lake Diuturna, I had not been much afraid he
would overtake me. Now I was traveling no longer, and I could feel
the weakness in my limbs, for despite the food I had eaten I was
weaker than I had ever been while starving in the mountains.
Then too, I feared Agia almost more than Hethor's notules, his


salamanders and slugs. I knew her courage, her cleverness, and her
malice. Any one of the scarlet-clad priestesses of the Pelerines
moving between the cots might easily be she, with a poisoned
stiletto beneath her gown. I slept badly that night; but though I
dreamed much, my dreams were indistinct, and I will not attempt to
relate them here.
I woke feeling less than rested. My fever, of which I had hardly
been conscious when I came to the lazaret, and which had seemed
to subside on the day previous, returned. I felt its heat in every limb
—it seemed to me that I must glow, that the very glaciers of the
south would melt if I came among them. I took out the Claw and
clasped it to me, and for a time even held it in my mouth. My fever
sank again, but left me weak and dizzied.
That morning the soldier came to see me. He wore a white gown the
Pelerines had given him in place of his armor, but he appeared
wholly recovered, and told me he hoped to leave the next day. I said
I would like to introduce him to the acquaintances I had made in
this part of the lazaret and asked if he now recalled his name.
He shook his head. "I can remember very little. I am hoping that
when I go among the units of the army I will find someone there
who knows me."
I introduced him anyway, calling him Miles since I could think of
nothing better. I did not know the Ascian's name either and
discovered that no one did, not even Foila. When we asked him
what it was, he only said, "I am Loyal to the Group of Seventeen."
For a time Foila, Melito, the soldier, and I chatted among ourselves.
Melito seemed to like him very well, though perhaps only because


of the similarity of the name I had given him to his own. Then the
soldier helped me into a sitting posture, lowered his voice, and said,
"Now I have to talk to you privately. As I said, I think I will leave
here in the morning. From what I have seen of you, you won't be
getting out for several days—maybe not for a couple of weeks. I
may never see you again."
"Let us hope that isn't so."
"I hope not either. But if I can find my legion, I may be killed by the
time you're well. And if I can't find it, I'll probably go into another
to keep from being arrested as a deserter." He paused.
I smiled. "And I may die here, of the fever. You didn't want to say
that. Do I look as bad as poor Melito?"
He shook his head. "Not as bad, no. I think you'll make it—"
"That's what the thrush sang while the lynx chased the hare around
the bay tree."
Now it was his turn to smile. "You're right; I was about to say that."
"Is it a common expression in that part of the Commonwealth where
you were brought up?"
The smile vanished. "I don't know. I can't remember where my
home is, and that's part of the reason I have to talk to you now. I
remember walking down a road with you at night—that's the only
thing I do remember, before I came here. Where did you find me?"
"In a wood, I suppose about five or ten leagues south of here. Do
you recall what I told you about the Claw as we walked?"
He shook his head. "I think I remember you mentioning such a


thing, but not what you said."
"What do you remember? Tell me all of it, and I'll tell you what I
know, and what I can guess."
"Walking with you. A lot of darkness… I fell, or maybe flew
through it. Seeing my own face, multiplied again and again. A girl
with hair like red gold and enormous eyes."
"A beautiful woman?"
He nodded. "The most beautiful in the world."
Raising my voice, I asked if anyone had a mirror he would lend us
for a moment. Foila produced one from the possessions beneath her
cot, and I held it up for the soldier. "Is this the face?"
He hesitated. "I think so."
"Blue eyes?"
"… I can't be sure."
I returned the mirror to Foila. "I will tell you again what I told you
on the road, and I wish we had a more private place in which to do
it. Some time ago a talisman came into my hands. It came
innocently, but it does not belong to me, and it is very valuable—
sometimes, not always, but sometimes—it has the power to heal the
sick, and even to revive the dead. Two days ago, as I was traveling
north, I came across the body of a dead soldier. It was in a forest,
away from the road. He had been dead less than a day; I would say
it's likely he had died sometime during the preceding night. I was
very hungry then, and I cut his pack straps and ate most of the food
he had been carrying with him. Then I felt guilty about doing that
and got out the talisman and tried to restore him to life. It has failed


often before, and this time I thought for a while it was going to fail
again. It didn't, although he returned to life slowly and for a long
time did not seem to know where he was or what was happening to
him."
"And I was that soldier?"
I nodded, looking into his honest blue eyes.
"May I see the talisman?"
I took it out and held it in the palm of my hand. He took it from me,
examined both sides carefully, and tested the point against the ball
of his finger. "It doesn't look magical,"
he said.
"I'm not sure magical is the right term for it. I've met magicians, and
nothing they did reminded me of this or the way it acts. Sometimes
it glows with light—it's very faint now, and I doubt if you can see
it."
"I can't. There doesn't seem to be any writing on it."
"You mean spells or prayers. No, I've never noticed any, and I've
carried it a long way. I don't really know anything about it except
that it acts at times; but I think it is probably the kind of thing spells
and prayers are made with, and not the kind that is made with them."
"You said it didn't belong to you."
I nodded again. "It belongs to the priestesses here, the Pelerines."
"You just came here. Two nights ago, when I did."
"I came looking for them, to give it back. It was taken from them—
not by me—some time ago, in Nessus."


"And you're going to return it?" He looked at me as though he
somehow doubted it.
"Yes, eventually."
He stood up, smoothing his robe with his hands.
I said, "You don't believe me, do you? Not about any of it."
"When I came here, you introduced me to the others nearby, the
ones you'd talked with while you lay here on your cot." He spoke
slowly, seeming to ponder every word. "Of course I've met some
people too, where they put me. There's one who isn't really
wounded very badly. He's just a boy, a youngster off some small
holding a long way from here, and he mostly sits on his cot and
looks at the floor."
"Homesick?" I asked.
The soldier shook his head. "He had an energy weapon. A korseke—
that's what somebody told me. Are you familiar with them?"
"Not very."
"They project a beam straight forward, and at the same time two
quartering beams, forward left and forward right. Their range isn't
great, but they say they're very good for dealing with mass attacks,
and I suppose they are."
He looked about for a moment to see if anyone was listening, but it
is a point of honor in the lazaret to disregard completely any
conversation not intended for oneself. If it were not so, the patients
would soon be at each other's throats.
"His hundred was the target of one of those attacks. Most of the
others broke and ran. He didn't, and they didn't get him. Another


man told me there were three walls of bodies in front of him. He
had dropped them until the Ascians were climbing up to the top and
jumping down at him. Then he had backed away and piled them up
again."
I said, "I suppose he got a medal and a promotion." I could not be
sure if it was my fever returning or merely the heat of the day, but I
felt sticky and somehow suffocated.
"No, they sent him here. I told you he was only a boy from the
country. He had killed more people that day than he had ever seen
up to the time a few months before when he went into the army. He
still hasn't gotten over it, and maybe he never will."
"Yes?"
"It seems to me you might be like that."
"I don't understand you," I said.
"You talk as if you've just come here from the south, and I suppose
that if you've left your legion that's the safest way to talk. Just the
same, anybody can see it isn't true—people don't get cut up the way
you are except where the fighting is. You were hit by rock splinters.
That's what happened to you, and the Pelerine who spoke to us the
first night we were here saw that right away. So I think you've been
north longer than you'll admit, and maybe longer than you think
yourself. If you've killed a lot of people, it might be nice for you to
believe you have a way to bring them back."
I tried to grin at him. "And where does that leave you?"
"Where I am now. I'm not trying to say I owe you nothing. I had
fever, and you found me. Maybe I was delirious. I think it's more


likely I was unconscious, and that let you think I was dead. If you
hadn't brought me here, I probably would have died."
He started to stand up; I stopped him with a hand on his arm. "There
are some things I should tell you before you go," I said. "About
yourself."
"You said you didn't know who I was."
I shook my head. "I didn't say that, not really. I said I found you in a
wood two days ago. In the sense you mean, I don't know who you
are—but in another sense I think I may. I think you're two people,
and that I know one of them."
"Nobody is two people."
"I am. I'm two people already. Perhaps more people are two than we
know. The first thing I want to tell you is much simpler, though.
Now listen." I gave him detailed directions for finding the wood
again, and when I was certain he understood them, I said, "Your
pack is probably still there, witthe straps cut, so if you find the place
you won't mistake it. There was a letter in your pack. I pulled it out
and read a part of it. It didn't carry the name of the person you were
writing to, but if you had finished it and were just waiting for a
chance to send it off, it should have at least a part of your name at
the end. I put it on the ground and it blew a little and caught against
a tree. It may still be possible for you to find it."
His face had tightened. "You shouldn't have read it, and you
shouldn't have thrown it away."
"I thought you were dead, remember? Anyway, a good deal was
going on at the time, mostly inside my head. Perhaps I was getting


feverish—I don't know. Now here's the other part. You won't
believe me, but it may be important that you listen. Will you hear
me out?"
He nodded.
"Good. Have you heard of the mirrors of Father Inire? Do you know
how they work?"
"I've heard of Father Inire's Mirror, but I couldn't tell you where I
heard about it. You're supposed to be able to step into it, like you'd
step into a doorway, and step out on a star. I don't think it's real."
"The mirrors are real. I've seen them. Up until now I always thought
of them in much the same way you did—as if they were a ship, but
much faster. Now I'm not nearly so sure. Anyway, a certain friend
of mine stepped between those mirrors and vanished. I was
watching him. It was no trick and no superstition; he went wherever
the mirrors take you. He went because he loved a certain woman,
and he wasn't a whole man. Do you understand?"
"He'd had an accident?"
"An accident had had him, but never mind that. He told me he
would come back. He said, 'I will come back for her when I have
been repaired, when I am sane and whole.' I didn't quite know what
to think when he said that, but now I believe he has come. It was I
who revived you, and I had been wishing for his return—perhaps
that had something to do with it."
There was a pause. The soldier looked down at the trampled soil on
which the cots had been set, then up again at me. "Possibly
whenever a man loses his friend and gets another, he feels the old


friend is with him again."
"Jonas—that was his name—had a habit of speech. Whenever he
had to say something unpleasant, he softened it, made a joke of it,
by attributing what he said to some comic situation. The first night
we were here, when I asked you your name, you said, 'I lost it
somewhere along the way. That's what the jaguar said, who had
promised to guide the goat.' Do you recall that?"
He shook his head. "I say a lot of foolish things."
"It struck me as strange; because it was the kind of thing Jonas said,
but he wouldn't have said it in that way unless he meant more by it
than you seemed to. I think he would have said, 'That was the
basket's story, that had been filled with water.' Something like that."
I waited for him to speak, but he did not.
"The jaguar ate the goat, of course. Swallowed its flesh and cracked
its bones, somewhere along the way."
"Haven't you ever thought that it might be just the peculiarity of
some town? Your friend might have come from the same place I
do."
I said, "It was a time, I think, and not a place. Long ago, someone
had to disarm fear—the fear that men of flesh and blood might feel
when looking into a face of steel and glass. Jonas, I know you're
listening. I don't blame you. The man was dead, and you still alive. I
understand that. But Jonas, Jolenta is gone—I watched her die, and
I tried to bring her back with the Claw, but I failed. Perhaps she was
too artificial, I don't know. You will have to find someone else."
The soldier rose. His face was no longer angry, but empty as a


somnambulist's. He turned and left without another word.
For perhaps a watch I lay on my cot with my hands behind my head,
thinking of many things. Hallvard, Melito, and Foila were talking
among themselves, but I did not attend to what they said. When one
of the Pelerines brought the noon meal, Melito got my ear by
rapping his platter with a fork and announced, "Severian, we have a
favor to ask of you."
I was eager to put my speculations behind me, and told him I would
help them in any way I could.
Foila, who had one of those radiant smiles Nature grants to some
women, smiled at me now. "It's like this. These two have been
bickering over me all morning. If they were well they could fight it
out, but it will be a long time before they are, and I don't think I
could stand it so long. Today I was thinking of my mother and
father, and how they used to sit before the fire on long winter
nights. If Hallvard and I marry, or Melito and I, someday we'll be
doing that too. So I have decided to marry the best storyteller. Don't
look at me as if I were mad—it's the only sensible thing I've done in
my life. Both of them want me, both are very handsome, neither has
any property, and if we don't settle this they'll kill each other or I'll
kill them both. You're an educated man—we can tell by the way
you talk. You listen and judge. Hallvard first, and the stories have to
be original, not out of books."
Hallvard, who could walk a little, got up from his cot and came to
sit on the foot of Melito's.

VII


Hallvard's Story—The Two Sealers
"This is a true story. I know many stories. Some are made up,
though perhaps the made up ones were true in times everyone has
forgotten. I also know many true ones, because many strange things
happen in the isles of the south that you northern people never
dream of. I chose this one because I was there myself and saw and
heard as much of it as anyone did.
"I come from the easternmost of the southern isles, which is called
Glacies. On our isle lived a man and a woman, my grandparents,
who had three sons. Their names were Anskar, Hallvard, and
Gundulf. Hallvard was my father, and when I grew large enough to
help him on his boat, he no longer hunted and fished with his
brothers. Instead, we two went out so that all we caught could be
brought home to my mother, and my sisters and younger brother.
"My uncles never married, and so they continued to share a boat.
What they caught they ate themselves or gave to my grandparents,
who were no longer strong. In the summer they farmed my
grandfather's land. He had the best on our isle, the only valley that
never felt the ice wind. You could grow things there that would not
ripen anywhere else on Glacies, because the growing season in this
valley was two weeks longer.
"When my beard was starting to sprout, my grandfather called all
the men of our family together—that was my father, my two uncles,
and myself. When we got to his house, my grandmother was dead,
and the priest from the big isle was there to lay out her body. Her


sons wept, as I did myself.
"That night, when we sat at my grandfather's table, with him at one
end and the priest at the other, he said, 'Now it is time that I dispose
of my property. Bega is gone. Her family has no more claim on it,
and I shall follow her shortly. Hallvard is married and has the
portion that came to him from his wife. With that he provides for
his family, and though they have little to spare, they do not go
hungry. You, Anskar. And you, Gundulf. Will you ever marry?"
"Both my uncles shook their heads.
" 'Then this is my will. I call upon the Omnipotent to hear, and I call
upon the servants of the Omnipotent also. When I die, all that I have
shall go to Anskar and Gundulf. If one die, it shall go to the other.
When both are dead, it shall go to Hallvard, or if Hallvard is dead, it
shall be divided among his sons. You four—if you do not agree my
will is just, speak now."
"No one spoke, and thus it was decided.
"A year passed. A ship of Erebus came raiding out of the mists, and
two ships put in for hides, sea ivory, and salt fish. My grandfather
died, and my sister Fausta bore her girl. When the harvest was in,
my uncles fished with the other men.
"When spring comes in the south, it is still too early to plant, for
there will be many freezing nights to come. But when men see that
the days are lengthening fast, they seek out the rookeries where the
seals breed. These are on rocks far from any shore, there is much
fog, and though they are growing longer, the days are still short.
Often it is the men who die and not the seals.


"And so it was with my Uncle Anskar, for my Uncle Gundulf
returned in their boat without him.
"Now you must know that when our men go sealing, or fishing, or
hunting any other kind of sea game, they tie themselves to their
boats. The rope is of braided walrus hide, and it is long enough to
let the man move about in the boat as much as is needful, but not
longer. The sea water is very cold and soon kills whoever remains
in it, but our men dress in sealskin tight-sewn, and often a man's
boat-mate can pull him back and in that way save his life.
"This is the tale my Uncle Gundulf told. They had gone far, seeking
a rookery others had not visited, when Anskar saw a bull seal
swimming in the water. He cast his harpoon; and when the seal
sounded, a loop of the harpoon line had caught his ankle, so that he
was dragged into the sea. He, Gundulf, had tried to pull him out, for
he was a very strong man. But his pulling and the pulling of the seal
on the harpoon line, which was tied to the base of the mast, had
capsized their boat. Gundulf had saved himself by pulling himself
hand over hand back to it and cutting the harpoon line with his
knife. When the boat was righted he had tried to haul in Anskar, but
the life rope had broken. He showed the frayed rope end. My Uncle
Anskar was dead.
"Among my people, women die on land but men at sea, and
therefore we call the kind of grave you make 'a woman's boat.'
When a man dies as Uncle Anskar did, a hide is stretched and
painted for him and hung in the house where the men meet to talk. It
is never taken down until no man living can recall the man who was
honored so. A hide like that was prepared for Anskar, and the


painters began their work.
"Then one bright morning when my father and I were readying the
tools to break ground for the new year's crop-well I remember it!—
some children who had been sent to gather birds' eggs came running
into the village. A seal, they said, lay on the shingle of the south
bay. As everyone knows, no seal comes to land where men are. But
it sometimes happens that a seal will die at sea or be injured in some
fashion. Thinking of that, my father and I and many others ran to
the beach, for the seal would belong to the first whose weapon
pierced it.
"I was the swiftest of all, and I provided myself with an earth-fork.
Such a thing does not throw well, but several other young men were
at my heels, so when I was a hundred strides away I cast it. Straight
and true it flew and buried its tines in the thing's back. Then
followed such a moment as I hope never to see again. The weight of
the fork's long handle overbalanced it, and it rolled until the handle
rested on the ground.
"I saw the face of my Uncle Anskar, preserved by the cold sea
brine. His beard was tangled with the dark green kelp, and his life
rope of stout walrus hide had been cut only a few spans from his
body.
"My Uncle Gundulf had not seen him, for he was gone to the big
isle. My father took Anskar up, and I helped him, and we carried
him to Gundulf's house and put the end of the rope upon his chest
where Gundulf would see it, and with some other men of Glacies sat
down to wait for him.
"He shouted when he saw his brother. It was not such a cry as a


woman makes, but a bellow like the bull seal gives when he warns
the other bulls from his herd. He ran in the dark. We set a guard on
the boats and hunted him that night across the isle. The lights that
spirits make in the ultimate south flamed all night, so we knew
Anskar hunted with us. Brightest they flashed before they faded,
when we found him among the rocks at Radbod's End."
Hallvard fell silent. Indeed, silence lay about us everywhere. All the
sick within hearing had been listening to him. At last Melito said,
"Did you kill him?"
"No. In the old days it was so, and a bad thing. Now the mainland
law avenges bloodguilt, which is better. We bound his arms and
legs and laid him in his house, and I sat with him while the older
men readied the boats. He told me he had loved a woman on the big
isle. I never saw her, but he said her name was Nennoc, and she was
fair, and younger than he, but no man would have her because she
had borne a child by a man who had died the winter before. In the
boat, he had told Anskar he would carry Nennoc home, and An-skar
called him oath-breaker. My Uncle Gundulf was strong. He seized
Anskar and threw him out of the boat, then wrapped the life rope
about his hands and snapped it as a woman who sews breaks her
thread.
"He had stood then, he said, with one hand on the mast, as men do,
and watched his brother in the water. He had seen the flash of the
knife, but he thought only that Anskar sought to threaten him with it
or to throw it."
Hallvard was silent again, and when I saw he would not speak, I
said, "I don't understand. What did Anskar do?"


A smile, the very smallest smile, tugged at Hallvard's lips under his
blond mustache. When I saw it, I felt I had seen the ice isles of the
south, blue and bitterly cold. "He cut his life rope, the rope Gundulf
had already broken. In that way, men who found his body would
know that he had been murdered. Do you see?"
I saw, and for a while I said nothing more. "So," Melito grunted to
Foila, "the wonderful valley land went to Hallvard's father, and by
this story he has managed to tell you that though he has no property,
he has prospects of inheriting some. He has also told you, of course,
that he comes of a murderous family."
"Melito believes me much cleverer than I am," the blond man
rumbled. "I had no such thoughts. What matters now is not land or
skins or gold, but who tells the best tale. And I, who know many,
have told the best I know. It is true as he says that I might share my
family's property when my father dies. But my unmarried sisters
will have some part too for their marriage portions, and only what
remained would be divided between my brother and myself. All that
matters nothing, because I would not take Foila to the south, where
life is so hard. Since I have carried a lance I have seen many better
places."
Foila said, "I think your Uncle Gundulf must have loved Nennoc
very much."
Hallvard nodded. "He said that too while he lay bound. But all the
men of the south love their women. It is for them that they face the
sea in winter, the storms and the freezing fogs. It is said that as a
man pushes his boat out over the shingle, the sound the bottom


makes grating on the stones is my wife, my children, my children,
my wife."
I asked Melito if he wanted to begin his story then; but he shook his
head and said that we were all full of Hallvard's, so he would wait
and begin next day. Everyone then asked Hallvard questions about
life in the south and compared what they had learned to the way
their own people lived. Only the Ascian was silent. I was reminded
of the floating islands of Lake Diuturna and told Hallvard and the
others about them, though I did not describe the fight at
Baldanders's castle. We talked in this way until it was time for the
evening meal.

VIII
The Pelerine
By the time we had finished eating, it was beginning to get dark.
We were always quieter then, not only because we lacked strength,
but because we knew that those wounded who would die were more
liable to do so after the sun set, and particularly in the deep of the
night. It was the time when past battles called home their debts.
In other ways too, the night made us more aware of the war.
Sometimes—and on that night I remember them particularly—the
discharges of the great energy weapons blazed across the sky like
heat lightning. One heard the sentries marching to their posts, so
that the word watch, which we so often used with no meaning
beyond that of a tenth part of the night, became an audible reality,


an actuality of tramping feet and unintelligible commands.
There came a moment when no one spoke, that lengthened and
lengthened, interrupted only by the murmurings of the well—the
Pelerines and their male slaves—who came to ask the condition of
this patient or that. One of the scarlet-clad priestesses came and sat
by my cot, and my mind was so slow, so nearly sleeping, that it was
some time before I realized that she must have carried a stool with
her.
"You are Severian," she said, "the friend of Miles?"
"Yes."
"He has recalled his name. I thought you would like to know."
I asked her what it was.
"Why, Miles, of course. I told you."
"He will recall more than that, I think, as time goes by."
She nodded. She seemed to be a woman past middle age, with a
kindly, austere face. "I am sure he will. His home and family."
"If he has them."
"Yes, some do not. Some lack even the ability to make a home."
"You're referring to me."
"No, not at all. Anyway, that lack is not something the person can
do something about. But it is much better, particularly for men, if
they have a home. Like the man your friend talked about, most men
think they make their homes for their families, but the fact is that
they make both homes and families for themselves."
"You were listening to Hallvard, then."


"Several of us were. It was a good story. A sister came and got me
at the place where the patient's grandfather made his will. I heard all
the rest. Do you know what the trouble was with the bad uncle?
With Gundulf?"
"I suppose that he was in love."
"No, that was what was right with him. Every person, you see, is
like a plant. There is a beautiful green part, often with flowers or
fruit, that grows upward toward the sun, toward the Increate. There
is also a dark part that grows away from it, tunneling where no light
comes."
I said, "I have never studied the writings of the initiates, but even I
am aware of the existence of good and evil in everyone."
"Was I speaking of good and evil? It is the roots that give the plant
the strength to climb toward the sun, though they know nothing of
it. Suppose that some scythe, whistling along the ground, should
sever the stalk from its roots. The stalk would fall and die, but the
roots might put up a new stalk."
"You are saying that evil is good."
"No. 1 am saying that the things we love in others and admire in
ourselves spring from things we do not see and seldom think about.
Gundulf, like other men, had the instinct to exercise authority. Its
proper growth is the founding of a family—and women, too, have a
similar instinct. In Gundulf that instinct had long been frustrated, as
it is in so many of the soldiers we see here. The officers have their
commands, but the soldiers who have no command suffer and do
not know why they suffer. Some, of course, form bonds with others


in the ranks. Sometimes several share a single woman, or a man
who is like a woman. Some make pets of animals, and some
befriend children left homeless by the struggle."
Remembering Casdoe's son, I said, "I can see why you object to
that."
"We do not object—most certainly not to that, and not to things
vastly less natural. I am only speaking of the instinct to exercise
authority. In the bad uncle it made him love a woman, and
specifically one who already possessed a child, so there would be a
larger family for him as soon as there was a family for him at all. In
that way, you see, he would have regained some part of the time he
had lost." She paused, and I nodded.
"Too much time, however, had been lost already; the instinct broke
out in another way. He saw himself as the rightful master of lands
he only held in trust for one brother, and the master of the life of the
other. That vision was delusive, was it not?"
"I suppose so."
"Others can have visions equally deluding, though less dangerous."
She smiled at me. "Do you regard yourself as possessing any special
authority?"
"I am a journeyman of the Seekers for Truth and Penitence, but that
position carries no authority. We of the guild only do the will of
judges."
"I thought the torturers' guild abolished long ago. Has it become,
then, a species of brotherhood for lictors?"
"It still exists," I told her.


"No doubt, but some centuries ago it was a true guild, like that of
the silversmiths. At least so I have read in certain histories
preserved by our order."
As I heard her, I felt a moment of wild elation. It was not that I
supposed her to be somehow correct. I am, perhaps, mad in certain
respects, but I know what those respects are, and such selfdeceptions are no part of them. Nevertheless, it seemed wonderful
to me—if only for that moment—to exist in a world where such a
belief was possible. I realized then, really for the first time, that
there were millions of people in the Commonwealth who knew
nothing of the higher forms of judicial punishment and nothing of
the circles within circles of intrigue that ring the Autarch; and it was
wine to me, or brandy rather, and left me reeling with giddy joy.
The Pelerine, seeing nothing of all this, said, "Is there no other form
of special authority that you believe yourself to possess?"
I shook my head.
"Miles told me that you believe yourself to possess the Claw of the
Conciliator, and that you showed him a small black claw, such as
might perhaps have come from an ocelot or a caracara, and that you
told him you have raised many from the dead by means of it."
The time had come then; the time when I would have to give it up.
Ever since we had reached the lazaret, I had known it must come
soon, but I had hoped to delay it until I was ready to depart. Now I
took out the Claw, for the last time as I thought, and pressed it into
the Pelerine's hand, saying, "With this you can save many. I did not
steal it, and I have sought always to return it to your order."


"And with it," she asked gently, "you have revived numbers of the
dead?"
"I myself would have died months ago without it," I told her, and I
began to recount the story of my duel with Agilus. "Wait," she said.
"You must keep it." And she returned the Claw to me. "I am not a
young woman any longer, as you see. Next year I will celebrate my
thirtieth anniversary as a full member of our order. At each of the
five superior feasts of the year, until this past spring, I saw the Claw
of the Conciliator when it was elevated for our adoration. It was a
great sapphire, as big around as an orichalk. It must have been
worth more than many villas, and no doubt it was for that reason
that the thieves took it."
I tried to interrupt her, but she silenced me with a gesture. "As for
its working miraculous cures and even restoring life to the dead, do
you think our order would have any sick among us if it were so? We
are few—far too few for the work we have to do. But if none of us
had died before last spring, we would be much more numerous.
Many whom I loved, my teachers and my friends, would be among
us still. Ignorant people must have their wonders, even if they must
scrape the mud from some epopt's boots to swallow. If, as we hope,
it still exists and has not been cut to make smaller gems, the Claw of
the Conciliator is the last relic we possess of the greatest of good
men, and we treasured it because we still treasure his memory. If it
had been the sort of thing you believe yourself to have, it would
have been precious to everyone, and the autarchs would have
wrested it from us long ago."
"It is a claw—" I began.


"That was only a flaw at the heart of the jewel. The Conciliator was
a man, Severian the Lictor, and not a cat or a bird." She stood up.
"It was dashed against the rocks when the giant threw it from the
parapet—"
"I had hoped to calm you, but I see that I am only exciting you," she
said. Quite unexpectedly she smiled, leaned forward, and kissed me.
"We meet many here who believe things that are not so. Not many
have beliefs that do them as much credit as yours do you. You and I
shall talk of this again some other time."
I watched her small, scarlet-clad figure until it was lost from sight in
the darkness and silence of the rows of cots. While we talked, most
of the sick had fallen asleep. A few groaned. Three slaves entered,
two carrying a wounded man on a litter while the third held up a
lamp so they could see their way. The light gleamed on their shaven
heads, which were covered with sweat. They put the wounded man
on a cot, arranged his limbs as though he were dead, and went away.
I looked at the Claw. It had been lifelessly black when the Pelerine
saw it, but now muted sparks of white fire ran from its base to its
point. I felt well—indeed, I found myself wondering how I had
endured lying all day upon the narrow mattress; but when I tried to
stand my legs would hardly hold me. Afraid at every moment that I
would fall on one of the wounded, I staggered the twenty paces or
so to the man I had just seen carried in.
It was Emilian, whom I had known as a gallant at the Autarch's
court. I was so startled to see him here that I called him by name.
"Thecla," he murmured. "Thecla…"


"Yes. Thecla. You remember me, Emilian. Now be well." I touched
him with the Claw.
He opened his eyes and screamed.
I fled, but fell when I was halfway to my own cot. I was so weak I
don't believe I could have crawled the remaining distance then, but I
managed to put away the Claw and roll beneath Hallvard's cot and
so out of sight.
When the slaves came back, Emilian was sitting up and able to
speak—though they could not, I think, make much sense of what he
said. They gave him herbs, and one of them remained with him
while he chewed them, then left silently.
I rolled from under the cot, and by holding on to the edge was able
to pull myself erect. All was still again, but I knew that many of the
wounded must have seen me before I had fallen. Emilian was not
asleep, as I had supposed he would be, but he seemed dazed.
"Thecla," he murmured. "I heard Thecla. They said she was dead.
What voices are here from the lands of the dead?"
"None now," I told him. "You've been ill, but you'll be well soon."
I held the Claw overhead and tried to focus my thoughts on Melito
and Foila as well as Emilian—on all the sick in the lazaret. It
flickered and was dark.

IX
Melito's Story—The Cock, the Angel,
and the Eagle


"Once not very long ago and not very far from the place where I
was born, there was a fine farm. It was especially noted for its
poultry: flocks of ducks white as snow, geese nearly as large as
swans and so fat they could scarcely walk, and chickens that were
as colorful as parrots. The farmer who had built up this place had a
great many strange ideas about farming, but he had succeeded so
much better with his strange ideas than any of his neighbors with
their sensible ones, that few had the courage to tell him what a fool
he was.
"One of his queer notions concerned the management of his
chickens. Everyone knows that when chicks are observed to be little
cocks they must be caponized. Only one cock is required in the
barnyard, and two will fight.
"But this farmer saved himself all that trouble. 'Let them grow up,'
he said. 'Let them fight, and let me tell you something, neighbor.
The best and cockiest cock will win, and he is the one who will sire
many more chicks to swell my flock. What's more, his chicks will
be the hardiest, and the best suited to throwing off every disease—
when your chickens are wiped out, you can come to me and I'll sell
you some breeding stock at my own price. As for the beaten cocks,
my family and I can eat them. There's no capon so tender as a cock
that has been fought to death, just as the best beef comes from a bull
that has died in the bull ring and the best venison from a stag the
hounds have run all day. Besides, eating capons saps a man's virility.
"This odd farmer also believed that it was his duty to select the
worst bird from his flock whenever he wanted one for dinner. 'It is
impious,' he said, 'for anyone to take the best. They should be left to


prosper under the eye of the Pancreator, who made cocks and hens
as well as men and women.' Perhaps because he felt as he did, his
flock was so good that it seemed sometimes there was no worst
among it.
"From all I have said, it will be clear that the cock of this flock was
a very fine one. He was young, strong, and brave. His tail was as
fine as the tails of many sorts of pheasants, and no doubt his comb
would have been fine too, save that it had been torn to ribbons in the
many desperate combats that had won him his place. His breast was
of glowing scarlet—like the Pelerines' robes here—but the geese
said it had been white before it was dyed in his own blood. His
wings were so strong that he was a better flier than any of the white
ducks, his spurs were longer than a man's middle finger, and his bill
was as sharp as my sword.
"This fine cock had a thousand wives, but the darling of his heart
was a hen as fine as he, the daughter of a noble race and the
acknowledged queen of all the chickens for leagues around. How
proudly they walked between the corner of the barn and the water of
the duck pond! You could not hope to see anything finer, no, not if
you saw the Autarch himself showing off his favorite at the Well of
Orchids—the more so since the Autarch is a capon, as I hear it.
"Everything was bugs for breakfast for this happy pair until one
night the cock was wakened by a terrible row. A great, eared owl
had broken into the barn where the chickens roosted and was
making his way among them as he sought for his dinner. Of course
he seized upon the hen who was the particular favorite of the cock;
and with her in his claws, he spread his wide, silent wings to sail


away. Owls can see mar-velously well in the dark, and so he must
have seen the cock flying at him like a feathered fury. Who has ever
seen an amazed expression on the face of an owl? Yet surely there
was one on that owl in the barn that night. The cock's spurs shuffled
faster than the feet of any dancer, and his bill struck for those round
and shining eyes as the bill of a woodpecker hammers the trunk of a
tree. The owl dropped the hen, flew from the barn, and was never
seen again.
"No doubt the cock had a right to be proud, but he became too
proud. Having defeated an owl in the dark, he felt he could defeat
any bird, anywhere. He began to talk of rescuing the prey of hawks
and bullying the teratornis, the largest and most terrible bird that
flies. If he had surrounded himself with wise counselors,
particularly the llama and the pig, those whom most princes choose
to help guide their affairs, I feel sure his extravagances would soon
have been effectively though courteously checked. Alas, he did not
do so. He listened only to the hens, who were all infatuated with
him, and to the geese and ducks, who felt that as his fellow barnyard
fowl they shared to some extent in whatever glory he won. At last
the day came, as it always does for those who show too much pride,
when he went too far.
"It was sunrise, ever the most dangerous time for those who do not
do well. The cock flew up and up and up, until he seemed about to
pierce the sky, and at last, at the very apogee of his flight, perched
himself atop the weathervane on the loftiest gable of the barn—the
highest point in the entire farmyard. There as the sun drove out the
shadows with lashes of crimson and gold, he screamed again and


again that he was lord of all feathered things. Seven times he
crowed so, and he might have got away with it, for seven is a lucky
number. But he could not be content with that. An eighth time he
made the same boast, and then flew down.
"He had not yet landed among his flock when there began a most
marvelous phenomenon high in the air, directly above the barn. A
hundred rays of sunlight seemed to tangle themselves as a kitten
snarls a ball of wool, and to roll themselves together as a woman
rolls up dough in a kneading pan. This collection of glorious light
then put out legs, arms, a head, , and at last wings, and swooped
down upon the barnyard. It was an angel with wings of red and blue
and green and gold, and though it seemed no bigger than the cock,
he knew as soon as he had looked into its eyes that it was far larger
on the inside than he.
" 'Now,' said the angel, 'hear justice. You claim that no feathered
thing can stand against you. Here am I, plainly a feathered thing. All
the mighty weapons of the armies of light I have left behind, and we
will wrestle, we two.'
"At that the cock spread his wings and bowed so low that his
tattered comb scraped the dust. 'I shall be honored to the end of my
days to have been thought worthy of such a challenge,' he said,
'which no other bird has ever received before. It is with the most
profound regret that I must tell you I cannot accept, and that for
three reasons, the first of which is that though you have feathers on
your wings, as you say, it is not against your wings that I would
fight but against your head and breast. Thus you are not a feathered
creature for the purposes of combat.'


"The angel closed his eyes and touched his hands to his own body,
and when he drew them away the hair of his head had become
feathers brighter than the feathers of the finest canary, and the linen
of his robe had become feathers whiter than the feathers of the most
brilliant dove.
" 'The second of which,' continued the cock, nothing daunted, 'is
that you, having, as you so clearly do, the power to transform
yourself, might choose during the course of our combat to change
yourself into some creature that does not possess feathers—for
example, a large snake. Thus if I were to fight you, I should have no
guarantee of fair play.'
"At that, the angel tore open his breast, and displaying all the
qualities therein to the assembled poultry, took out his ability to
alter his shape. He handed it to the fattest goose to hold for the
duration of the match, and the goose at once transformed himself,
becoming a gray salt goose, such as stream from pole to pole. But
he did not fly off, and he kept the angel's ability safe.
" 'The third of which,' continued the cock in desperation, 'is that you
are clearly an officer in the Pancreator's service, and in prosecuting
the cause of justice, as you do, are doing your duty. If I were to
fight you as you ask, I should be committing a grave crime against
the only ruler brave chickens acknowledge.'
" 'Very well,' said the angel. 'It is a strong legal position, and I
suppose you think you've won your way free. The truth is that you
have argued your way to your own death. I was only going to twist
your wings back a bit and pull out your tail feathers.' Then he lifted
his head and gave a strange, wild cry. Immediately an eagle dove


from the sky and dropped like a thunderbolt into the barnyard.
"All around the barn they fought, and beside the duck pond, and
across the pasture and back, for the eagle was very strong, but the
cock was quick and brave. There was an old cart with a broken
wheel leaning against one wall of the barn, and under it, where the
eagle could not fly at him from above and he could cool himself
somewhat in the shadow, the cock sought to make his final stand.
He was bleeding so much, however, that before the eagle, who was
almost as bloodied as he, could come at him there, he tottered, fell,
tried to rise, and fell again.
" 'Now,' said the angel, addressing all the assembled birds, 'you
have seen justice done. Be not proud! Be not boastful, for surely
retribution will be visited upon you. You thought your champion
invincible. There he lies, the victim not of this eagle but of pride,
beaten and destroyed.'
"Then the cock, whom they had all thought dead, lifted his head.
'You are doubtless very wise, Angel,' he said. 'But you know
nothing of the ways of cocks. A cock is not beaten until he turns tail
and shows the white feather that lies beneath his tail feathers. My
strength, which I made myself by flying and running, and in many
battles, has failed me. My spirit, which I received from the hand of
your master the Pancreator, has not failed me. Eagle, I ask no
quarter from you. Come here and kill me now. But as you value
your honor, never say that you have beaten me.'
"The eagle looked at the angel when he heard what the cock said,
and the angel looked at the eagle. 'The Pancreator is infinitely far
from us,' the angel said. 'And thus infinitely far from me, though I


fly so much higher than you. I guess at his desires—no one can do
otherwise.'
He opened his chest once more and replaced the ability he had for a
time surrendered. Then he and the eagle flew away, and for a time
the salt goose followed them. That is the end of the story."
Melito had lain upon his back as he spoke, looking up at the canvas
stretched overhead. I had the feeling he was too weak even to raise
himself on one elbow. The rest of the wounded had been as quiet
for his story as for Hallvard's.
At last I said, "That is a fine tale. It will be very hard for me to
judge between the two, and if it is agreeable to you and Hallvard,
and to Foila, I would like to give myself time to think about them
both."
Foila, who was sitting up with her knees drawn under her chin,
called, "Don't judge at all. The contest isn't over yet." Everyone
looked at her.
"I'll explain tomorrow," she said. "Just don't judge, Severian. But
what did you think of that story?"
Hallvard rumbled, "I will tell you what I think. I think Melito is
clever the way he claimed I was. He is not so well as I am, not so
strong, and in this way he has drawn a woman's sympathy to
himself. It was cunningly done, little cock."
Melito's voice seemed weaker than it had while he was recounting
the battle of the birds. "It is the worst story I know."
"The worst?" I asked. We were all surprised.
"Yes, the worst. It is a foolish tale we tell our little children, who


know nothing but the dust and the farm animals and the sky they see
above them. Surely every word of it must make that clear."
Hallvard asked, "Don't you want to win, Melito?"
"Certainly I do. You don't love Foila as I love her. I would die to
possess her, but I would sooner die than disappoint her. If the story I
have just told can win, then I shall never disappoint her, at least
with my stories. I have a thousand that are better than that."
Hallvard got up and came to sit on rny cot as he had the day before,
and I swung my legs over the edge to sit beside him. To me he said,
"What Melito says is very clever. Everything he says is very clever.
Still, you must judge us by the tales we told, and not by the ones we
say we know but did not tell. I, too, know many other stories. Our
winter nights are the longest in the Commonwealth."
I answered that according to Foila, who had originally thought of
the contest and who was herself the prize, I was not yet to judge at
all.
The Ascian said, "All who speak Correct Thought speak well.
Where then is the superiority of some students to others? It is in the
speaking. Intelligent students speak Correct Thought intelligently.
The hearer knows by the intonation of their voices that they
understand. By this superior speaking of intelligent students,
Correct Thought is passed, like fire, from one to another."
I think that none of us had realized he was listening. We were all a
trifle startled to hear him speak now. After a moment, Foila said,
"He means you should not judge by the content of the stories, but by
how well each was told. I'm not sure I agree with that—still, there


may be something in it."
"I do not agree," Hallvard grumbled. "Those who listen soon tire of
storyteller tricks. The best telling is the plainest."
Others joined in the argument, and we talked about it and about the
little cock for a long time.

X
Ava
While I was ill I had never paid much attention to the people who
brought our food, though when I reflected on it I was able to recall
them clearly, as I recall everything. Once our server had been a
Pelerine—she who had talked to me the night before. At other times
they had been the shaven-headed male slaves, or postulants in
brown. This evening, the evening of the day on which Melito had
told his story, our suppers were carried in by a postulant I had not
seen before, a slender, gray-eyed girl. I got up and helped her to
pass around the trays.
When we were finished, she thanked me and said, "You will not be
here much longer."
I told her I had something to do here, and nowhere else to go.
"You have your legion. If it has been destroyed, you will be
assigned to a new one."
"I am not a soldier. I came north with some thought of enlisting, but
I fell sick before I got the opportunity."


"You could have waited in your native town. I'm told that recruiting
parties go to all the towns, twice a year at least."
"My native town is Nessus, I'm afraid." I saw her smile.
"But I left it some time ago, and I wouldn't have wanted to sit
around someplace else for half a year waiting. Anyway, I never
thought of it. Are you from Nessus too?"
"You're having trouble standing up."
"No, I'm fine."
She touched my arm, a timid gesture that somehow reminded me of
the tame deer in the Autarch's garden. "You're swaying. Even if
your fever is gone, you're no longer used to being on your feet. You
have to realize that. You've been abed for several days. I want you
to lie down again now."
"If I do that, there'll be no one to talk to except the people I've been
talking with all day. The man on my right is an Ascian prisoner, and
the man on my left comes from some village neither you nor I ever
heard of."
"All right, if you'll lie down I'll sit and talk to you for a while. I've
nothing more to do until the nocturne must be played anyway. What
quarter of Nessus do you come from?"
As she escorted me to my cot, I told her that I did not want to talk,
but to listen; and I asked her what quarter she herself called home.
"When you're with the Pelerines, that's your home—wherever the
tents are set up. The order becomes your family and your friends,
just as if all your friends had suddenly become your sisters too. But
before I came here, I lived in the far northwestern part of the city,


within easy sight of the Wall."
"Near the Sanguinary Field?"
"Yes, very near it. Do you know the place?"
"I fought there once."
Her eyes widened. "Did you, really? We used to go there and watch.
We weren't supposed to, but we did anyway. Did you win?"
I had never thought about that and had to consider it.
"No," I said after a moment. "I lost."
"But you lived. It's better, surely, to lose and live than to take
another man's life."
I opened my robe and showed her the scar on my chest that Agilus's
avern leaf had made.
"You were very lucky. Often they bring in soldiers with chest
wounds like that, but we are seldom able to save them." Hesitantly
she touched my chest. There was a sweetness in her face that I have
not seen in the faces of other women. For a moment she stroked my
skin, then she jerked her hand away. "It could not have been very
deep."
"It wasn't," I told her.
"Once I saw a combat between an officer and an exultant in
masquerade. They used poisoned plants for weapons—I suppose
because the officer would have had an unfair advantage with the
sword. The exultant was killed and I left, but afterward there was a
great hullabaloo because the officer had run amok. He came dashing
by me, striking out with his plant, but someone threw a cudgel at his


legs and knocked him down. I think that was the most exciting fight
I ever saw."
"Did they fight bravely?"
"Not really. There was a lot of argument about legalities— you
know how men do when they don't want to begin."
" 'I shall be honored to the end of my days to have been thought
worthy of such a challenge, which no other bird has ever received
before. It is with the most profound regret that I must tell you I
cannot accept, and that for three reasons, the first of which is that
though you have feathers on your wings, as you say, it is not against
your wings that I would fight.' Do you know that story?"
Smiling, she shook her head.
"It's a good one. I'll tell it to you some time. If you lived so near the
Sanguinary Field, your family must have been an important one.
Are you an armigette?"
"Practically all of us are armigettes or exultants. It's a rather
aristocratic order, I'm afraid. Occasionally an opti-mate's daughter
like me is admitted, when the optimate has been a longtime friend
of the order, but there are only three of us. I'm told some optimates
think all they have to do is make a large gift and their girls will be
accepted, but it really isn't so—they have to help out in various
ways, not just with money, and they have to have done it for a long
time. The world, you see, is not really as corrupt as people like to
believe."
I asked, "Do you think it is right to limit your order in that way?
You serve the Conciliator. Did he ask the people he lifted out of


death if they were armigers or exultants?"
She smiled again. "That's a question that has been debated many
times in the order. But there are other orders that are quite open to
optimates, and to the lower classes too, and by remaining as we are
we get a great deal of money to use in our work and have a great
deal of influence. If we nursed and fed only certain kinds of people,
I would say you were right. But we don't; we even help animals
when we can. Conexa Epicharis used to say we stopped at insects,
but then she found one of us—I mean a postulant—trying to mend a
butterfly's wing."
"Doesn't it bother you that these soldiers have been doing their best
to kill Ascians?"
Her answer was very far from what I had expected. "Ascians are not
human."
"I've already told you that the patient next to me is an Ascian.
You're taking care of him, and as well as you take care of us, from
what I've seen."
"And I've already told you that we take in animals when we can.
Don't you know that human beings can lose their humanity?"
"You mean the zoanthropes. I've met some."
"Them, of course. They give up their humanity deliberately. There
are others who lose theirs without intending to, often when they
think they are enhancing it, or rising to some state higher than that
to which we are born. Still others, like the Ascians, have it stripped
from them."
I thought of Baldanders, plunging from his castle wall into Lake


Diuturna. "Surely these… things deserve our sympathy."
"Animals deserve our sympathy. That is why we of the order care
for them. But it isn't murder for a man to kill one."
I sat up and gripped her arm, feeling an excitement I could scarcely
contain. "Do you think that if something—some arm of the
Conciliator, let us say—could cure human beings, it might
nevertheless fail with those who are not human?"
"You mean the Claw. Close your mouth, please—you make me
want to laugh when you leave it open like that, and we're not
supposed to when people outside the order are around."
"You know!"
"Your nurse told me. She said you were mad, but in a nice way, and
that she didn't think you would ever hurt anyone. Then I asked her
about it, and she told. You have the Claw, and sometimes you can
cure the sick and even raise the dead."
"Do you believe I'm mad?"
Still smiling, she nodded.
"Why? Never mind what the Pelerine told you. Have I said anything
to you tonight to make you think so?"
"Or spellbound, perhaps. It isn't anything you've said at all. Or at
least, not much. But you are not just one man."
She paused after saying that. I think she was waiting for me to deny
it, but I said nothing.
"It is in your face and the way you move—do you know that I don't
even know your name? She didn't tell me."


"Severian."
"I'm Ava. Severian is one of those brother—sister names, isn't it?
Severian and Severa. Do you have a sister?"
"I don't know. If I do, she's a witch."
Ava let that pass. "The other one. Does she have a name?"
"You know she's a woman then."
"Uh huh. When I was serving the food, I thought for a moment that
one of the exultant sisters had come to help me. Then I looked
around and it was you. At first it seemed that it was just when I saw
you from the corner of my eye, but sometimes, while we've been
sitting here, I see her even when I'm looking right at you. When you
glance to one side sometimes you vanish, and there's a tall, pale
woman using your face. Please don't tell me I fast overmuch. That's
what they all tell me, and it isn't true, and even if it were, this isn't
that."
"Her name is Thecla. Do you remember what you were just saying
about losing humanity? Were you trying to tell me about her?"
Ava shook her head. "I don't think so. But I wanted to ask you
something. There was another patient here like you, and they told
me he came with you."
"Miles, you mean. No, my case and his are quite different. I won't
tell you about him. He should do it himself, or no one should. But I
will tell you about myself. Do you know of the corpse-eaters?"
"You're not one of them. A few weeks ago we had three insurgent
captives. I know what they're like."
"How do we differ?"


"With them…" She groped for words. "With them it's out of control.
They talk to themselves—of course a lot of people do—and they
look at things that aren't there. There's something lonely about it,
and something selfish. You aren't one of them."
"But I am," I said. And I told her, without going into much detail, of
Vodalus's banquet.
"They made you," she said when I was through. "If you had shown
what you felt, they would have killed you."
"That doesn't matter. I drank the alzabo. I ate her flesh. And at first
it was filthy, as you say, though I had loved her. She was in me, and
I shared the life that had been hers, and yet she was dead. I could
feel her rotting there. I had a wonderful dream of her on the first
night; when I go back among my memories it is one the things I
treasure most. Afterward, there was something horrible, and
sometimes I seemed to be dreaming while I was awake—that was
the talking and staring you mentioned, I think. Now, and for a long
time, she seems alive again, but inside me."
"I don't think the others are like that."
"I don't either," I said. "At least, not from what I've heard of them.
There are a great many things I do not understand. What I have told
you is one of the chief ones."
Ava was quiet for the space of two or three breaths, then her eyes
opened wide. "The Claw, the thing you believe in. Did you have it
then?"
"Yes, but I didn't know what it could do. It had not acted—or rather,
it had acted, it had raised a woman called Dorcas, but I didn't know


what had happened, where she had come from. If I had known, I
might have saved Thecla, brought her back."
"But you had it? You had it with you?"
I nodded.
"Then don't you see? It did bring her back. You just said it could act
without your even knowing it. You had it, and you had her, rotting,
as you say, inside you."
"Without the body…"
"You're a materialist, like all ignorant people. But your materialism
doesn't make materialism true. Don't you know that? In the final
summing up, it is spirit and dream, thought and love and act that
matter."
I was so stunned by the ideas that had come crowding in on me that
I did not speak again for some time, but sat wrapped in my own
speculations. When I came to myself again at last, I was surprised
that Ava had not gone and tried to thank her.
"It was peaceful, sitting here with you, and if one of the sisters had
come, I could have said I was waiting in case one of the sick should
cry out."
"I haven't decided yet about what you said about Thecla. I'll have to
think about it a long time, probably for many days. People tell me I
am a rather stupid man."
She smiled, and the truth was that I had said what I had (though it
was true) at least in part to make her smile. "I don't think so. A
thorough man, rather."
"Anyway, I have another question. Often when I tried to sleep, or


when I woke in the night, I have tried to connect my failures and my
successes. I mean the times when I used the Claw and revived
someone, and the times when I tried to but life did not return. It
seems to me that it should be more than mere chance, though
perhaps the link is something I cannot know."
"Do you think you've found it now?"
"What you said about people losing their humanity—that might be a
part of it. There was a woman… I think she may have been like
that, though she was very beautiful. And a man, my friend, who was
only partly cured, only helped. If it's possible for someone to lose
his humanity, surely it must be possible for something that once had
none to find it. What one loses another finds, everywhere. He, I
think, was like that. Then too, the effect always seems less when the
deaths come by violence…"
"I would expect that," Ava said softly.
"It cured the man-ape whose hand I had cut away. Perhaps that was
because I had done it myself. And it helped Jonas, but I—Thecla—
had used those whips."
"The powers of healing protect us from Nature. Why should the
Increate protect us from ourselves? We might protect ourselves
from ourselves. It may be that he will help us only when we come to
regret what we have done."
Still thinking, I nodded.
"I am going to the chapel now. You're well enough to walk a short
distance. Will you come with me?"
While I had been beneath that wide canvas roof, it had seemed the


whole of the lazaret to me. Now I saw, though only dimly and by
night, that there were many tents and pavilions. Most, like ours, had
their walls gathered up for coolness, furled like the sails of a ship at
anchor. We entered none of them but walked between them by
winding paths that seemed long to me, until we reached one whose
walls were down. It was of silk, not canvas, and shone scarlet
because of the lights within.
"Once," Ava told me, "we had a great cathedral. It could hold ten
thousand, yet be packed into a single wagon. Our Domnicellae had
it burned just before I came to the order."
"I know," I said. "I saw it."
Inside the silken tent, we knelt before a simple altar heaped with
flowers. Ava prayed. I, knowing no prayers, spoke without sound to
someone who seemed at times within me and at times, as the angel
had said, infinitely remote.

XI
Loyal to the Group of Seventeen's
Story—The Just Man
The next morning, when we had eaten and everyone was awake, I
ventured to ask Foila if it was now time for me to judge between
Melito and Hallvard. She shook her head, but before she could
speak, the Ascian announced, "All must do their share in the service
of the populace. The bullock draws the plow and the dog herds the
sheep, but the cat catches mice in the granary. Thus men, women,


and even children can serve the populace."
Foila flashed that dazzling smile. "Our friend wants to tell a story
too."
"What!" For a moment I thought Melito was actually going to sit
up. "Are you going to let him—let one of them— consider—"
She gestured, and he sputtered to silence. "Why yes." Something
tugged at the corners of her lips. "Yes, I think I shall. I'll have to
interpret for the rest of you, of course. Will that be all right,
Severian?"
"If you wish it," I said.
Hallvard rumbled, "This was not in the original agreement. I recall
each word."
"So do I," Foila said. "It isn't against it either, and in fact it's in
accordance with the spirit of the agreement, which was that the
rivals for my hand—neither very soft nor very fair now, I'm afraid,
though it's becoming more so since I've been confined in this place
—would compete. The Ascian would be my suitor if he thought he
could; haven't you seen the way he looks at me?"
The Ascian recited, "United, men and women are stronger; but a
brave woman desires children, and not husbands."
"He means that he would like to marry me, but he doesn't think his
attentions would be acceptable. He's wrong." Foila looked from
Melito to Hallvard, and her smile had become a grin. "Are you two
really so frightened of him in a storytelling contest? You must have
run like rabbits when you saw an Ascian on the battlefield."
Neither of them answered, and after a time, the Ascian began to


speak: "In times past, loyalty to the cause of the populace was to be
found everywhere. The will of the Group of Seventeen was the will
of everyone."
Foila interpreted: "Once upon a time …"
"Let no one be idle. If one is idle, let him band together with others
who are idle too, and let them look for idle land. Let everyone they
meet direct them. It is better to walk a thousand leagues than to sit
in the House of Starvation."
"There was a remote farm worked in partnership by people who
were not related."
"One is strong, another beautiful, a third a cunning artificer. Which
is best? He who serves the populace."
"On this farm lived a good man."
"Let the work be divided by a wise divider of work. Let the food be
divided by a just divider of food. Let the pigs grow fat. Let rats
starve."
"The others cheated him of his share."
"The people meeting in counsel may judge, but no one is to receive
more than a hundred blows."
"He complained, and they beat him."
"How are the hands nourished? By the blood. How does the blood
reach the hands? By the veins. If the veins are closed, the hands will
rot away."
"He left that farm and took to the roads."
"Where the Group of Seventeen sit, there final justice is done."


"He went to the capital and complained of the way he had been
treated."
"Let there be clean water for those who toil. Let there be hot food
for them and a clean bed."
"He came back to the farm, tired and hungry after his journey."
"No one is to receive more than a hundred blows."
"They beat him again."
"Behind everything some further thing is found, forever; thus the
tree behind the bird, stone beneath soil, the sun behind Urth. Behind
our efforts, let there be found our efforts."
"The just man did not give up. He left the farm again to walk to the
capital."
"Can all petitioners be heard? No, for all cry together. Who, then,
shall be heard—is it those who cry loudest? No, for all cry loudly.
Those who cry longest shall be heard, and justice shall be done to
them."
"Arriving at the capital, he camped upon the very doorstep of the
Group of Seventeen and begged all who passed to listen to him.
After a long time he was admitted to the palace, where those in
authority heard his complaints with sympathy."
"So say the Group of Seventeen: From those who steal, take all they
have, for nothing that they have is their own."
"They told him to go back to the farm and tell the bad men—in their
name—that they must leave."
"As a good child to its mother, so is the citizen to the Group of


Seventeen."
"He did just as they had said."
"What is foolish speech? It is wind. It has come in at the ears and
goes out of the mouth. No one is to receive more than a hundred
blows."
"They mocked him and beat him."
"Behind our efforts, let there be found our efforts."
"The just man did not give up. He returned to the capital once
more."
"The citizen renders to the populace what is due to the populace.
What is due to the populace? Everything."
"He was very tired. His clothes were in rags and his shoes worn out.
He had no food and nothing to trade."
"It is better to be just than to be kind, but only good judges can be
just; let those who cannot be just be kind."
"In the capital he lived by begging."
At this point I could not help but interrupt. I told Foila that I thought
it was wonderful that she understood so well what each of the stock
phrases the Ascian used meant in the context of his story, but that I
could not understand how she did it—how she knew, for example,
that the phrase about kindness and justice meant that the hero had
become a beggar.
"Well, suppose that someone else—Melito, perhaps—were telling a
story, and at some point in it he thrust out his hand and began to ask
for alms. You'd know what that meant, wouldn't you?"


I agreed that I would.
"It's just the same here. Sometimes we find Ascian soldiers who are
too hungry or too sick to keep up with the rest, and after they
understand we aren't going to kill them, that business about
kindness and justice is what they say. In Ascian, of course. It's what
beggars say in Ascia."
"Those who cry longest shall be heard, and justice shall be done to
them."
"This time he had to wait a long while before he was admitted to the
palace, but at last they let him in and heard what he had to say."
"Those who will not serve the populace shall serve the populace."
"They said they would put the bad men in prison."
"Let there be clean water for those who toil. Let there be hot food
for them, and a clean bed."
"He went back home."
"No one is to receive more than a hundred blows."
"He was beaten again."
"Behind our efforts, let there be found our efforts."
"But he did not give up. Once more he set off for the capital to
complain."
"Those who fight for the populace fight with a thousand hearts.
Those who fight against them with none."
"Now the bad men were afraid."
"Let no one oppose the decisions of the Group of Seventeen."
"They said to themselves, 'He has gone to the palace again and


again, and each time he must have told the rulers there that we did
not obey their earlier commands. Surely, this time they will send
soldiers to kill us."
"If their wounds are in their backs, who shall stanch their blood?"
"The bad men ran away."
"Where are those who in times past have opposed the decisions of
the Group of Seventeen?"
"They were never seen again."
"Let there be clean water for those who toil. Let there be hot food
for them, and a clean bed. Then they will sing at their work, and
their work will be light to them. Then they will sing at the harvest,
and the harvest will be heavy."
"The just man returned home and lived happily ever after."
Everyone applauded this story, moved by the story itself, by the
ingenuity of the Ascian prisoner, by the glimpse it had afforded us
of life in Ascia, and most of all, I think, by the graciousness and wit
Foila had brought to her translation.
I have no way of knowing whether you, who eventually will read
this record, like stories or not. If you do not, no doubt you have
turned these pages without attention. I confess that I love them.
Indeed, it often seems to me that of all the good things in the world,
the only ones humanity can claim for itself are stories and music;
the rest, mercy, beauty, sleep, clean water and hot food (as the
Ascian would have said) are all the work of the Increate. Thus,
stories are small things indeed in the scheme of the universe, but it
is hard not to love best what is our own—hard for me, at least.


From this story, though it was the shortest and the most simple too
of all those I have recorded in this book, I feel that I learned several
things of some importance. First of all, how much of our speech,
which we think freshly minted in our own mouths, consists of set
locutions. The Ascian seemed to speak only in sentences he had
learned by rote, though until he used each for the first time we had
never heard them. Foila seemed to speak as women commonly do,
and if I had been asked whether she employed such tags, I would
have said that she did not—but how often one might have predicted
the ends of her sentences from their beginnings.
Second, I learned how difficult it is to eliminate the urge for
expression. The people of Ascia were reduced to speaking only with
their masters' voice; but they had made of it a new tongue, and I had
no doubt, after hearing the Ascian, that by it he could express
whatever thought he wished.
And third, I learned once again what a many-sided thing is the
telling of any tale. None, surely, could be plainer than the Ascian's,
yet what did it mean? Was it intended to praise the Group of
Seventeen? The mere terror of their name had routed the evildoers.
Was it intended to condemn them?
They had heard the complaints of the just man, and yet they had
done nothing for him beyond giving him their verbal support. There
had been no indication they would ever do more.
But I had not learned those things I had most wished to learn as I
listened to the Ascian and to Foila. What had been her motive in
agreeing to allow the Ascian to compete? Mere mischief? From her
laughing eyes I could easily believe it. Was she perhaps in truth


attracted to him? I found that more difficult to credit, but it was
surely not impossible. Who has not seen women attracted to men
lacking every attractive quality? She had clearly had much to do
with Ascians, and he was clearly no ordinary soldier, since he had
been taught our language. Did she hope to wring some secret from
him?
And what of him? Melito and Hallvard had accused each other of
telling tales with an ulterior purpose. Had he done so as well? If he
had, it had surely been to tell Foila—and the rest of us too—that he
would never give up.

XII
Winnoc
That evening I had yet another visitor: one of the shaven-headed
male slaves. I had been sitting up and attempting to talk with the
Ascian, and he seated himself beside me. "Do you remember me,
Lictor?" he asked. "My name is Winnoc."
I shook my head.
"It was I who bathed you and cared for you on the night you
arrived," he told me. "I have been waiting until you were well
enough to speak. I would have come last night, but you were deep
in talk already with one of our postulants."
I asked what he wished to speak to me about.
"A moment ago I called you Lictor, and you did not deny it. Are
you indeed a lictor? You were dressed as one that night."


"I have been a lictor," I said. "Those are the only clothes I own."
"But you are a lictor no longer?"
I shook my head. "I came north to enter the army."
"Ah," he said. For a moment he looked away.
"Surely others do the same."
"A few, yes. Most join in the south, or are made to join. A few come
north like you, because they want some special unit where a friend
or relation is already. A soldier's life…"
I waited for him to continue.
"It's a lot like a slave's, I think. I've never been a soldier myself, but
I've talked to a lot of them."
"Is your life so miserable? I would have thought the Pelerines kind
mistresses. Do they beat you?"
He smiled at that and turned until I could see his back. "You've been
a lictor. What do you think of my scars?"
In the fading light I could scarcely make them out. I ran my fingers
across them. "Only that they are very old and were made with the
lash," I said.
"I got them before I was twenty, and I'm nearly fifty now. A man
with black clothes like yours made them. Were you a lictor for
long?"
"No, not long."
"Then you don't know much of the business?"
"Enough to practice it."


"And that's all? The man who whipped me told me he was from the
guild of torturers. I thought maybe you might have heard of them."
"I have."
"Are they real? Some people have told me they died out a long time
ago, but that isn't what the man who whipped me said."
I told him, "They still exist, so far as I'm aware. Do you happen to
recall the name of the torturer who scourged you?"
"He called himself Journeyman Palaemon—ah, you know him!"
"Yes. He was my teacher for a time. He's an old man now."
"He's still alive, then? Will you ever see him again?"
"I don't think so."
"I'd like to see him myself. Maybe sometime I will. The Increate,
after all, orders all things. You young men, you live wild lives—I
know I did, at your age. Do you know yet that he shapes everything
we do?"
"Perhaps."
"Believe me, it's so. I've seen much more than you. Since it is so, it
may be that I'll never see Journeyman Palaemon again, and you've
been brought here to be my messenger."
Just at that point, when I expected him to convey to me whatever
message he had, he fell silent. The patients who had listened so
attentively to the Ascian's story were talking among themselves
now; but somewhere in the stack of soiled dishes the old slave had
collected, one shifted its position with a faint clink, and I heard it.
"What do you know of the laws of slavery?" he asked me at last. "I


mean, of the ways a man or a woman can become a slave under the
law?"
"Very little," I said. "A certain friend of mine" (I was thinking of the
green man) "was called a slave, but he was only an unlucky
foreigner who'd been seized by some unscrupulous people. I knew
that wasn't legal."
He nodded agreement. "Was he dark of skin?"
"You might say that, yes."
"In the olden times, or so I've heard, slavery was by skin color. The
darker a man was, the more a slave they made him. That's hard to
believe, I know. But we used to have a chatelaine in the order who
knew a lot about history, and she told me. She was a truthful
woman."
"No doubt it originated because slaves must often toil in the sun," I
observed. "Many of the usages of the past now seem merely
capricious to us."
At that he became a trifle angry. "Believe me, young man, I've lived
in the old days and I've lived now, and I know a lot better than you
which was the best."
"So Master Palaemon used to say."
As I had hoped it would, that restored him to the principal topic of
his thought. "There's only three ways a man can be a slave," he said.
"Though for a woman it's different, what with marriage and the like.
"If a man's brought—him being a slave—into the Commonwealth
from foreign parts, a slave he remains, and the master that brought
him here can sell him if he wants. That's one. Prisoners of war—like


this Ascian here—are the slaves of the Autarch, the Master of
Masters and the Slave of Slaves. The Autarch can sell them if he
wants to. Often he does, and because most of these Ascians aren't
much use except for tedious work, you often find them rowing on
the upper rivers.
That's two.
"Number three is that a man can sell himself into somebody's
service, because a free man is the master of his own body—he's his
own slave already, as it were."
"Slaves," I remarked, "are seldom beaten by torturers. What need of
it, when they can be beaten by their own masters?"
"I wasn't a slave then. That's part of what I wanted to ask
Journeyman Palaemon about. I was just a young fellow that had
been caught stealing. Journeyman Palaemon came in to talk to me
on the morning I was going to get my whipping. I thought it was a
kindly thing for him to do, although it was then that he told me he
was from the guild of torturers."
"We always prepare a client, if we can," I said.
"He told me not to try to keep from yelling—it doesn't hurt quite so
bad, is what he told me, if you yell out just as the whip comes
down. He promised me there wouldn't be any hitting more than the
number the judge said, so I could count them if I wanted to, and that
way I'd know when it was about over. And he said he wouldn't hit
harder than he had to, to cut the skin, and he wouldn't break any
bones."
I nodded.


"I asked him then if he'd do me a favor, and he said he would if he
could. I wanted for him to come back afterward and talk to me
again, and he said he would try to when I was a little recovered.
Then a caloyer came in to read the prayer.
"They tied me to a post, with my hands over my head and the
indictment tacked up above my hands. Probably you've done it
yourself many times."
"Often enough," I told him.
"I doubt the way they did me was any different. I've got the scars of
it still, but they've faded, just like you say. I've seen many a man
with worse ones. The jailers, they dragged me back to my cell as the
custom is, but I think I could have walked. It didn't hurt as much as
losing an arm or a leg. Here I've helped the surgeons take off a good
many."
"Were you thin in those days?" I asked him.
"Very thin. I think you could have counted every rib I had."
"That was much to your advantage, then. The lash cuts deep in a fat
man's back, and he bleeds like a pig. People say the traders aren't
punished enough for short weighing and the like, but those who
speak so don't know how they suffer when they are."
Winnoc nodded to that. "The next day I felt almost as strong as
ever, and Journeyman Palaemon came like he'd promised. I told him
how it was with me—how I lived and all—and asked him a bit
about himself. I guess it seems queer to you that I'd talk so to a man
that had whipped me?"
"No. I've heard of similar things many times."


"He told me he'd done something against his guild. He wouldn't tell
me what it was, but because of it he was exiled for a while. He told
me how he felt about it and how lonesome he was. He said he'd
tried to feel better by thinking how other people lived, by knowing
they had no more guild than he did. But he could only feel sorry for
them, and pretty soon he felt sorry for himself too. He told me that
if I wanted to be happy, and not go through this kind of thing again,
to find some sort of brotherhood for myself and join."
"Yes?" I asked.
"And I decided to do what he's said. When I was let out, I spoke to
the masters of a lot of guilds, picking and choosing them at first,
then talking to any I thought might take me, like the butchers and
the candlemakers. None of them would take on an apprentice as old
as I was, or somebody that didn't have the fee, or somebody with a
bad character—they looked at my back, you see, and decided I was
a troublemaker.
"I thought about signing on a ship or joining the army, and since
then I've often wished I'd gone ahead with one or the other,
although maybe if I had I'd wish now I hadn't, or maybe not be
living to wish at all. Then I got the notion of joining some religious
order, I don't know why. I talked to a bunch of them, and two
offered to take me, even when I told them I didn't have any money
and showed them my back. But the more I heard about the way they
were supposed to live in there, the less I felt like I could do it. I had
been drunk a lot, and I liked the girls, and I didn't really want to
change.
"Then one day when I was standing around on a corner I saw a man


I took to belong to some order I hadn't talked to yet. By that time I
was planning to sign aboard a certain ship, but it wasn't going to sail
for almost a week, and a sailor had told me a lot of the hardest work
came while they were getting ready, and I'd miss it if I waited until
they were about to get up the anchor. That was all a lie, but I didn't
know it then.
"Anyway, I followed this man I'd seen, and when he stopped—he'd
been sent to buy vegetables, you see—I went up to him and asked
him about his order. He told me he was a slave of the Pelerines and
it was about the same as being in an order, but better. A man could
have a drink or two and nobody'd object so long as he was sober
when he came to his work. He could lie with the girls too, and there
were good chances for that because the girls thought they were holy
men, more or less, and they traveled all around.
"I asked if he thought they'd take me, and I said I couldn't believe
the life was as good as he made it out to be. He said he was sure
they would, and although he couldn't prove what he'd said about the
girls right then and there, he'd prove what he'd said about drinking
by splitting a bottle of red with me.
"We went to a tavern by the market and sat down, and he was as
good as his word. He told me the life was a lot like a sailor's,
because the best part of being a sailor was seeing various places,
and they did that. It was like being a soldier too, because they
carried weapons when the order journeyed in wild parts. Besides all
of that, they paid you to sign. In an order, the order gets an offering
from every man who takes their vow. If he decides to leave later, he
gets some of it back, depending on how long he's been in. For us


slaves, as he explained to me, all that went the other way. A slave
got paid when he signed. If he left later he'd have to buy his way
out, but if he stayed he could keep all the money.
"I had a mother, and even though I never went to see her I knew she
didn't have an aes. While I was thinking about the religious orders,
I'd got to be more religious myself, and I didn't see how I was going
to minister to the Increate with her on my mind. I signed the paper—
naturally Goslin, the slave who'd brought me in, got a reward for it
—and I took the money to my mother."
I said, "That made her happy, I'm sure, and you too."
"She thought it was some kind of trick, but I left it with her anyhow.
I had to go back to the order right away, naturally, and they'd sent
somebody with me. Now I've been here thirty years."
"You're to be congratulated, I hope."
"I don't know. It's been a hard life, but then all lives are hard, from
what I've seen of them."
"I too," I said. To tell the truth, I was becoming sleepy and wished
that he would go. "Thank you for telling me your story. I found it
very interesting."
"I want to ask you something," he said, "and I want you to ask
Journeyman Palaemon for me if you see him again."
I nodded, waiting.
"You said you thought the Pelerines would be kind mistresses, and I
suppose you're right. I've had a lot of kindness from some of them,
and I've never been whipped here—nothing worse than a few slaps.
But you ought to know how they do it. Slaves that don't behave


themselves get sold, that's all. Maybe you don't follow me."
"I don't think I do."
"A lot of men sell themselves to the order, thinking like I did that
it'll be an easy life and an adventure. So it is, mostly, and it's a good
feeling to help cure the sick and the wounded. But those who don't
suit the Pelerines are sold off, and they get a lot more for them than
they paid them. Do you see how it is now? This way, they don't
have to beat anybody. About the worst punishment you get is
scrubbing out the jakes. Only if you don't please them, you can find
yourself getting driven down into a mine.
"What I've wanted to ask Journeyman Palaemon all these years…"
Winnoc paused, gnawing at his lower lip. "He was a torturer, wasn't
he? He said so, and so did you."
"Yes, he was. He still is."
"Then what I want to know is whether he told me what he did to
torment me. Or was he giving me the best advice he could?" He
looked away so that I would not see his expression. "Will you ask
him that for me? Then maybe sometime I'll see you again."
I said, "He advised you as well as he could, I'm certain. If you'd
stayed as you were, you might have been executed by him or
another torturer long ago. Have you ever seen a man executed? But
torturers don't know everything."
Winnoc stood up. "Neither do slaves. Thank you, young man."
I touched his arm to detain him for a moment. "May I ask you
something now? I myself have been a torturer. If you've feared for
so many years that Master Palaemon had said what he did only to


give you pain, how do you know that I haven't done the same just
now?"
"Because you would have said the other," he told me. "Good night,
young man."
I thought for a time about what Winnoc had said, and about what
Master Palaemon had said to him so long ago. He too had been a
wanderer, then, perhaps ten years before I was born. And yet he had
returned to the Citadel to become a master of the guild. I recalled
the way Abdiesus (whom I had betrayed) had wished to have me
made a Master. Surely, whatever crime Master Palaemon had
committed had been hidden later by all the brothers of the guild.
Now he was a master, though as I had seen all my life, being too
accustomed to it to wonder at it, it was Master Gurloes who directed
the guild's affairs despite his being so much younger. Outside the
warm winds of the northern summer played among the tent ropes;
but it seemed to me that I climbed the steep steps of the Matachin
Tower again and heard the cold winds sing among the keeps of the
Citadel.
At last, hoping to turn my mind to less painful matters, I stood and
stretched and strolled to Foila's cot. She was awake, and I talked
with her for a time, then asked if I might judge the stories now; but
she said I would have to wait one more day at least.

XIII
Foila's Story—The Armiger's Daughter


"Hallvard and Melito and even the Ascian have had their chances.
Don't you think I'm entitled to one too? Even a man who courts a
maid thinking he has no rivals has one, and that one is herself. She
may give herself to him, but she may also choose to keep herself for
herself. He has to convince her that she will be happier with him
than by herself, and though men convince maids of that often, it
isn't often true. In this competition I will make my (own entry, and
win myself for myself if I can. If I marry for tales, should I marry
someone who's a worse teller of them than I am myself?"
"Each of the men has told a story of his own country. I will do the
same. My land is the land of the far horizons, of the wide sky. It is
the land of grass and wind and galloping hoofs. In summer the wind
can be as hot as the breath of an oven, and when the pampas take
fire, the line of smoke stretches a hundred leagues and the lions ride
our cattle to escape it, looking like devils. The men of my country
are brave as bulls and the women are fierce as hawks.
"When my grandmother was young, there was a villa in my country
so remote that no one ever came there. It belonged to an armiger, a
feudatory of the Liege of Pascua. The lands were rich, and it was a
fine house, though the roof beams had been dragged by oxen all one
summer to get them to the site. The walls were of earth, as the walls
of all the houses in my country are, and they were three paces thick.
People who live in woodlands scoff at such walls, but they are cool
and make a fine appearance whitewashed and will not burn. There
was a tower and a wide banqueting hall, and a contrivance of ropes
and wheels and buckets by which two merychips, walking in a
circle, watered the garden on the roof.


"The armiger was a gallant man and his wife a lovely woman, but of
all their children only one lived beyond the first year. She was tall,
brown as leather yet smooth as oil, with hair the color of the palest
wine and eyes dark as thun-derheads. Still, the villa where they
dwelt was so remote that no one knew and no one came to seek her.
Often she rode all day alone, hunting with her peregrine or dashing
after her spotted hunting cats when they had started an antelope.
Often too she sat alone in her bedchamber all the day, hearing the
song of her lark in its cage and turning the pages of old books her
mother had carried from her own home.
"At last her father determined that she must wed, for she was near
the twentieth year, after which few would want her. Then he sent s
everywhere for three hundred leagues around, crying her beauty and
promising that on his death her husband should hold all that was his.
Many fine riders came, with silver-mounted saddles and coral on
the pommels of their swords. He entertained them all, and his
daughter, with her hair in a man's hat and a long knife in a man's
sash, mingled with them, feigning to be one of them, so that she
might hear who boasted of many women and see who stole when he
thought himself unobserved. Each night she went to her father and
told him their names, and when she had gone he called them to him
and told them of the stakes where no one goes, where men bound in
rawhide die in the sun; and the next morning they saddled their
mounts and rode away.
"Soon there remained but three. Then the armiger's daughter could
go among them no more, for with so few she feared they would
surely know her. She went to her bedchamber and let down her hair


and brushed it, and took off her hunting clothes and bathed in
scented water. She put rings on her fingers and bracelets on her
arms and wide hoops of gold in her ears, and on her head that thin
circlet of fine gold that an armiger's daughter is entitled to wear. In
short, she did all she knew to make herself beautiful, and because
her heart was brave, perhaps there was no maid anywhere more
beautiful than she.
"When she was dressed as she wished, she sent her servant to call
her father and the three suitors to her. 'Now behold me,' she said.
'You see a ring of gold about my brow, and smaller rings suspended
from my ears. The arms that will embrace one of you are
themselves embraced by rings smaller still, and rings yet smaller are
on my fingers. My chest of jewels lies open before you, and there
are no more rings to be found in it; but there is another ring still in
this room—a ring I do not wear. Can one of you discover it and
bring it to me?'
"The three suitors looked up and down, behind the arras, and
beneath the bed. At last the youngest took the lark's cage from its
hook and carried it to the armiger's daughter; and there, about the
lark's right leg, was a tiny ring of gold. 'Now hear me,' she said. 'My
husband shall be the man who shows me this little brown bird again.'
"And with that she opened the cage and thrust in her hand, then
carrying the lark upon her finger took it to the window and tossed it
in the air. For a moment the three suitors saw the gold ring glint in
the sun. The lark rose until it was no more than a dot against the sky.
"Then the suitors rushed down the stair and out the door, calling for
their mounts, the swift-footed friends that had carried them already


so many leagues across the empty pampas. Their silver-mounted
saddles they threw upon their backs, and in less than a moment all
three were gone from the sight of the armiger and the armiger's
daughter, and from each other's as well, for one rode north toward
the jungles, and one east toward the mountains, and the youngest
west toward the restless sea.
"When he who went north had ridden for some days, he came to a
river too swift for swimming and rode along its bank, ever
harkening to the songs of the birds who dwelt there, until he reached
a ford. In that ford a rider in brown sat a brown destrier. His face
was masked with a brown neckcloth, his cloak, his hat, and all his
clothing were of brown, and about the ankle of his brown right boot
was a ring of gold.
" 'Who are you?' " called the suitor.
The figure in brown answered not a word.
" 'There was among us at the armiger's house a certain young man
who vanished on the day before the last day,' said the suitor, 'and I
think that you are he. In some way you have learned of my quest,
and now you seek to prevent me. Well, stand clear of my road, or
die where you stand.'
"And with that he drew sword and spurred his destrier into the
water. For some time they fought as the men of my country fight,
with the sword in the right hand and the long knife in the left, for
the suitor was strong and brave, and the rider in brown was quick
and blade-crafty. But at last the latter fell, and his blood stained the
water.


" 'I leave you your mount,' the suitor called, 'if your strength is
sufficient to get you into the saddle again. For I am a merciful man.'
And he rode away.
"When he who had ridden toward the mountains had ridden for
some days also, he came to such a bridge as the mountain people
build, a narrow affair of rope and bamboo, stretched across a chasm
like the web of a spider. No man but a fool attempts to ride across
such a contrivance, and so he dismounted and led his mount by the
reins.
"When he began to cross it seemed to him that the bridge was all
empty before him, but he had not come a quarter of the way when a
figure appeared in the center. In form it was much like a man, but it
was all of brown save for one flash of white, and it seemed to fold
brown wings about itself. When the second suitor was closer still he
saw that it wore a ring of gold about the ankle of one boot, and the
brown wings now seemed no more than a cloak of that color.
"Then he traced a Sign in the air before him to protect him from
those spirits that have forgotten their creator, and he called, 'Who
are you? Name yourself!'
" 'You see me,' the figure answered him. 'Name me true, and your
wish is my wish.'
" 'You are the spirit of the lark sent forth by the armiger's daughter,'
said the second suitor. 'Your form you may change, but the ring
marks you.'
"At that, the figure in brown drew sword and presented it hilt
foremost to the second suitor. 'You have named me rightly,' it said.


'What would you have me do?'
" 'Return with me to the armiger's house,' said the suitor, 'so that I
may show you to the armiger's daughter and so win her.'
" 'I will return with you gladly, if that is what you wish,' said the
figure in brown. 'But I warn you now that if she sees me, she will
not see in me what you see.'
" 'Nevertheless, come with me,' answered the suitor, for he did not
know what else to say.
"On such a bridge as the mountain people build, a man may turn
about without much difficulty, but a four-legged beast finds it
nearly impossible to do so. Therefore, they were forced to continue
to the farther side in order that the second suitor might face his
mount toward the armiger's house once more. 'How tedious this is,'
he thought as he walked the great catenary of the bridge, 'and yet,
how difficult and dangerous. Cannot that be used to my benefit?' At
last he called to the figure in brown, 'I must walk this bridge, and
then walk it again. But must you do so as well? Why don't you fly
to the other side and wait there for me?'
"At that, the figure in brown laughed, a wondrous trilling. 'Did you
not see that one of my wings is bandaged? I fluttered too near one
of your rivals, and he slashed at me with his sword.'
" 'Then you cannot fly far?' asked the second suitor.
" 'No indeed. As you approached this bridge I was perched on the
brown walkway resting, and when I heard your tread I had scarcely
strength to flutter up.'
" 'I see,' said the second suitor, and no more. But to himself he


thought: 'If I were to cut this bridge, the lark would be forced to take
bird-form again—yet it could not fly far, and I should surely kill it.
Then I could carry it back, and the armiger's daughter would know
it."
"When they reached the farther side, he patted the neck of his mount
and turned it about, thinking that it would die, but that the best such
animal was a small price to set against the ownership of great herds.
'Follow us,' he said to the figure in brown, and led his mount onto
the bridge again, so that over that windy and aching chasm he went
first, and the destrier behind him, and the figure in brown last of all.
'The beast will rear as the bridge falls,' he thought, 'and the spirit of
the lark will not be able to dash past, so it must resume its bird
shape or perish.' His plans, you see, were themselves shaped by the
beliefs of my land, where those who set store in shape-changers will
tell you that like thoughts they will not change once they have been
made prisoner.
"Down the long curve of the bridge again walked the three, and up
the side from which the second suitor had come, and as soon as he
set foot on the rock, he drew his sword, sharp as his labor could
make it. Two handrails of rope the bridge had, and two cables of
hemp to support the roadway. He ought to have cut those first, but
he wasted a moment on the handrails, and the figure in brown
sprang from behind into the destrier's saddle, drove spur to its
flanks, and rode him down. Thus he died under the hoofs of his own
mount.
"When the youngest suitor, who had gone toward the sea, had
ridden some days as well, he reached its marge. There on the beach


beside the unquiet sea he met someone cloaked in brown, with a
brown hat, and a brown cloth across nose and mouth, and a gold
ring about the ankle of a brown boot.
" 'You see me,' the person in brown called. 'Name me true, and your
wish shall be my wish.'
" 'You are an angel,' replied the youngest suitor, 'sent to guide me to
the lark I seek.'
"At that the brown angel drew a sword and presented it, hilt
foremost, to the youngest suitor, saying, 'You have named me
rightly. What would you have me do?'
" 'Never will I attempt to thwart the will of the Liege of Angels,'
answered the youngest suitor. 'Since you are sent to guide me to the
lark, my only wish is that you shall do so.'
" 'And so I shall,' said the angel. 'But would you go by the shortest
road? Or the best?'
"At that the youngest suitor thought to himself, 'Here surely is some
trick. Ever the empyrean powers rebuke the impatience of men,
which they, being immortal, can easily afford to do. Doubtless the
shortest way lies through the horrors of caverns underground, or
something like.' There-fore he answered the angel, 'By the best.
Would not it dis-honor her whom I shall wed to travel any other?'
" 'Some say one thing and some another,' replied the an-gel. 'Now
let me mount up behind you. Not far from here there is a goodly
port, and there I have just sold two destriers as good as yours or
better. We shall sell yours as well, and the gold ring that circles my
boot.'


"In the port they did as the angel had indicated, and with their
money purchased a ship, not large but swift and sound, and hired
three knowing seamen to work her.
"On the third day out from port, the youngest suitor had such a
dream by night as young men have. When he woke he touched the
pillow near his head and found it warm, and when he lay down to
sleep again, he winded some delicate perfume—the odor, it might
have been, of the flowering grasses the women of my land dry in
spring to braid in their hair.
"An isle they reached where no men come, and the youngest suitor
went ashore to search for the lark. He found it not, but at the dying
of the day stripped off his garments to cool himself in the surging
sea. There, when the stars had brightened, another joined him.
Together they swam, and together lay telling tales on the beach.
"One day while they were peering over the prow of their ship for
another (for they traded at times and at times fought also) a great
gust of wind came and the angel's hat was blown into the alldevouring sea, and soon the brown cloth that had covered her face
went to join it.
"At last they grew weary of the unresting sea and thought of my
land, where the lions ride our cattle in autumn when the grass burns,
and the men are brave as bulls and the women fierce as hawks.
Their ship they had called the Lark, and now the Lark flew across
blue waters, each morn impaling the red sun upon her bowsprit. In
the port where they had bought her they sold her and received three
times the price, for she had become a famous vessel, renowned in
song and story; and indeed, all who came to the port wondered at


how small she was, a trim, brown craft hardly a score of paces from
stem to rudderpost. Their loot they sold also, and the goods they had
gained by trading. The people of my land keep the best destriers
they breed for themselves, but it is to this port that they bring the
best of those they sell, and there the youngest suitor and the angel
bought good mounts and filled their saddlebags with gems and gold,
and set out for the armiger's house that is so remote that no one ever
comes there.
"Many a scrape did they have upon the way, and many a time
bloody the swords that had been washed so often in the cleansing
sea and wiped on sailcloth or sand. Yet at last come they did. There
the angel was welcomed by the armiger, shouting, and by his wife,
weeping, and by all the servants, talking. And there she doffed her
brown clothing and became the armiger's daughter of old once more.
"A great wedding was planned. In my land such things take many
days, for there are roasting pits to be dug anew, and cattle to be
slaughtered, and messengers who must ride for days to fetch guests
who must ride for days also. On the third day, as they waited, the
armiger's daughter sent her servant to the youngest suitor, saying,
"My mistress will not hunt today. Rather, she invites you to her
bedchamber, to talk of times past upon sea and land."
"The youngest suitor dressed himself in the finest of the clothes he
had bought when they had returned to port, and soon was at the
door of the armiger's daughter.
"He found her sitting on a window seat, turning the pages of one of
the old books her mother had carried from her own home and
listening to the singing of a lark in a cage. To that cage he went, and


saw that the lark had a ring of gold about one leg. Then he looked at
the armiger's daughter, wondering.
" 'Did the angel you met upon the strand not promise you should be
guided to this lark?' she said. 'And by the best road? Each morning I
open his cage and cast him out upon the wind to exercise his wings.
Soon he returns to it again, where there is food for him, clean water,
and safety.'
"Some say the wedding of the youngest suitor and the armiger's
daughter was the finest ever seen in my land."

XIV
Mannea
That night there was much talk of Foila's story, and this time it was
I who postponed making any judgment among the tales. Indeed, I
had formed a sort of horror of judging, the residue, perhaps, of my
education among the torturers, who teach their apprentices from
boyhood to execute the instructions of the judges appointed (as they
themselves are not) by the officials of our Commonwealth.
In addition, I had something more pressing on my mind. I had
hoped that our evening meal would be served by Ava, but when it
was not, I rose anyway, dressed myself in my own clothes, and
slipped off in the gathering dark.
It was a surprise—a very pleasant one—to find that my legs were
strong again. I had been free of fever for several days, yet I had
grown accustomed to thinking myself ill (just as I had earlier been


accustomed to thinking myself well) and had lain in my cot without
complaint. No doubt many a man who walks about and does his
work is dying and ignorant of it, and many who lie abed all day are
healthier than those who bring their food and wash them.
I tried to recall, as I followed the winding paths between the tents,
when I had felt so well before. Not in the mountains or upon the lake
—the hardships I had suffered there had gradually reduced my
vitality until I fell prey to the fever. Not when I fled Thrax, for I was
already worn out from my duties as lictor. Not when I had arrived at
Thrax; Dorcas and I had undergone privations in the roadless
country nearly as severe as I was to bear alone in the mountains.
Not even when I had been at the House Absolute (a period that now
seemed as remote as the reign of Ymar), because I had still been
suffering the aftereffects of the alzabo and my ingestion of Thecla's
dead memories.
At last it came to me: I felt now as I had on that memorable
morning when Agia and I had set out for the Botanic Gardens, the
first morning after I had left the Citadel. That morning, though I had
not known it, I had acquired the Claw. For the first time I wondered
if it had not been cursed as well as blessed. Or perhaps it was only
that all the past months had been needed for me to recover fully
from the leaf of the avern that had pierced me that same evening. I
took out the Claw and stared at its silvery gleam, and when I raised
my eyes, I saw the glowing scarlet of the Pelerines' chapel.
I could hear the chanting, and I knew it would be some time before
the chapel would be empty, but I proceeded anyway, and at last
slipped through the door and took a place in the back. Of the liturgy


of the Pelerines, I will say nothing. Such things cannot always be
well described, and even when they can, it is less than proper to do
so. The guild called the Seekers for Truth and Penitence, to which I
at one time belonged, has its own ceremonies, one of which I have
described in some detail in another place. Certainly those
ceremonies are peculiar to it, and perhaps those of the Pelerines
were peculiar to them as well, though they may once have been
universal.
Speaking in so far as I can as an unprejudiced observer, I would say
that they were more beautiful than ours but less theatrical, and thus
in the long run perhaps less moving. The costumes of the
participants were ancient, I am sure, and striking. The chants
possessed a queer attraction I have not encountered in other music.
Our ceremonies were intended chiefly to impress the role of the
guild upon the minds of our younger members. Possibly those of the
Pelerines had a similar function. If not, then they were designed to
engage the particular attention of the All-Seeing, and whether they
did so I cannot say. In the event, the order received no special
protection.
When the ceremony was over and the scarlet-clad priestesses filed
out, I bowed my head and feigned to be deep in prayer. Very
readily, I found, the pretense became the thing itself. I remained
conscious of my kneeling body, but only as a peripheral burden. My
mind was among the starry wastes, far from Urth and indeed far
from Urth's archipelago of island worlds, and it seemed to me that
that to which I spoke was farther still—I had come, as it were, to the
walls of the universe, and now shouted through the walls to one


who waited outside.
"Shouted," I said, but perhaps that is the wrong word. Rather I
whispered, as Barnoch, perhaps, walled up in his house, might have
whispered through some chink to a sympathetic passerby. I spoke of
what I had been when I wore a ragged shirt and watched the beasts
and birds through the narrow window of the mausoleum, and what I
had become. I spoke too, not of Vodalus and his struggle against the
Autarch, but of the motives I had once foolishly attributed to him. I
did not deceive myself with the thought that I had it in me to lead
millions. I asked only that I might lead myself; and as I did so, I
seemed to see, with a vision increasingly clear, through the chink in
the universe to a new universe bathed in golden light, where my
listener knelt to hear me. What had seemed a crevice in the world
had expanded until I could see a face and folded hands, and the
opening, like a tunnel, running deep into a human head that for a
time seemed larger than the head of Typhon carved upon the
mountain. I was whispering into my own ear, and when I realized it
I flew into it like a bee and stood up.
Everyone was gone, and a silence as profound as any I have ever
heard seemed to hang in the air with the incense. The altar rose
before me, humble in comparison to that Agia and 1 had destroyed,
yet beautiful with its lights and purity of line and panels of sunstone
and lapis lazuli.
Now I came forward and knelt before it. I needed no scholar to tell
me the Theologoumenon was no nearer now. Yet he seemed nearer,
and I was able—for the final time—to take out the Claw, something
I had feared I could not do. Forming the syllables only in my mind,


I said, "I have carried you over many mountains, across rivers, and
across the pampas. You have given Thecla life in me. You have
given me Dorcas, and you have restored Jonas to this world. Surely
I have no complaint of you, though you must have many of me. One
I shall not deserve. It shall not be said that I did not do what I might
to undo the harm I have done."
I knew the Claw would be swept away if I were to leave it openly
on the altar. Mounting the dais, I searched among its furnishings for
a place of concealment that should be secure and permanent, and at
last noticed that the altar-stone itself was held from below with four
clamps that had surely never been loosed since the altar was
constructed, and seemed likely to remain in place so long as it
stood. 1 have strong hands, and I was able to free them, though I do
not think most men could. Beneath the stone some wood had been
chiseled away so that it should be supported at the edges only and
would not rock—it was more than I had dared to hope for. With
Jonas's razor I cut a small square of cloth from the edge of my nowtattered guild cloak. In it I wrapped the Claw, then I laid it under the
stone and retightened the clamps, bloodying my fingers in my effort
to make sure they would not come loose by accident.
As I stepped away from the altar I felt a profound sorrow, but I had
not gone halfway to the door of the chapel before I was seized with
wild joy. The burden of life and death had been lifted from me.
Now I was only a man again, and I was delirious with delight. I felt
as I had felt as a child when the long lessons with Master Malrubius
were over and I was free to play in the Old Yard or clamber across
the broken curtain wall to run among the trees and mausoleums of


our necropolis. I was disgraced and outcast and homeless, without
friend and without money, and I had just given up the most valuable
object in the world, which was, perhaps, in the end the only
valuable object in the world. And yet I knew that all would be well.
I had climbed to the bottom of existence and felt it with my hands,
and I knew that there was a bottom, and that from this point onward
I could only rise. I swirled my cloak about me as I had when I was
an actor, for I knew that I was an actor and no torturer, though I had
been a torturer. I leaped into the air and capered as the goats do on
the mountainside, for I knew that I was a child, and that no man can
be a man who is not.
Outside, the cool air seemed expressly made for me, a new creation
and not the ancient atmosphere of Urth. I bathed in it, first
spreading my cloak then raising my arms to the stars, filled my
lungs as does one who has just escaped drowning in the fluids of
birth.
All this took less time than it has required to describe it, and I was
about to start back to the lazaret tent from which I had come when I
became aware of a motionless figure watching me from the
shadows of another tent some distance off. Ever since the boy and I
had escaped the blindly questing creature that had destroyed the
village of the magicians, I had been afraid that some of Hethor's
servants might search me out again. I was about to flee when the
figure stepped into the moonlight, and I saw it was only a Pelerine.
"Wait," she called. Then, coming nearer, "I am afraid I frightened
you."
Her face was a smooth oval that seemed almost sexless. She was


young, I thought, though not so young as Ava and a good two heads
taller—a true exultant, as tall as Thecla had been.
I said, "When one has lived long with danger…"
"I understand. I know nothing of war, but much of the men and
women who have seen it."
"And now how may I serve you, Chatelaine?"
"First I must know if you are well. Are you?"
"Yes," I said. "I will leave this place tomorrow."
"You were in the chapel giving thanks, then, for your recovery."
I hesitated. "I had much to say, Chatelaine. That was a part of it,
yes."
"May I walk with you?"
"Of course, Chatelaine."
I have heard it said that a tall woman seems taller than any man, and
perhaps it is true. This woman was far less in stature than
Baldanders had been, yet walking beside her made me feel almost
dwarfish. I recalled too how Thecla had bent over me when we
embraced, and how I had kissed hebreasts.
When we had taken two score steps or so, the Pelerine said, "You
walk well. Your legs are long, and I think they have covered many
leagues. You are not a cavalry trooper?"
"I have ridden a bit, but not with the cavalry. 1 came through the
mountains on foot, if that's what you mean, Chatelaine."
"That is well, for I have no mount for you. But I do not believe I
have told you my name. I am Mannea, mistress of the postulants of


our order. Our Domnicellae is away, and so for the moment I am in
charge of our people here."
"I am Severian of Nessus, a wanderer. I wish that I could give you a
thousand chrisos to help carry out your good work, but I can only
thank you for the kindness I have received here."
"When I spoke of a mount, Severian of Nessus, I was neither
offering to sell you one nor offering to give you one in the hope of
thus earning your gratitude. If we do not have your gratitude now,
we shall not get it."
"You have it," I told her, "as I've said. As I've also said, I will not
linger here presuming on your kindness."
Mannea looked down at me. "I did not think you would. This
morning a postulant told me how one of the sick had gone to the
chapel with her two nights ago and described him. This evening,
when you remained behind after the rest left, I knew you were he. I
have a task, you see, and no one to perform it. In calmer days I
would send a party of our slaves, but they are trained in the care of
the sick, and we have need of every one of them and more. Yet it is
said, 'He sends the beggar a stick and to the hunter a spear.' "
"I have no wish to insult you, Chatelaine, but I think that if you trust
me because I went to your chapel you trust me for a bad reason. For
all you know, I could have been stealing gems from the altar."
"You mean that thieves and liars often come to pray. By the
blessing of the Conciliator they do. Believe me, Severian, wanderer
from Nessus, no one else does—in the order or out of it. But you
molested nothing. We have not half the power ignorant people


suppose—nevertheless, those who think us without power are more
ignorant still. Will you go on an errand for me? I'll give you a safeconduct so you will not be taken up as a deserter."
"If the errand is within my powers, Chatelaine." She put her hand on
my shoulder. It was the first time she had touched me, and I felt a
slight shock, as though I had been brushed unexpectedly by the
wing of a bird.
"About twenty leagues from here," she said, "is the hermitage of a
certain wise and holy anchorite. Until now he has been safe, but all
this summer the Autarch has been driven back, and soon the fury of
the war will roll over that place. Someone must go to him and
persuade him to come to us—or if he cannot be persuaded, force
him to come. I believe the Conciliator has indicated that you are to
be the messenger. Can you do it?"
"I'm no diplomatist," I told her. "But for the other business, I can
honestly say I have received long training."

XV
The Last House
Mannea had given me a rough map showing the location of the
anchorite's retreat, emphasizing that if I failed to follow the course
indicated on it precisely, I would almost certainly be unable to
locate it.
In what direction that house lay from the lazaret I cannot say. The
distances shown on the map were in proportion to their difficulty,


and turnings were adjusted to suit the dimensions of the paper. I
began by walking east, but soon found that the route I followed had
turned north, then west through a narrow canyon threaded by a
rushing stream, and at last south.
On the earliest leg of my journey, I saw a great many soldiers—
once a double column lining both sides of the road while mules
carried back the wounded down the center. Twice I was stopped,
but each time the display of my safe-conduct permitted me to
proceed. It was written on cream-colored parchment, the finest I had
then seen, and bore the narthex sigil of the order stamped in gold. It
read:
To Those Who Serve—
The letter you read shall identify our servant Severian of
Nessus, a young man dark of hair and eye, pale of face,
thin, and well above the middle height. As you honor the
memory we guard, and yourselves may wish in time for
succor and if need be an honorable interment, we beg you
not hinder this Severian as he prosecutes the business we
have entrusted to him, but rather provide him such aid as
he may require and you can supply.
For the Order of the Journeying Monials of the
Conciliator, called Pelerines, I am
The Chatelaine Mannea
Instructress and Directress
Once I had entered the narrow canyon, however, all the armies of


the world seemed to vanish. I saw no more soldiers, and the rushing
water drowned the distant thundering of the Autarch's sacars and
culverins—if indeed they could have been heard in that place at all.
The anchorite's house had been described to me and the description
augmented by a sketch on the map I carried; moreover, I had been
told that two days would be required for me to reach it. I was
considerably surprised, therefore, when, at sunset, I looked up and
saw it perched atop the cliff looming over me.
There was no mistaking it. Mannea's sketch had captured perfectly
that high, peaked gable with its air of lightness and strength.
Already a lamp shone in one small window.
In the mountains I had climbed many cliffs; some had been much
higher than this one, and some—at least in appearance—more
sheer. I had by no means been looking forward to camping among
the rocks, and as soon as I saw the anchorite's house, I decided I
would sleep in it that night.
The first third of the climb was easy. I scaled the rock face like a cat
and was more than halfway up the whole of it before the fading of
the light.
I have always had good night vision; I told myself the moon would
soon be out and continued. In that I was wrong. The old moon had
died while I lay in the lazaret, and the new would not be born for
several days. The stars shed some light, though they were crossed
and recrossed by bands of hurrying clouds; but it was a deceptive
light that seemed worse than none, save when I did not have it. I
found myself recalling then how Agia had waited with her assassins
for me to emerge from the underground realm of the man-apes. The


skin of my back crawled as though in anticipation of the arbalests'
blazing bolts.
Soon a worse difficulty overtook me: I lost my sense of balance. I
do not mean that I was entirely at the mercy of vertigo. I knew, in a
general way, that down was in the direction of my feet and up in the
direction of the stars; but I could be no more precise than that, and
because I could not, I could judge only poorly how far I might lean
out to search for each new handhold.
Just when this feeling was at its worst, the hurrying clouds closed
their ranks, and I was left in total darkness. Sometimes it seemed to
me that the cliff face had assumed a more gentle slope, so that I
might almost have stood erect and walked up it. Sometimes I felt
that it was beetling out—I must cling to the underside or fall. Often
I felt certain I had not been climbing at all, but edging long
distances to the left or right. Once I found myself almost head
downward.
At last I reached a ledge, and there I determined to stay until the
light came again. I wrapped myself in my cloak, lay down, and
shifted my body to bring my back firmly against the rock. No
resistance met it. I shifted once more and still felt nothing. I grew
afraid that my sense of direction had deserted me even as my sense
of balance had, and that I had somehow turned myself about and
was edging toward the drop. After feeling the rock to either side, I
rolled on my back and extended my arms.
At that moment there came a flash of sulfurous light that dyed the
belly of every cloud. Not far off, some great bombard had loosed its
cargo of death, and in that hectic illumination I saw that I had


gained the top of the cliff, and that the house I had seen there was
nowhere to be found. I lay upon an empty expanse of rock and felt
the first drops of the coming rain patter against my face.
Next morning, cold and miserable, I ate some of the food I had
carried from the lazaret and made my way down the farther side of
the high hill of which the cliff had formed a part. The slope there
was easier, and it was my intention to double about the shoulder of
the hill until I again reached the narrow valley indicated on my map.
I could not do so. It was not that my way was blocked, but rather
that when, after long walking, I arrived at what should have been
the location I sought, I found an entirely different place, a shallower
valley and a broader stream. After several watches wasted searching
there, I discovered the spot from which (as it seemed to me) I had
seen the anchorite's house perched upon the cliff top. Needless to
say, it was not there now, nor was the cliff so high nor so steep as I
recalled it.
It was there that I took out the map again, and studying it noticed
that Mannea had written, in a hand so fine that I could scarcely
believe it had been done with the pen I had seen her use, the words
THE LAST HOUSE beneath the image of the anchorite's dwelling.
For some reason those words and the picture of the house itself atop
its rock recalled to me the house Agia and I had seen in the Jungle
Garden, where husband and wife had sat listening to the naked man
called Isangoma. Agia, who had been wise in the ways of all the
Botanic Gardens, had told me there that if I turned on the path and
attempted to go back to the hut I should not find it. Reflecting upon
that incident, I discovered that I did not now believe her, but that I


had believed her at the time. It might be, of course, that my loss of
credulity was only a reaction to her treachery, of which I had by
now had a sufficient sample. Or it might merely be that I was far
more ingenuous then, when I was less than a day gone from the
Citadel and the nurturing of the guild. But it was also possible—so
it seemed to me now—that I had believed then because I had just
seen the thing for myself, and that the sight of it, and the knowledge
of those people, had carried its own conviction.
Father Inire was alleged to have built the Botanic Gardens. Might it
not be that some part of the knowledge he commanded was shared
by the anchorite? Father Inire, too, had built the secret room in the
House Absolute that had appeared to be a painting. I had discovered
it by accident but only because I had followed the instructions of the
old picture cleaner, who had meant that I should. Now I was no
longer following the instructions of Mannea.
I retraced my way around the shoulder of the hill and up the easy
slope. The steep cliff I recalled dropped before me, and at its base
rushed a narrow stream whose song filled all the strait valley. The
position of the sun indicated that I had at most two watches of light
remaining, but by that light the cliff was far easier to descend than it
had been to climb by night. In less than a watch I was down,
standing in the narrow valley I had left the evening before. I could
see no lamp at any window, but the Last House stood where it had
been, founded upon stone over which my boots had walked that
day. I shook my head, turned away from it, and used the dying light
to read the map Mannea had drawn for me.
Before I go further, I wish to make it clear that I am by no means


certain there was anything preternatural in all that I have described.
I saw the Last House thus twice, but on both occasions under
similar lighting, the first time being by late twilight and the second
by early twilight. It is surely possible that what I saw was no more
than a creation of rocks and shadows, the illuminated window a star.
As to the vanishing of the narrow valley when I tried to come upon
it from the other direction, there is no geographical feature more
prone to disappear from sight than such a narrow declivity. The
slightest unevenness in the ground conceals it. To protect
themselves from marauders, some of the autochthonous peoples of
the pampas go so far as to build their villages in that form, first
digging a pit whose bottom can be reached by a ramp, then
excavating houses and stables from the sides of it. As soon as the
grass has covered the cast-out earth, which occurs very rapidly after
the winter rains, one may ride to within half a chain of such a place
without realizing it exists.
But though I may have been such a fool, I do not believe I was.
Master Palaemon used to say that the supernatural exists in order
that we may not be humiliated at being frightened by the night
wind; but I prefer to believe that there was some element truly
uncanny surrounding that house. I believe it now more firmly than I
did then.
However it may be, I followed the map I had been given from that
time forward, and before the night was more than two watches old,
found myself climbing a path that led to the door of the Last House,
which stood at the edge of just such a cliff as I remembered. As
Mannea had said, the trip had taken just two days.


XVI
The Anchorite
There was a porch. It was hardly higher than the stone upon which
it stood, but it ran to either side of the house and around the corners,
like those long porches one sometimes sees on the better sort of
country houses, where there is little to fear and the owners like to sit
in the cool of the evening and watch Urth fall below Lune. I rapped
at the door, and then, when no one answered, walked around this
porch, first right, then left, peering in the windows.
It was too dark inside for me to see anything, but I found that the
porch circled the house as far as the edge of the cliff, and there
ended without a railing. I knocked again as fruitlessly as before and
had laid myself on the porch to sleep (for having a roof over it, it
was a better place than any I was likely to find among the rocks)
when I heard faint footsteps.
Somewhere high in that high house, a man was walking. His steps
were but slow at first, so that I thought he must be an old man or a
sick one. As they came nearer, however, they became firmer and
more swift, until as they neared the door they seemed the regular
tread of a man of purpose, such a one as might, perhaps, command a
maniple, or an ile of cavalry.
I had stood again by then and dusted my cloak and made myself as
presentable as I could, yet I was only poorly prepared for him I saw
when the door swung back. He carried a candle as thick as my wrist,


and by its light I beheld a face that was like the faces of the
Hierodules I had met in Baldan-ders's castle, save that it was a
human face—indeed, I felt that as the faces of the statues in the
gardens of the House Absolute had imitated the faces of such beings
as Famulimus, Barbatus, and Ossipago, so their faces were only
imitations, in some alien medium, of such faces as the one I saw
now. I have said often in this account that I remember everything,
and so I do; but when I try to sketch that face beside these words of
mine I find I cannot do so. No drawing that I make resembles it in
the least. I can only say that the brows were heavy and straight, the
eyes deep-set and deep blue, as Thecla's were. This man's skin was
fine as a woman's too, but there was nothing womanish about him,
and the beard that flowed to his waist was of darkest black. His robe
seemed white, but there was a rainbow shimmering where it caught
the candlelight.
I bowed as I had been taught in the Matachin Tower and told him
my name and who had sent me. Then I said, "And are you, sieur, the
anchorite of the Last House?"
He nodded. "I am the last man here. You may call me Ash."
He stood to one side, indicating that I should enter, then led me to a
room at the rear of the house, where a wide window overlooked the
valley from which I had climbed the night before. There were
wooden chairs there and a wooden table. Metal chests, dully
gleaming in the candlelight, rested in the corners and in the angles
between floor and walls.
"You must pardon the poor appearance of this place," he said. "It is
here that I receive company, but I have so little company that I have


begun to use it as a storeroom."
"When one lives alone in such a lonely spot, it is well to seem poor,
Master Ash. This room, however, does not."
I had not thought that face capable of smiling, yet he smiled. "You
wish to see my treasures? Look." He rose and opened a chest,
holding the candle so that it lit the interior. There were square
loaves of hard bread and packages of pressed figs. Seeing my
expression he asked, "Are you hungry? There is no spell upon this
food, if you are fearful of such things."
I was ashamed, because I had carried food for the journey and still
had some left for the return; but I said, "I would like some of that
bread, if you can spare it."
He gave me half a loaf already cut (and with a very sharp knife),
cheese wrapped in silver paper, and dry yellow wine.
"Mannea is a good woman," he told me. "And you, I think, are a
good man of the kind who does not know himself to be one—some
say that is the only kind. Does she think I can help you?"
"Rather she believes that I can help you, Master Ash. The armies of
the Commonwealth are in retreat, and soon the battle will
overwhelm all this part of the country, and after the battle, the
Ascians."
He smiled again. "The men without shadows. It is one of those
names, of which there are many, that are in error and yet perfectly
correct. What would you think if an Ascian told you he really cast
no shadow?"
"I don't know," I said. "I never heard of such a thing."


"It is an old story. Do you like old stories? Ah, I see a light in your
eyes, and I wish I could tell it better. You call your enemies
Ascians, which of course is not what they call themselves, because
your fathers believed they came from the waist of Urth, where the
sun is precisely overhead at noon. The truth is that their home is
much farther north. Yet Ascians they are. In a fable made in the
earliest morning of our race, a man sold his shadow and found
himself driven out everywhere he went. No one would believe that
he was human."
Sipping wine, I thought of the Ascian prisoner whose cot had stood
beside my own. "Did this man ever regain his shadow, Master Ash?"
"No. But for a time he traveled with a man who had no reflection."
Master Ash fell silent. Then he said, "Mannea is a good woman; I
wish that I could oblige you. But I cannot go, and the war will never
reach me here, no matter how its columns march."
I said, "Perhaps it would be possible for you to come with me and
reassure the Chatelaine."
"That I cannot do either."
I saw then that I would have to force him to accompany me, but
there seemed to be no reason to resort to duress now; there would be
plenty of opportunity in the morning. I shrugged my shoulders as
though in resignation and asked, "May I then at least sleep here
tonight? I will have to return and report your decision, but the
distance is fifteen leagues or more, and I could not walk much
farther now."
Again I saw his faint smile, just such a smile as a carving of ivory


might make when the motion of a torch altered the shadow of its
lips. "I had hoped to have some news of the world from you," he
said. "But I see that you are weary. Come with me when you have
finished eating. I will show you to your bed."
"I have no courtly manners, Master, but I am not so ill-bred as to
sleep when my host still desires my conversation— though I'm
afraid I have little enough news to give. From what I've learned
from my fellow sufferers in the lazaret, the war proceeds and waxes
hotter each day. We are reinforced with legions and half legions,
they by whole armies sent down from the north. They have much
artillery too, and therefore we must rely more upon our mounted
lances, who can charge swiftly and engage the enemy closely before
his heavy pieces can be pointed. They have more fliers also than
they boasted last year, although we have destroyed many. The
Autarch himself has come to command, bringing many of his
household troops from the House Absolute. But…" Shrugging
again, I paused to take a bite of bread and cheese.
"The study of war has always seemed to me the least interesting part
of history. Even so, there are certain patterns. When one side in a
long war shows sudden strength, it is usually for one of three
reasons. The first is that it has formed some new alliance. Do the
soldiers of these new armies differ in any way from those in the
old?"
"Yes," I said. "I have heard that they are younger and on the whole
less strong. And there are more women among them."
"No differences in tongue or dress?"
I shook my head.


"Then for the present at least we can dismiss an alliance. The
second possibility would be the termination of another war, fought
elsewhere. If that were so, the reinforcements would be veterans.
You say they are not, thus only the third remains. For some reason
your foes have need of an immediate victory and are straining every
limb."
I had finished the bread, but I was truly curious by now. "Why
should that be?"
"Without knowing more than I do, I cannot say. Perhaps their
leaders fear their people, who have sickened of the war. Perhaps all
the Ascians are only servants, and their masters now threaten to act
for themselves."
"You extend hope at one moment and snatch it away at the next."
"Not I, but history. Have you yourself been at the front?"
I shook my head.
"That is well. In many respects, the more a man sees of war the less
he knows of it. How stand the people of your Commonwealth? Are
they united behind their Autarch? Or has the war so worn them that
they shout for peace?"
I laughed at that, and all the old bitterness that had helped draw me
to Vodalus came rushing back. "Unite? Shout? I know that you have
isolated yourself, Master, to fix your mind on higher things, but I
would not have thought any man could know so little of the land in
which he lives. Careerists, mercenaries, and young would-be
adventurers fight the war. A hundred leagues south it is less than a
rumor, outside the House Absolute."


Master Ash pursed his lips. "Your Commonwealth is stronger than I
would have believed, then. No wonder your foes are in despair."
"If that is strength, may the All Merciful preserve us from
weakness. Master Ash, the front may collapse at any time. It would
be wise for you to come with me to a safer place."
He appeared not to have heard. "If Erebus and Abaia and the rest
enter the field themselves, it will be a new struggle. If and when.
Interesting. But you are tired. Come with me. I will show you your
bed and the high matters that, as you said a moment ago, I came
here to study."
We ascended two flights and entered a room that must have been
the one in which I had seen a light the evening before. It was a wide
chamber of many windows, and it occupied the entire story. There
were machines there, but they were smaller and fewer than those I
had seen in Baldanders's castle, and there were tables too, and
papers, and many books, and near the center a narrow bed.
"Here I nap," Master Ash explained, "when my work will not let me
retire. It is not large for a man of your frame, but I think you will
find it comfortable."
I had slept on stone the night before; it looked very appealing
indeed.
After showing me where I could relieve myself and wash, he left.
My last glimpse of him before he darkened the light caught the
same perfect smile I had seen before.
An instant later, when my eyes had grown accustomed to the dark, I
ceased to wonder about it, for outside all those many windows there


shone an unbounded pearly radiance. "We are above the clouds," I
said to myself (I, too, half smiling), "or rather, some low clouds
have come to shroud this hilltop, unnoticed by me in the darkness
but known in some fashion to him. Now I see the tops of those
clouds, high matters surely, as I saw the tops of clouds from
Typhon's eyes." And I laid myself down to sleep.

XVII
Ragnarok—The Final Winter
It seemed strange to wake without a weapon, though for some
reason I cannot explain, that was the first morning on which I had
felt so. After the destruction of Terminus Est I had slept at the
sacking of Baldanders's castle without fear, and later journeyed
north without fear. Only the night before, I had slept upon the bare
rock of the cliff top weaponless and—perhaps only because I had
been so tired—had not been afraid. I now think that during all those
days, and indeed during all the days since I had left Thrax, I had
been putting the guild behind me and coming to believe that I was
what those who encountered me took me for—the sort of would-be
adventurer I had mentioned the night before to Master Ash. As a
torturer, I had not so much considered my sword a weapon as a tool
and a badge of office. Now in retrospect it had become a weapon to
me, and I had no weapon. I thought about that as I lay upon my
back on Master Ash's comfortable mattress, my hands behind my
head. I would have to acquire another sword if I remained in the
war-torn lands, and it would be wise to have one even if I turned


south again. The question was whether to turn south or not. If I
remained where I was, I risked being drawn into the fighting, where
I might well be killed. But for me a return to the south would be
even more dangerous. Abdiesus, the archon of Thrax, had no doubt
posted a reward for my capture, and the guild would almost
certainly procure my assassination if they learned I was anywhere
near Nessus.
After vacillating over this decision for some time, as one does when
only half-awake, I recalled Winnoc and what he had told me of the
slaves of the Pelerines. Because it is a disgrace to us if our clients
die after torment, we are taught a good deal of leech-craft in the
guild; I thought I knew already at least as much as they. When I had
cured the girl in the jacal, I had felt suddenly uplifted. The
Chatelaine Mannea had a good opinion of me already and would
have a better one when I returned with Master Ash.
A few moments before, I had been disturbed because I lacked a
weapon. Now I felt I had one—resolution and a plan are better than
a sword, because a man whets his own edges on them. I threw off
the blankets, noticing then for the first time, I think, how soft they
were. The big room was cold but filled with sunlight; it was almost
as though there were suns on all four sides, as though all the walls
were east walls. I walked naked to the nearest window and saw that
undulating field of white I had vaguely noted the evening before.
It was not a mass of cloud but a plain of ice. The window would not
open, or if it would, I could not solve the puzzle of its mechanism;
but I put my face close to the glass and peered downward as well as
I could. The Last House rose, as I had seen before, from a high hill


of rock. Now this hilltop alone remained above the ice. I went from
window to window, and the view from each was the same. Going
back to the bed that had been mine, I pulled on my trousers and
boots, and slung my cloak about my shoulders, hardly knowing
what it was I did.
Master Ash appeared just as I finished dressing. "I hope I do not
intrude," he said. "I heard you walking up here."
I shook my head.
"I did not want you to become disturbed."
Without my willing it, my hands had gone to my face. Now some
foolish part of me became aware of my bristling beard. I said, "I
meant to shave before putting on my cloak. That was stupid of me. I
haven't shaved since I left the lazaret." It was as though my mind
were trudging across the ice, leaving my tongue and lips to get
along as best they might.
"There is hot water here, and soap."
"That's good," I said. And then, "If I go downstairs…"
That smile again. "Will it be the same? The ice? No. You are the
first to have guessed. May I ask how you did it?"
"A long time ago—no, only a few months, actually, though it seems
like such a long time now—I went to the Botanic Gardens in
Nessus. There was a place called the Lake of Birds, where the
bodies of the dead seemed to remain fresh forever. I was told it was
some property of the water, but I wondered even then that there
should be so much power in water. There was another place too,
that they called the Jungle Garden, where the leaves were greener


than I have ever known leaves to be—not a bright green but dark
with greenness, as if the plants could never use all the energy the
sun poured down. The people there seemed not of our time, though
I could not say if they were of the past, or the future, or some third
thing that is neither. They had a little house. It was much smaller
than this, but this reminds me of it. I've thought often of the Botanic
Gardens since I left them, and sometimes I've wondered if their
secret were not that the time never changed in the Lake of Birds,
and that one moved forward or backward—however it might be—
when walking the path of the Jungle Garden. Am I perhaps
speaking overmuch?"
Master Ash shook his head.
"Then when I was coming here, I saw your house at the top of this
hill. But when I climbed to it, it was gone, and the valley below was
not as I remembered it." I did not know what else to say, and fell
silent.
"You are correct," Master Ash told me. "I have been put here to
observe what you see about you now. The lower stories of my
home, however, reach into older periods, of which yours is the
oldest."
"That seems a great wonder."
He shook his head. "It is almost more wonderful that this spur of
rock has been spared by the glaciers. The tops of peaks far higher
are submerged. It is sheltered by a geographic pattern so subtle that
it could only be achieved by accident."
"But it too will be covered at last?" I asked.


"Yes."
"And what then?"
"I shall leave. Or rather, I shall leave some time before it occurs."
I felt a surge of irrational anger, the same emotion I had sometimes
known as a boy when I could not make Master Malrubius
understand my questions. "I meant, what of Urth?"
He shrugged. "Nothing. What you see is the last glacia-tion. The
surface of the sun is dull now; soon it will grow bright with heat,
but the sun itself will shrink, giving less energy to its worlds.
Eventually, should anyone come and stand upon the ice, he will see
it only as a bright star. The ice he stands upon will not be that which
you see but the atmosphere of this world. And so it will remain for a
very long time. Perhaps until the close of the universal day."
I went to another window and looked out again on the expanse of
ice. "Will this happen soon?"
"The scene you see is many thousands of years in your future."
"But before this, the ice must have come from the south."
Master Ash nodded. "And down from the mountaintops. Come with
me."
We descended to the second level of the house, which I had scarcely
noticed when I had come upstairs the night before. The windows
were far fewer there, but Master Ash placed chairs before one and
indicated that we would sit and look out. It was as he had said—ice,
lovely in its purity, crept down the mountainsides to war with the
pines. I asked if this too were far in the future, and he nodded once
more. "You will not live to see it again."


"But so near that the life of a man will nearly reach it?"
He twitched his shoulders and smiled beneath his beard. "Let us say
it is a thing of degree. You will not see this. Nor will your children,
nor theirs. But the process has already begun. It began long before
you were born."
I knew nothing of the south, but I found myself thinking of the
island people of Hallvard's story, the precious little sheltered places
with a growing season, the hunting of the seals. Those islands
would not hold men and their families much longer. The boats
would scrape over their stony beaches for the last time. "My wife,
my children, my children, my wife."
"At this time, many of your people are already gone," Master Ash
continued. "Those you call the cacogens have mercifully carried
them to fairer worlds. Many more will leave before the final victory
of the ice. I am myself, you see, descended from those refugees."
I asked if everyone would escape.
He shook his head. "No, not everyone. Some would not go, some
could not be found. No home could be found for others."
For some time I sat looking out at the beleaguered valley and trying
to order my thoughts. At last I said, "I have always found that men
of religion tell comforting things that are not true, while men of
science recount hideous truths. The Chatelaine Mannea said you
were a holy man, but you appear to be a man of science, and you
said your people had sent you to our dead Urth to study the ice."
"The distinction you mention no longer holds. Religion and science
have always been matters of faith in something.


It is the same something. You are yourself what you call a man of
science, so I talk of science to you. If Mannea were here with her
priestesses, I would talk differently."
I have so many memories that I often become lost among them.
Now as I looked at the pines, waving in a wind I could not feel, I
seemed to hear the beating of a drum. "I met another man who said
he was from the future once," I said. "He was green—nearly as
green as those trees—and he told me that his time was a time of
brighter sun."
Master Ash nodded. "No doubt he spoke truly."
"But you tell me that what I see now is but a few lifetimes away,
that it is part of a process already begun, and that this will be the
last glaciation. Either you are a false prophet or he was."
"I am not a prophet," answered Master Ash, "nor was he. No one
can know the future. We are speaking of the past."
I was angry again. "You told me this was only a few lifetimes
away."
"I did. But you, and this scene, are past events for me."
"I am not a thing of the past! I belong to the present."
"From your own viewpoint you are correct. But you forget I cannot
see you from your viewpoint. This is my house. It is through my
windows that you have looked. My house strikes its roots into the
past. Without that I should go mad here. As it is, I read these old
centuries like books. I hear the voices of the long dead, yours
among them. You think that time is a single thread. It is a weaving,
a tapestry that extends forever in all directions. I follow a thread


backward. You will trace a color forward, what color I cannot
know. White may lead you to me, green to your green man."
Not knowing what to say, I could only mutter that I had conceived
of time as a river.
"Yes—you came from Nessus, did you not? And that was a city
built about a river. But it was once a city by the sea, and you would
do better to think of time as a sea. The waves ebb and flow, and
currents run beneath them."
"I would like to go downstairs," I said. "To return to my own time."
Master Ash said, "I understand."
"I wonder if you do. Your time, if I have heard you rightly, is that of
this house's highest story, and you have a bed there, and other
necessary things. Yet when you are not overwhelmed by your labors
you sleep here, according to what you have told me. Yet you say
this is nearer my time than your own."
He stood up. "I meant that I too flee the ice. Shall we go? You will
want food before you begin the long trip back to Mannea."
"We both will," I said.
He turned to look at me before he started down the stair. "I told you
I could not go with you. You have discovered for yourself how well
hidden this house is. For all who do not walk the path correctly,
even the lowest story stands in the future."
I caught both his arms behind him in a double lock and used my
free hand to search him for weapons. There were none, and though
he was strong, he was not as strong as I had feared he might be.
"You plan to carry me to Mannea. Is that correct?"


"Yes, Master, and we'll have a great deal less trouble if you will go
willingly. Tell me where I can find some rope—I don't want to have
to use the belt of your robe."
"There is none," he told me.
I bound his hands with his cincture, as I had first planned. "When
we are some distance from here," I said, "1 will loose you if you
will give me your word to behave well."
"I made you welcome in my house. What harm have I done you?"
"Quite a bit, but that doesn't matter. I like you, Master Ash, and I
respect you. I hope that you won't hold what I am doing to you
against me any more than I hold what you have done to me against
you. But the Pelerines sent me to fetch you, and I find I am a certain
sort of man, if you understand what I mean. Now don't go down the
steps too fast. If you fall, you won't be able to catch yourself."
I led him to the room to which he had first taken me and got some
of the hard bread and a package of dried fruit. "I don't think of
myself as one anymore," I continued, "but I was brought up as—" It
was at my lips to say torturer, but I realized (then, I think, for the
first time) that it was not quite the correct term for what the guild
did and used the official one instead, "—as a Seeker for Truth and
Penitence. We do what we have said we will do."
"I have duties to perform. In the upper level, where you slept."
"I am afraid they must go unperformed."
He was silent as we went out the door and onto the rocky hilltop.
Then he said, "I will go with you, if I can. I have often wished to
walk out of this door and never halt."


I told him that if he would swear upon his honor, I would untie him
at once.
He shook his head. "You might think that I betrayed you."
I did not know what he meant.
"Perhaps somewhere there is the woman I have called Vine. But
your world is your world. I can exist there only if the probability of
my existence is high."
I said, "I existed in your house, didn't I?"
"Yes, but that was because your probability was complete. You are
a part of the past from which my house and I have come. The
question is whether I am the future to which you go."
I remembered the green man in Saltus, who had been solid enough.
"Will you vanish like a soap bubble then?" I asked. "Or blow away
like smoke?"
"I do not know," he said. "I do not know what will happen to me. Or
where I will go when it does. I may cease to exist in any time. That
was why I never left of my own will."
I took him by one arm, I suppose because I thought I could keep
him with me in that way, and we walked on. I followed the route
Mannea had drawn for me, and the Last House rose behind us as
solidly as any other. My mind was busy with all the things he had
told me and showed me, so that for a while, the space of twenty or
thirty paces, perhaps, I did not look around at him. At last his
remark about the tapestry suggested Valeria to me. The room where
we had eaten cakes had been hung with them, and what he had said
about tracing threads suggested the maze of tunnels through which I


had run before encountering her. I started to tell him of it, but he
was gone. My hand grasped empty air. For a moment I seemed to
see the Last House afloat like a ship upon its ocean of ice. Then it
merged into the dark hilltop on which it had stood; the ice was no
more than what I had once taken it to be—a bank of cloud.

XVIII
Foila's Request
For another hundred paces or more, Master Ash was not entirely
gone. I felt his presence, and sometimes even caught sight of him,
walking beside me and half a step behind, when I did not try to look
directly at him. How I saw him, how he could in some sense be
present while in another absent, I do not know. Our eyes receive a
rain of photons without mass or charge from swarming particles like
a billion, billion suns—so Master Palaemon, who was nearly blind,
had taught me. From the pattering of those photons we believe we
see a man. Sometimes the man we believe we see may be as illusory
as Master Ash, or more so.
His wisdom I felt with me too. It had been a melancholy wisdom,
but a real one. I found myself wishing he had been able to
accompany me, though I realized it would have meant the coming
of the ice was certain. "I'm lonely, Master Ash," I said, not daring to
look back. "How lonely I didn't realize until now. You were lonely
also, I think. Who was the woman you called Vine?"
Perhaps I only imagined his voice. "The first woman." "Meschiane?


Yes, I know her, and she is very lovely. My Meschiane was Dorcas,
and I am lonely for her, but for all the others too. When Thecla
became a part of me, I thought I would never be lonely again. But
now she is so much a part that we're only one person, and I can be
lonely for others. For Dorcas, for Pia the island girl, for little
Severian and Drotte and Roche. If Eata were here, I could hug him.
"Most of all, I'd like to see Valeria. Jolenta was the most beautiful
woman I've ever seen, but there was something in Valeria's face that
tore my heart out. I was only a boy, I suppose, though I didn't think
so then. I crawled up out of the dark and found myself in a place
they called the Atrium of Time. Towers—the towers of Valeria's
family—rose on all sides of it. In the center was an obelisk covered
with sundials, and though I remember its shadow on the snow, it
couldn't have had sunlight there for more than two or three watches
of each day; the towers must shade it most of the time. Your
understanding is deeper than mine, Master Ash—can you tell me
why they might have built it so?"
A wind that played among the rocks seized my cloak so that it
billowed from my shoulders. I secured it again and pulled up my
hood. "I was following a dog. I called him Triskele, and I said, even
to myself, that he was mine, though I had no right to keep a dog. It
was a winter day when I found him. We'd been doing laundry—
washing the clients' bedclothes—and the drain plugged with rags
and lint. I'd been shirking my work, and Drotte told me to go
outside and ram a clothes prop up it. The wind was terribly cold.
That was your ice coming, I suppose, though I didn't know it at the
time—the winters getting a little worse each year. And of course


when I got the drain open, a gush of filthy water would come out
and wet my hands.
"I was angry because I was the oldest, except for Drotte and Roche,
and I thought the younger apprentices ought to have to do the work.
I was poking at the clog with my stick when I saw him across the
Old Yard. The keepers in the Bear Tower had held a private fight, I
suppose, the night before, and the dead beasts were lying outside
their door waiting for the nacker. There was an arsinoither and a
smilodon, and several dire wolves. The dog was lying on top. I
suppose he had been the last to die, and from his wounds one of the
dire wolves had killed him. Of course, he wasn't really dead, but he
looked dead.
"I went over to see him—it was an excuse to stop what I was doing
for a moment and blow on my fingers. He was as stiff and cold as…
well, as anything I've ever seen. I killed a bull once with my sword,
and when it was lying dead in its own blood it still looked quite a bit
more living than Triskele did then. Anyway, I reached out and
stroked his head. It was as big as a bear's, and they had cut off his
ears, so that only two little points were left. When I touched him he
opened his eyes. I dashed back across the Yard and rammed the
stick up so hard it broke through at once, because I was afraid
Drotte would send Roche down to see what I was doing.
"When I think back on it, it was as if I had the Claw already, more
than a year before I got it. I can't describe how he looked when he
rolled his eye up to see me. He touched my heart. I never revived an
animal when I had the Claw, but then I never tried. When I was
among them, I was usually wishing I could kill one, because I


wanted something to eat. Now I'm no longer sure that killing
animals to eat is something we are meant to do. I noticed that you
had no meat in your supplies—only bread and cheese, and wine and
dried fruit. Do your people, on whatever world it is where people
live in your time, feel so too?"
I paused, hoping for an answer, but none came. All the
mountaintops had dropped below the sun now; I was no longer
certain whether some thin presence of Master Ash followed me or
only my shadow.
I said, "When I had the Claw I found that it would not revive those
dead by human acts, though it seemed to heal the man-ape whose
hand I had struck off. Dorcas thought it was because I had done it
myself. I can't say—I never thought the Claw knew who held it, but
perhaps it did."
A voice—not Master Ash's but a voice I had never heard before—
called out, "A fine new year to you!"
I looked up and and saw, perhaps forty paces off, just such an uhlan
as Hethor's notules had killed on the green road to the House
Absolute. Not knowing what else to do, I waved and shouted, "Is it
New Year's Day, then?"
He touched spurs to his destrier and came galloping up. "Mid
summer today, the beginning of the new year. A glorious one for
our Autarch."
I tried to recall some of the phrases Jolenta had been so fond of.
"Whose heart is the shrine of his subjects."
"Well said! I'm Ibar, of the Seventy-eighth Xenagie, patrolling the


road until evening, worse luck."
"Surely it's lawful to use the road here."
"Entirely. Provided, of course, that you are prepared to identify
yourself."
"Yes," I said. "Of course." I had almost forgotten the safe-conduct
Mannea had written for me. Now I took it out and handed it to him.
When I had been stopped on my way to the Last House, I had by no
means been sure that the soldiers who had questioned me could
read. Each had stared wisely at the parchment, but it might well
have been that they took in no more than the sigil of the order and
Mannea's regular and vigorous, though slightly eccentric,
penmanship. The uhlan unquestionably could. I could see his eyes
traveling the lines of script, and even guess, I think, when they
paused momentarily at "honorable interment."
He refolded the parchment carefully but retained it. "So you are a
servant of the Pelerines."
"I have that honor, yes."
"You were praying, then. I thought you were talking to yourself
when I saw you. I don't hold with any religious nonsense. We have
the standard of the xenagie near at hand and the Autarch at a
distance, and that's all I need of reverence and mystery; but I have
heard that they were good women."
I nodded. "I believe—perhaps somewhat more than you. But they
are indeed."
"And you were sent on a task for them. How many days ago?"
"Three."


"Are you returning to the lazaret at Media Pars now?"
I nodded again. "I hope to reach it before nightfall."
He shook his head. "You won't. Take it easy, that's my advice to
you." He held out the parchment.
I took it and returned it to my sabretache. "I was traveling with a
companion, but we were separated. I wonder if you've seen him." I
described Master Ash.
The uhlan shook his head. "I'll keep an eye out for him and tell him
which way you went if I see him. Now—will you answer a question
for me? It's not official, so you can tell me it's none of my affair if
you want."
"I will if I can."
"What will you do when you leave the Pelerines?"
I was somewhat taken aback. "Why, I hadn't planned to leave at all.
Someday, perhaps."
"Well, keep the light cavalry in mind. You look like a man of your
hands, and we can always use one. You'll live half as long as you
would in the infantry, and have twice as much fun."
He urged his mount forward, and I was left to ponder what he had
said. I did not doubt that he had been serious in telling me to sleep
on the road; but that very seriousness made me hurry forward all the
faster. I have been blessed with long legs, so that when I need to I
can walk as fast as most men can trot. I used them then, dropping all
thoughts of Master Ash and my own troubled past. Perhaps some
thin presence of Master Ash still accompanied me; perhaps it does


so yet. But if it did, I was and remain unaware of it.
Urth had not yet turned her face from the sun when I came to that
narrow road the dead soldier and I had taken only a little over a
week before. There was blood in its dust still, much more than I had
seen there previously. I had feared from what the uhlan had said that
the Pelerines had been accused of some misdeed; now 1 felt sure
that it was only that a great influx of wounded had been brought to
the lazaret, and he had decided I deserved a night's rest before being
set to work on them. That thought was a vast relief to me. A
superabundance of the injured would give me an opportunity to
show my skills and render it that much more likely that Mannea
would accept me when I offered to sell myself to the order, if only 1
could contrive some tale to account for my failure at the Last House.
When I turned the final bend in the road, however, what I saw was
entirely different.
Where the lazaret had stood, the ground seemed to have been
plowed by a host of madmen, plowed and dug—its bottom already a
small lake of shallow water. Shattered trees rimmed the circle.
Until darkness came, I walked back and forth across it. I was
looking for some sign of my friends, and also for some trace of the
altar that had held the Claw. I found a human hand, a man's hand,
blown off at the wrist. It might have been Melito's, or Hallvard's, or
the Ascian's, or Winnoc's. I could not tell.
I slept beside the road that night. When morning came I began my
inquiries, and before evening I had located the survivors, some half
dozen leagues from the original site. I went from cot to cot, but
many were unconscious and so bandaged about the head that I could


not have known them. It is possible that Ava, Mannea, and the
Pelerine who had carried a stool to my bedside were among them,
though I did not discover them there.
The only woman I recognized was Foila, and that only because she
recognized me, calling "Severian!" as I walked among the wounded
and dying. I went to her and tried to question her, but she was very
weak and could tell me little. The attack had come without warning
and shattered the lazaret like a thunderbolt; her memories were all
of the aftermath, of hearing the screams that for a long time had
brought no rescuers, and at last being dragged forth by soldiers who
knew little of medicine. I kissed her as well as I could, and
promised to come and see her again—a promise, I think, that both
of us knew I would not be able to keep. She said, "Do you recall the
time when all of us told stories? I thought of that."
I said I knew she had.
"I mean while they were carrying us here. Melito and Hallvard and
the rest are dead, I think. You will be the only one who remembers,
Severian."
I told her I would remember always.
"I want you to tell other people. On winter days, or a night when
there is nothing else to do. Do you remember the stories?"
" 'My land is the land of far horizons, of the wide sky.' "
"Yes," she said, and seemed to sleep.
My second promise I have kept, first copying all the stories onto the
blank pages at the close of the brown book, then giving them here,
just as I heard them in the long, warm noons.


XIX
Guasacht
The next two days I spent in wandering. I will not say much of them
here, for there is little to say. I might, I suppose, have enlisted in
several units, but I was far from sure I wanted to enlist. I would
have liked to return to the Last House, but I was too proud to cast
myself on Master Ash's charity, assuming that Master Ash was
again to be found there. I told myself I would gladly have returned
to the post of Lictor of Thrax, yet if that had been possible, I am not
certain I would have done so. I slept like an animal in wooded
places and took what food I could, which was little.
On the third day I discovered a rusty falchion, dropped, as it
appeared, in some campaign of the year before. I got out my little
flask of oil and my broken whetstone (both of which I had retained,
together with her hilt, when I had cast the wreck of Terminus Est
into the water) and spent a happy watch in cleaning and sharpening
it. When that was done, I trudged on, and soon struck a road.
With the protection of Mannea's safe-conduct effectively removed, I
was more chary of showing myself than I had been on my way from
Master Ash's. But it seemed probable that the dead soldier the Claw
had raised, who now called himself Miles though I knew some part
of him to be Jonas, had by now joined some unit. If so, he would be
on a road or in camp near one, if he was not actually in battle; and I
wished to speak to him. Like Dorcas, he had paused a time in the
country of the dead. She had dwelt there longer, but I hoped that if I


could question him before too much time had erased his memories
of it, I might learn something that would—if not permit me to
regain her—at least help reconcile me to her loss.
For I found I loved her now as I never had when we tramped crosscountry to Thrax. Then my thoughts had been too much of Thecla; I
had always been reaching inside myself to find her. Now it seemed,
if only because she had been a part of me so long, that I had grasped
her indeed, in an embrace more final than any coupling—or rather,
that as the male's seed penetrates the female body to produce (if it
be the will of Apeiron) a new human being, so she, entering my
mouth, by my will had combined with the Severian that was to
establish a new man: I who still call myself Severian but am
conscious, as it were, of my double root.
Whether I could have learned what I sought from Miles-Jonas, I do
not know. I have never found him, though I have persevered in the
search from that day to this. By midafter-noon I had entered a realm
of broken trees, and from time to time I passed corpses in more or
less advanced stages of decay. At first I tried to pillage them as I
had the body of Miles-Jonas, but others had been there before me,
and indeed the fennecs had come in the night with their sharp little
teeth to loot the flesh.
Somewhat later, as my energies were beginning to flag, I paused at
the smoldering remains of an empty supply wagon. The draft
animals, which had not, it appeared, been dead long, lay in the road,
with their driver pitched on his face between them; and it occurred
to me that I might do worse than to cut as much meat as I wanted
from their flanks and carry it to some isolated spot where I could


kindle a fire. I had fleshed the point of the falchion in the haunch of
one of these animals when I heard the drumming of hoofs, and
supposing them to belong to the destrier of an estafette, moved to
the edge of the road to let him pass.
It was instead a short, thick-bodied, energetic-looking man on a tall,
ill-used mount. He reined up at the sight of me, but something in his
expression told me there was no need for fight or flight. (If there
had been, it would have been fight. His destrier would have done
him little good among the stumps and fallen logs, and despite his
haubergeon and brass-ringed buff cap, I thought I could best him.)
"Who are you?" he called. And when I told him, "Severian of
Nessus, eh? You're civilized then, or half-civilized, but you don't
look like you've been eating too well."
"On the contrary," I said. "Better than I've been accustomed to,
recently." I did not want him to think me weak.
"But you could use some more—that's not Ascian blood on your
sword. You're a schiavoni? An irregular?"
"My life has been pretty irregular of late, certainly."
"But you're attached to no formation?" With startling dexterity he
vaulted from his saddle, threw the reins to the ground, and came
striding over. He was slightly bowlegged and had one of those faces
that appear to have been molded in clay and flattened from the top
and bottom before firing, so that the forehead and chin are shallow
but broad, the eyes slits, the mouth wide. Still I liked him at once
for his verve, and because he took so little trouble to hide his
dishonesty.


I said, "I'm attached to nothing and no one—memories excepted."
"Ahh!" He sighed, and for an instant rolled his eyes upward. "I know
—I know. We have all had our difficulties, every one of us. What
was it, a woman or the law?"
I had not previously viewed my troubles in that light, but after
thinking for a moment I admitted it had been a bit of both.
"Well, you've come to the right place and you've met the right man.
How'd you like a good meal tonight, a whole crowd of new friends,
and a handful of orichalks tomorrow? Sound good? Good!"
He returned to his mount, and his hand darted out as quickly as a
fencer's blade to grasp her bridle before she could shy away. When
he had the reins again, he leaped into the saddle as readily as he had
left it. "Now you get up behind me," he called. "It's not far, and
she'll carry two easily enough."
I did as he told me, though with considerably more difficulty since I
had no stirrup to assist me. The instant I was seated, the destrier
struck like a bushmaster at my leg; but her master, who had clearly
been anticipating the maneuver, clubbed her so hard with the brass
pommel of his poniard that she stumbled and nearly fell.
"Pay no mind," he said. The shortness of his neck did not permit
him to look over his shoulder, so he spoke out of the left side of his
mouth to make it clear he was addressing me. "She's a fine animal
and a plucky fighter, and she just wants to make sure you
understand her value. A sort of initiation, you know. You know
what an initiation is?"
I told him I thought myself familiar with the term.


"Anything that's worth belonging to has one, you'll find— I've
found that out myself. I've never seen one that a plucky lad couldn't
handle and laugh about afterwards."
With that cryptic encouragement he set his enormous spurs to the
sides of his fine animal as if he meant to eviscerate her on the spot,
and we went flying down the road, trailed by a cloud of dust.
Since the time I had ridden Vodalus's charger out of Saltus, I had
supposed in my innocence that all mounts might be divided into two
sorts: the highbred and swift, and the cold-blooded and slow. The
better, I thought, ran with the graceful ease, almost, of a coursing
cat; the worse moved so tardily that it hardly mattered how they did
it. It used to be a maxim of one of Thecla's tutors that all two-valued
systems are false, and I discovered on that ride a new respect for
him. My benefactor's mount belonged to that third class (which I
have since discovered is fairly extensive) comprising those animals
that outrace the birds but seem to run with legs of iron upon a road
of stone. Men have numberless advantages over women and for that
reason are rightly charged to protect them, yet there is one great one
women may boast over men: No woman has ever had her organs of
generation crushed between her own pelvis and the bony spine of
one of these galloping brutes. That happened to me twenty or thirty
times before we reined up, and when I slid over the crupper at last
and leaped aside to dodge a kick, I was in no very good mood.
We had halted in one of those little, lost fields one sometimes finds
among the hills, an area more or less level and a hundred strides or
so across. A tent the size of a cottage had been erected in the center,
with a faded flag of black and green flapping before it. Several


score hobbled mounts grazed at will over the field, and an equal
number of ragged men, with a sprinkling of unkempt women,
lounged about cleaning armor, sleeping, and gambling.
"Look here!" my benefactor shouted, dismounting to stand beside
me. "Here's a new recruit!" To me he announced, "Severian of
Nessus, you're standing in the presence of the Eighteenth Bacele of
the Irregular Contarü, every one of us a fighter of dauntless courage
whenever there's a speck of money to be made."
The ragged men and women were standing and drifting toward us,
many of them frankly grinning. A tall and very thin man led the
way.
"Comrades, I give you Severian of Nessus!
"Severian," my benefactor continued, "I'm your condot-tiere. Call
me Guasacht. This fishing pole here, taller even than you are, is my
second, Erblon. The rest will introduce themselves, I'm sure.
"Erblon, I want to talk to you. There'll be patrols tomorrow." He
took the tall man by the arm and led him into the tent, leaving me
with the crowd of troopers who had by now surrounded me.
One of the largest, an ursine man almost my height and at least
twice my weight, gestured toward the falchion. "Don't you have a
scabbard for that? Let's see it."
I surrendered it without argument; whatever might happen next, I
felt certain it would not be an occasion for killing.
"So, you're a rider, are you?"
"No," I said. "I've ridden a bit, but I don't consider myself an expert."
"But you know how to manage them?"


"I know men and women better."
Everyone laughed at that, and the big man said, "Well, that's just
fine, because you probably won't do much riding, but a good
understanding of women—and destriers—will be a help to you."
As he spoke, I heard the sound of hoofs. Two men were leading up
a piebald, muscular and wild-eyed. His reins had been divided and
lengthened, permitting the men to stand at either side of his head,
about three paces away. A trollop with fox-colored hair and a
laughing face sat the saddle with ease, and in lieu of the reins held a
riding whip in each hand. The troopers and their women cheered
and clapped, and at the sound the piebald reared like a whirlwind
and pawed the air, showing the three horny growths on each
forefoot that we call hoofs for what they were—talons adapted
almost as well to combat as to gripping turf. Their feints outsped my
eyes.
The big man slapped me on the back. "He's not the best I ever had,
but he's good enough, and I trained him myself. Mesrop and Lactari
there are going to pass you those reins, and all you have to do is get
up on him. If you can do it without knocking Daria off, you can
have her until we run you down." He raised his voice: "All right, let
him go!"
I had expected the two men to give me the reins. Instead they threw
them at my face, and in snatching for them I missed them both.
Someone goaded the piebald from behind, and the big man gave a
peculiar, piercing whistle. The piebald had been taught to fight, like
the destriers in the Bear Tower, and though his long teeth had not


been augmented with metal, they had been left as nature made them
and stood out from his mouth like knives.
I dodged a flashing forefoot and tried to grasp his halter; a blow
from one of the whips caught me full across the face, and the
piebald's rush knocked me sprawling.
The troopers must have held him back or I would have been
trampled. Perhaps they also helped me to my feet—I cannot be sure.
My throat was full of dust, and blood from my forehead trickled
into my eyes.
I went for him again, circling to the right to keep clear of his hoofs,
but he turned more quickly than I, and the girl called Daria snapped
both lashes before my face to throw me off. More from anger than
any plan I seized one. The thong of the whipstock was around her
wrist; when I jerked the lash she came with it, falling into my arms.
She bit my ear, but I got her by the back of the neck, spun her
around, dug fingers into one firm buttock and lifted her. Kicking the
air, her legs seemed to startle the piebald. I backed him through the
crowd until one of his tormentors goaded him toward me, then
stepped on his reins.
After that, it was easy. I dropped the girl, caught his halter, twisted
his head, and kicked his forefeet from under him as we were taught
to do with unruly clients. With a high-pitched, animal scream he
came crashing down. I was in the saddle before he could get his legs
beneath him, and from there I lashed his flanks with the long reins
and sent him bolting through the crowd, then turned him and
charged them again.
All my life I had heard of the excitement of this kind of fighting,


though I had never experienced it. Now I found everything more
than true. The troopers and their women were yelling and running,
and a few flourished swords. They might have threatened a
thunderstorm with more effect—I rode over half a dozen at a sweep.
The girl's red hair flew like a banner as she fled, but no human legs
could have outdistanced that steed. We flashed past her, and I
caught her by that flaming banner and threw her over the arcione
before me.
A twisting trail led to a dark ravine, and that ravine to another. Deer
scattered ahead of us; in three bounds we overtook a buck in velvet
and shouldered him out of the way. While I had been Lictor of
Thrax, I had heard that the eclectics often raced game and leaped
from their mounts to stab it. I believed those stories now—I could
have cut the buck's throat with a butcher knife.
We left him behind, crested a new hill and dashed down into a
silent, wooded valley. When the piebald had run himself out, I let
him find his own path among the trees, which were the largest I had
seen since leaving Saltus; and when he stopped to crop the sparse,
tender grass that grew between their roots, I halted and threw the
reins on the ground as I had seen Guasacht do, then dismounted and
helped the red-haired girl off.
"Thanks," she said. And then, "You did it. I didn't think you could."
"Or you wouldn't have agreed to this? I had supposed they made
you."
"I wouldn't have given you that cut with the whip. You'll want to
repay me now, won't you? With the reins, I suppose."



"What makes you think that?" I was tired and sat down. Yellow
flowers, each blossom no bigger than a drop of water, grew in the
grass; I picked a few and found they smelled of calambac.
"You look the type. Besides, you carried me bottom up, and men
who do that always want to hit it."
"I never knew that. It's an interesting thought."
"I have a lot of them—that kind." Quickly and gracefully she seated
herself beside me and put a hand on my knee. "Listen, it was the
initiation, that's all. We take turns, and it was my turn and I was
supposed to hit you. Now it's over."
"I understand."
"Then you won't hurt me? That's wonderful. We can have a good
time here, really. Whatever you want and as much as you want, and
we won't go back until it's time to eat."
"I didn't say I wouldn't hurt you."
Her face, which had been wreathed with forced smiles, fell, and she
looked at the ground. I suggested that she might ruaway.
"That would only make it more fun for you, and you'd hurt me more
before we were through." Her hand crept up my thigh as she spoke.
"You're nice looking, you know. And so tall." She made a sitting
bow, pressing her face into my lap to give me a tingling kiss, then
straightening up at once. "It could be nice. Really it could."
"Or you could kill yourself. Have you a knife?"
For an instant, her mouth formed a perfect little circle. "You're
crazy, aren't you? I should have known." She leaped to her feet.


I caught her by one ankle and sent her sprawling to the soft forest
floor. Her shift was rotten with wear—a pull and it fell away. "You
said you wouldn't run."
She looked over her shoulder at me with large eyes.
I said, "You have no power over me, neither you nor they. I am not
afraid of pain, or of death. There is only one living woman I desire,
and no man but myself."

XX
Patrol
We held a perimeter no more than a couple of hundred paces across.
For the most part, our enemies had only knives and axes—the axes
and their ragged clothes recalled the volunteers I had helped
Vodalus against in our necropolis—but there were hundreds of them
already, and more coming.
The bacele had saddled up and left camp before dawn. The shadows
were still long, somewhere along the shifting front, when a scout
showed Guasacht the deep ruts of a coach traveling north. For three
watches we tracked it.
The Ascian raiders who had captured it fought well, turning south to
surprise us, then west, then north again like a writhing serpent; but
always leaving a trail of dead, caught between our fire and that of
the guards inside, who shot them through the loopholes. It was only
toward the end, when the Ascians could no longer flee, that we
grew aware of other hunters.


By noon, the little valley was surrounded. The gleaming steel coach
with its dead and dying prisoners stood mired to the axles. Our
Ascian prisoners squatted in front of it, guarded by our wounded.
The Ascian officer spoke our tongue, and a watch earlier Guasacht
had ordered him to free the coach and shot several Ascians when he
had failed; thirty or more remained, nearly naked, listless and emptyeyed. Their weapons were piled some distance off, near our tethered
mounts.
Now Guasacht was making the rounds, and I saw him pause at the
stump that sheltered the trooper next to me. One of the enemy put
her head from behind a clump of brush some way up the slope. My
contus struck her with a bolt of flame; she leaped by reflex, then
curled up as spiders do when someone tosses them among the coals
of a campfire. She had been white-faced beneath her red bandana,
and I suddenly understood that she had been made to look—that
there were those behind that brush who had disliked her, or at least
not valued her, and who had forced her to look out. I fired again,
slashing the green growth with the bolt and bringing a puff of acrid
smoke that drifted toward me like her ghost.
"Don't waste those charges," Guasacht said at my elbow. More from
habit, I think, than from fear, he had thrown himself flat beside me.
I asked if the charges would be exhausted before night if I fired six
times a watch.
He shrugged, then shook his head.
"That's how fast I've been shooting this thing, as well as I can judge
by the sun. And when night comes…"



I looked at him, and he could only shrug again.
"When night comes," I continued, "we won't be able to see them
until they're only a few steps away. We'll fire more or less at
random and kill a few score, then draw swords and stand back to
back, and they'll kill us."
He said, "Help will arrive before then," and when he saw I did not
believe him, he spat. "I wish I'd never looked at the damned thing's
track. I wish I'd never heard of it."
It was my turn to shrug. "Give it back to the Ascians, and we'll
break out."
"It's coin, I tell you! Gold to pay our troops. It's too heavy to be
anything else."
"The armor must weigh a good deal."
"Not that much. I've seen these coaches before, and it's gold from
Nessus or the House Absolute. But those things inside—who's ever
seen such creatures?"
"I have."
Guasacht stared at me.
"When I went out through the Piteous Gate in the Wall of Nessus.
They are man-beasts, contrived by the same lost arts that made our
destriers faster than the road engines of old." I tried to recall what
else Jonas had told me of them, and finished rather weakly by
saying, "The Autarch employs them in duties too laborious for men,
or for which men cannot be trusted."
"I suppose that might be right enough. They can't very well steal the
money. Where would they go? Listen, I've had my eye on you."


"I know," I said. "I've felt it."
"I've had my eye on you, I say. Particularly since you made that
piebald of yours go for the man that trained him. Up here in
Orithyia we see a lot of strong men and a lot of brave ones—mostly
when we step over their bodies. We see a lot of smart ones too, and
nineteen out of twenty are too smart to be of use to anybody,
including themselves. What's valuable are men, and sometimes
women, who've got a kind of power, the power that makes other
people want to do what they say. I don't mean to brag, but I've got
it. You've got it too."
"It hasn't been overwhelmingly apparent in my life before this."
"Sometimes it takes the war to bring it out. That's one of the
benefits of the war, and since it hasn't got many we ought to
appreciate the ones it does. Severian, I want you to go down to the
coach and treat with these man-animals. You say you know
something about them. Get them to come out and help us fight.
We're both on the same side, after all."
I nodded. "And if I can get them to open the doors, we can divide
the money among us. Some of us, at least, may escape."
Guasacht shook his head in disgust. "What did I tell you just a
moment ago about being too smart? If you were really smart, you
wouldn't have ignored it. No, you tell them that even if there's only
three or four of them, every fighter counts. Besides, there's at least a
chance the sight of them will frighten these damn freebooters away.
Let me have your contus, and I'll hold your position for you until
you come back." I handed over the long weapon. "Who are these


people, anyway?"
"These? Camp followers. Sutlers and whores—men as well as
women. Deserters. Every so often the Autarch or one of his generals
has them rounded up and put to work, but they slip away before
long. Slipping away's their specialty. They ought to be wiped out."
"I have your authority to treat with our prisoners in the coach?
You'll back me up?"
"They're not prisoners—well, yes, I suppose they are. You tell them
what I said and make the best deal you can. I'll back you."
I looked at him for a moment, trying to decide whether he meant it.
Like so many middle-aged men, he carried the old man he would
become in his face, soured and obscene, already muttering the
objections and complaints that would be his in the final skirmish.
"You've got my word. Go on."
"All right." I rose. The armored coach resembled the carriages that
had been used to bring important clients to our tower in the Citadel.
Its windows were narrow and barred, its rear wheels as high as a
man. The smooth steel sides suggested those lost arts I had
mentioned to Guasacht, and I knew the man-beasts inside had better
weapons than ours. I extended my hands to show I was unarmed
and walked as steadily as I could toward them until a face showed at
one window grill.
When one hears of such creatures, one imagines something stable,
midway between beast and human; but when one actually sees them
—as I now saw this man-beast, and as I had seen the man-apes in
the mine near Saltus—they are not like that at all. The best


comparison I can make is to the flickering of a silver birch tossed by
the wind. At one moment it seems a common tree, at the next, when
the undersides of the leaves appear, a supernatural creation. So it is
with the man-beasts. At first I thought a mastiff peered at me
through the bars; then it seemed rather a man, nobly ugly, tawnyfaced and amber-eyed. I raised my hands to the grill to give him my
scent, thinking of Triskele.
"What do you want?" His voice was harsh but not unpleasant.
"I want to save your lives," I said. It was the wrong thing to say, and
I knew it as soon as the words had left my mouth.
"We want to save our honor."
I nodded. "Honor is the higher life."
"If you can tell us how to save our honor, speak. We will listen. But
we will never surrender our trust."
"You have already surrendered it," I said.
The wind died, and the mastiff was back in an instant, flashing teeth
and blazing eyes.
"It was not to safeguard gold from the Ascians that you were put
into this coach, but to safeguard it from those of our own
Commonwealth who would steal it if they could. The Ascians are
beaten—look at them. We are the Autarch's loyal humans. Those
you were set to guard against will overwhelm us soon."
"They must kill me and my fellows before they can get the gold."
It was gold, then. I said, "They will do so. Come out and help us
fight, while there is still a chance of victory."


He hesitated, and I was no longer sure that I had been entirely
wrong to speak first of saving his life. "No," he said. "We cannot.
What you say may be reason, I do not know. Our law is not the law
of reason. Our law is honor and obedience. We stay."
"But you know that we are not your enemies?"
"Anyone seeking what we guard is our enemy."
"We're guarding it too. If these camp followers and deserters came
within range of your weapons, would you fire on them?"
"Yes, of course."
I walked over to the spiritless cluster of Ascians and asked to speak
with their commander. The man who stood was only slightly taller
than the rest; the intelligence in his face was the kind one
sometimes sees in cunning madmen. I told him Guasacht had sent
me to treat in his stead because I had often spoken with Ascian
prisoners and knew their ways. This was, as I intended, overheard
by his three wounded guards, who could see Guasacht manning my
position on the perimeter.
"Greetings in the name of the Group of Seventeen," the Ascian said.
"In the name of the Group of Seventeen."
The Ascian looked startled but nodded.
"We are surrounded by the disloyal subjects of our Autarch, who
are thus the enemies of both the Autarch and the Group of
Seventeen. Our own commander, Guasacht, has devised a plan that
will leave us all alive and free."
"The servants of the Group of Seventeen must not be expended
without purpose."


"Precisely. Here is the plan. We will harness some of our destriers
to the steel coach—as many as necessary to pull it free. You and
your people must work to free it too. When it's free, we'll return
your weapons and help you fight your way out of this cordon. Your
soldiers and ours will go north, and you can keep the coach and the
money inside to take to your superiors, just as you hoped when you
captured it."
"The light of Correct Thought penetrates every darkness."
"No, we haven't gone over to the Group of Seventeen. You have to
help us in return. In the first place, help get the coach out of the
mud. In the second, help us fight our way out. In the third, provide
us with an escort that will get us through your army and back to our
own lines."
The Ascian officer glanced toward the gleaming coach. "No failure
is permanent failure. But inevitable success may require new plans
and greater strength."
"Then you approve of my new plan?" I had not been aware that I
was perspiring, but now the sweat ran stinging into my eyes. I
wiped my forehead with the edge of my cloak, just as Master
Gurloes used to.
The Ascian officer nodded. "Study of Correct Thought eventually
reveals the path of success."
"Yes," I said. "All right, I've studied it. Behind our efforts, let there
be found our efforts."
When I returned to the coach, the same man-beast I had seen before
came to the window again, not quite so hostile this time. I said,


"The Ascians have agreed to try to push this thing out once more.
We're going to have to unload it."
"That is impossible."
"If we don't, the gold will be lost with the sun. I'm not asking you to
give it up—just take it out and mount guard over it. You'll have
your weapons, and if any human bearing arms comes close to you,
you can kill him. I'll be with you, unarmed. You can kill me too."
It took a great deal more talking, but eventually they did it. I got the
wounded who had been watching the Ascians to lay down their
conti and harness eight of our destriers to the coach, and got the
Ascians positioned to pull on the harness and heave at the wheels.
Then the door in the side of the steel coach swung open and the
man-beasts carried out small metal chests, two working while the
one I had spoken to stood guard. They were taller than I had
expected and had fusils, with pistols in their belts to supplement
them—the first pistols I had seen since I had watched the
Hierodules use them to turn Baldanders's charges in the gardens of
the House Absolute.
When all the chests were out and the three man-beasts were
standing around them with their weapons at the ready, I shouted.
The wounded troopers lashed every destrier in the new team, the
Ascians heaved until their eyes started from their straining faces…
and just when we all thought it would not, the steel coach lifted
itself from the mud and lumbered half a chain before the wounded
could bring it to a halt. Guasacht nearly got us both killed by
running down from the perimeter waving my contus, but the manbeasts had just sense enough to see that he was merely excited and


not dangerous.
He got a great deal more excited when he saw the man-beasts carry
their gold inside again, and when he heard what I had promised the
Ascians. I reminded him that he had given me leave to act in his
name.
"When I act," he sputtered, "it's with the idea of winning."
I confessed I lacked his military experience, but told him I had
found that in some situations winning consisted of disentangling
oneself.
"Just the same, I had hoped you would work out something better."
Rising inexorably while we remained unaware of their motion, the
mountain peaks to the west were already clawing for the lower edge
of the sun; I pointed to it.
Suddenly, Guasacht smiled. "After all, these are the same Ascians
we took it from before."
He called the Ascian officer over and told him our mounted troopers
would lead the attack, and that his soldiers could follow the steel
coach on foot. The Ascian agreed, but when his soldiers had
rearmed themselves, he insisted on placing half a dozen on top of
the coach and leading the attack himself with the rest. Guasacht
agreed with an apparent bad grace that seemed to me entirely
assumed. We put an armed trooper astride each of the eight destriers
of the new team, and I saw Guasacht conversing earnestly with their
cornet.
I had promised the Ascian we would break through the cordon of
deserters to the north, but the ground in that direction proved to be


unsuited to the steel coach, and in the end a route north by
northwest was agreed upon. The Ascian infantry advanced at a pace
not much short of a full run, firing as they came. The coach
followed. The narrow, enduring bolts of the troopers' conti stabbed
at the ragged mob who tried to close about it, and the Ascian
arquebuses on its roof sent gouts of violet energy crashing among
them. The man-beasts fired their fusils from the barred windows,
slaughtering half a dozen with a single blast.
The remainder of our troops (I among them) followed the coach,
having maintained our perimeter until it was gone. To save precious
charges, many put their conti through the saddle rings, drew their
swords, and rode down the straggling remnant the Ascians and the
coach had left behind.
Then the enemy was past, and the ground clearer. At once the
troopers whose mounts pulled the coach clapped spurs to them, and
Guasacht, Erblon, and several others who were riding just behind it
swept the Ascians from its top in a cloud of crimson flame and
reeking smoke. Those on foot scattered, then turned to fire.
It was a fight I did not feel I could take part in. I reined up, and so
saw—I believe, before any of the others—the first of the anpiels
who dropped, like the angel in Melito's fable, from the sun-dyed
clouds. They were fair to look upon, naked and having the slender
bodies of young women; but their rainbow wings spread wider than
any teratornis's, and each anpiel held a pistol in either hand.
Late that night, when we were back in camp and the wounded had
been cared for, I asked Guasacht if he would do as he had again.
He thought for a moment. "I hadn't any way of knowing those


flying girls would come. Looking at it from this end, it's natural
enough—there must have been enough in that coach to pay half the
army, and they wouldn't hesitate to send elite troops looking for it.
But before it happened, would you have guessed it?"
I shook my head.
"Listen, Severian, I shouldn't be talking to you like this. But you did
what you could, and you're the best leech I ever saw. Anyway, it
came out all right in the end, didn't it? You saw how friendly their
seraph was. What did she see, after all? Plucky lads trying to save
the coach from the Ascians. We'll get a commendation, I should
think. Maybe a reward."
I said, "You could have killed the man-beasts, and the Ascians too,
when the gold was out of the coach. You didn't because I would
have died with them. I think you deserve a commendation. From
me, at least."
He rubbed his drawn face with both hands. "Well, I'm just as happy.
It would have been the end of the Eighteenth; in another watch we'd
have been killing each other for the money."

XXI
Deployment
Before the battle there were other patrols and days of idleness.
Often enough we saw no Ascians, or saw only their dead. We were
supposed to arrest deserters and drive from our area such peddlers
and vagabonds as fatten on an army; but if they seemed to us such


people as had surrounded the steel coach, we killed them, not
executing them in any formal style but cutting them down from the
saddle.
The moon waxed again nearly to the full, hanging like a green apple
in the sky. Experienced troopers told me the worst fights always
came at or near the full of the moon, which is said to breed
madness. I suppose this is actually because its refulgence permits
generals to bring up reinforcements by night.
On the day of the battle, the graisle's bray summoned us from our
blankets at dawn. We formed a ragged double column in the mist,
with Guasacht at our head and Erblon following him with our flag. I
had supposed that the women would stay behind—as most had
when we had gone on patrol—but more than half drew conti and
came with us. Those who had helmets, I noticed, thrust their hair up
into the bowl, and many wore corslets that flattened and concealed
their breasts. I mentioned it to Mesrop, who rode opposite me.
"There might be trouble about the pay," he said. "Somebody with
sharp eyes will be counting us, and the contracts usually call for
men."
"Guasacht said there'd be more money today," I reminded him.
He cleared his throat and spat, the white phlegm vanishing into the
clammy air as though Urth herself had swallowed it. "They won't
pay until it's over. They never do."
Guasacht shouted and waved an arm; Erblon gestured with our flag,
and we were off, the hoofbeats sounding like the thudding of a
hundred muffled drums. I said, "I suppose that way they don't have


to pay for those who are killed."
"They pay triple—once because he fought, once for blood money,
and once for discharge money."
"Or she fought, I suppose."
Mesrop spat again.
We rode for some time, then halted at a spot that seemed no
different from any other. As the column fell silent, I heard a
humming or murmuring in the hills all around us. A scattered army,
dispersed no doubt for sanitary reasons and to deprive the Ascian
enemy of a concentrated target, was assembling now just as
particles of dust in the stone town had come together in the bodies
of its resuscitated dancers.
Not unnoticed. Even as birds of prey had once followed us before
we reached that town, now five-armed shapes that spun like wheels
pursued us above the scattered clouds that dimmed and melted in
the level red light of dawn. At first, when they were highest, they
seemed merely gray; but as we watched they dropped toward us,
and I saw they were of a hue for which I can find no name but that
stands to achroma as gold to yellow, or silver to white. The air
groaned with their turning.
Another that we had not seen came leaping across our path, hardly
higher than the treetops. Each spoke was the length of a tower,
pierced with casements and ports. Though it lay flat upon the air, it
seemed to stride along. Its wind whistled down upon us as if to
blow away the trees. My piebald screamed and bolted, and so did
many other destriers, often falling in that strange wind.


In the space of a heartbeat it was over. The leaves that had swirled
about us like snow fell to earth. Guasacht shouted and Erblon
sounded the graisle and brandished our flag. I got the piebald under
control and cantered from one destrier to another, taking them by
the nostrils until their riders could manage them again.
I rescued Daria, who I had not known was in the column, in this
way. She looked very pretty and boyish dressed as a trooper, with a
contus, and a slender sabre at either side of her saddle horn. I could
not help thinking when I saw her of how other women I had known
would appear in the same situation: Thea a theatrical warrior maid,
beautiful and dramatic but essentially the figure of a figurehead;
Thecla—now part of myself—a vengeful mimalone brandishing
poisoned weapons; Agia astride a slender-legged sorrel, wearing a
cuirass molded to her figure, while her hair, plaited with bowstrings,
flew wild in the wind; Jolenta a floriate queen in armor spikey with
thorns, her big breasts and fleshy thighs absurd at any gait faster
than a walk, smiling dreamily at each halt and attempting to recline
in the saddle; Dorcas a naiad riding, lifted momentarily like a
fountain flashing with sunshine; Valeria, perhaps, an aristocratic
Daria.
I had supposed, when I saw our people scatter, that it would be
impossible to reassemble the column; but within a few moments of
the time the pentadactyl air-strider had passed over us, we were
together again. We galloped for a league or more—mostly, I
suspect, to dissipate some of the nervous energy of our destriers—
then halted by a brook and gave them just as much water as would
wet their mouths without making them sluggish. When I had fought


the piebald back from the bank, I rode to a clearing from which I
could watch the sky. Soon Guasacht trotted over and asked me
jocularly, "You looking for another one?"
I nodded and told him I had never seen such craft before. "You
wouldn't have, unless you've been close to the front. They'd never
come back if they tried to go down south."
"Soldiers like us wouldn't stop them." He grew suddenly serious, his
tiny eyes mere slits in the sun-browned flesh. "No. But plucky lads
can stop their raiding parties. The guns and air-galleys can't do that."
The piebald stirred and stamped with impatience. I said, "I come
from a part of the city you've probably never heard of, the Citadel.
There are guns there that look out over the whole quarter, but I've
never known them to be fired except ceremonially." Still staring at
the sky, I thought of the wheeling pentadactyls over Nessus, and a
thousand blasts, issuing not just from the Barbican and the Great
Keep, but from all the towers; and I wondered with what weapons
the pentadactyls would reply.
"Come along," Guasacht said. "I know it's a temptation to keep a
lookout for them, but it doesn't do any good."
I followed him back to the brook, where Erblon was lining up the
column. "They didn't even fire at us. They must surely have guns in
those fliers."
"We're pretty small fish." I could see that Guasacht wanted me to
rejoin the column, though he hesitated to order me to do so directly.
For my part, I could feel fear grip me like a specter, strongest about
my legs, but lifting cold tentacles into my bowels, touching my


heart. I wanted to be silent, but I could not stop talking. "When we
go onto the field of battle—" (I think I imagined this field like the
shaven lawn of the Sanguinary Field, where I had fought Agilus.)
Guasacht laughed. "When we go into the fight, our gunners would
be delighted to see them out after us." Before I understood what he
was about to do, he struck the piebald with the flat of his blade and
sent me cantering off.
Fear is like those diseases that disfigure the face with running sores.
One becomes almost more afraid of their being seen than of their
source, and comes to feel not only disgraced but defiled. When the
piebald began to slow, I dug my heels into him and fell into line at
the very end of the column.
Only a short time before I had been on the point of replacing
Erblon; now I was demoted, not by Guasacht but by myself, to the
lowest position. And yet when I had helped reassemble the scattered
troopers, the thing I feared had already passed; so that the entire
drama of my elevation had been played out after it had ended in
debasement. It was as though one were to see a young man idling in
a public garden stabbed—then watch him, all unknowing, strike up
an acquaintance with the voluptuous wife of his murderer, and at
last, having ascertained, as he thought, that her husband was in
another part of the city, clasp her to him until she cried out from the
pain of the dagger's hilt protruding from his chest.
When the column lurched forward, Daria detached herself from it
and waited until she could fall in beside me. "You're afraid," she
said. It was not a question but a statement, and not a reproach but
almost a password, like the ridiculous phrases I had learned at


Vodalus's banquet.
"Yes. You're about to remind me of the boast I made to you in the
forest. I can only say that I did not know it to be an empty one when
I made it. A certain wise man once tried to teach me that even after
a client has mastered one excruciation, so that he can put it from his
mind even while he screams and writhes, another quite different
excruciation may be as effectual in breaking his will as in breaking
a child's. I learned to explain all this when he asked me but never
until now to apply it, as I should, to my own life. But if I am the
client here, who is the torturer?"
"We're all more or less afraid," she said. "That was why-yes, I saw it
—Guasacht sent you away. It was to keep you from making his own
feeling worse. If it were worse, he wouldn't be able to lead. When
the time comes, you'll do what you have to, and that's all any of
them do."
"Hadn't we better go?" I asked. The end of the column was moving
off in that surging way the tail of a long line always does.
"If we go now, a lot of them will know we're at the rear because
we're afraid. If we wait just a little while longer, many of those who
saw you talking with Guasacht will think he sent you back here to
speed up stragglers, and that I came back to be with you."
"All right," I said.
Her hand, damp with sweat and as thin as Dorcas's, came sliding
into mine.
Until that moment, I had been certain she had fought before. Now I
asked her, "Is this your first time too?"


"I can fight better than most of them," she declared, "and I'm sick of
being called a whore."
Together, we trotted after the column.

XXII
Battle
I saw them first as a scattering of colored dots on the farther side of
the wide valley, skirmishers who seemed to move and mix, as
bubbles do that dance upon the surface of a mug of cider. We were
trotting through a grove of shattered trees whose white and naked
wood was like the living bone of a compound fracture. Our column
was much larger now, perhaps the whole of the irregular contarü. It
had been under fire, in a more or less dilatory way, for about half a
watch. Some troopers had been wounded (one, near me, quite
badly) and several killed. The wounded cared for themselves and
tried to help each other—if there were medical attendants for us
they were too far behind us for me to be conscious of them.
From time to time we passed corpses among the trees; usually these
were in little clusters of two or three, sometimes they were merely
solitary individuals. I saw one who had contrived in dying to hook
the collar of his brigandine jacket to a splinter protruding from one
of the broken trunks, and I was struck by the horror of his situation,
his being dead and yet unable to rest, and then by the thought that
such was the plight of all those thousands of trees, trees that had
been killed but could not fall.


At about the same time I became aware of the enemy, I realized that
there were troops of our own army to either side. To our right a
mixture, as it were, of mounted men and infantry, the riders
helmetless and naked to the waist, with red and blue blanket rolls
slung across their bronzed chests. They were better mounted, I
thought, than most of us. They carried lancegays not much longer
than the height of a man, many of them holding them aslant their
saddle-bows. Each had a small copper shield bound to the upper
part of his left arm. I had no idea from what part of the
Commonwealth these men might come; but for some reason,
perhaps only because of their long hair and bare chests, I felt sure
they were savages.
If they were, the infantry that moved among them was something
lower still, brown and stooped and shaggy-haired. I had only
glimpses through the broken trees, but I thought they dropped to all
fours at times. Occasionally one seemed to grasp the stirrup of some
rider, as I had sometimes taken Jonas's when he rode his merychip;
whenever that occurred, the rider struck at his companion's hand
with the butt of his weapon.
A road ran through lower ground to our left; and down it, and to
either side of it, there moved a force far more numerous than our
column and the savage riders and their companions all combined:
battalions of peltasts with blazing spears and big, transparent
shields; hobilers on prancing mounts, with bows and arrow cases
crossed over their backs; lightly armed cherkajis whose formations
were seas of plumes and flags.
I could know nothing of the courage of all these strange soldiers


who had suddenly become my comrades, but I unconsciously
assumed it to be no greater than my own, and they seemed a slender
defense indeed against the moving dots on the farther side. The fire
to which we were subjected grew more intense, and so far as I could
see, our enemies were under none at all.
; Only a few weeks before (though it felt like at least a year now) I
would have been terrified at the thought of being shot at with such a
weapon as Vodalus had used on the foggy night in our necropolis
with which I have begun this account. The bolts that struck all
around us made that simple beam appear as childish as the shining
slugs thrown from the hetman's archer's pellet bow.
I had no idea what sort of device was used to project these bolts, or
even whether they were in fact pure energy or some type of missile;
but as they landed among us, their nature was that of an explosion
lengthened into something like a rod. And though they could not be
seen until they struck, they whistled as they came, and by that
whistled note, which endured no longer than the blink of an eye, I
soon learned to tell how near they would hit and how powerful the
extended detonation would be. If there was no change in the tone,
so that it resembled the note a coryphaeus sounds on his pitch pipe,
the strike would be some distance off. But if it rose quickly, as
though a note first sounded for men had become one for women, its
impact would be nearby; and though only the loudest of the
monotonal bolts were dangerous, each that rose to a scream claimed
at least one of us and often several.
It seemed madness to trot forward as we did. We should have
scattered, or dismounted to take refuge among the trees; and if one


of us had done it, I think all the rest would have followed him. With
every bolt that fell, I was almost that one. But again and again, as if
my mind were chained in some narrow circle, the memory of the
fear I had shown earlier held me in my place. Let the rest run and I
would run with them; but I would not run first.
Inevitably, a bolt struck parallel to our column. Six troopers flew
apart as though they themselves had contained small bombs, the
head of the first bursting in a gout of scarlet, the neck and shoulders
of the second, the chest of the third, the bellies of the fourth and
fifth, and the groin (or perhaps on the saddle and the back of his
destrier) of the sixth, before the bolt struck the ground and sent up a
geyser of dust and stones. The men and animals opposite those who
were destroyed in this way were killed too, wracked by the force of
the explosions and bombarded with the limbs and armor of the
others.
Holding the piebald to a trot, and often to a walk, was the worst of
it; if I could not run, I wanted to press forward, to get the fighting
begun, to die if I was in fact to die. This hit gave me some
opportunity to relieve my feelings. Waving to Daria to follow, I let
the piebald lope past the little group of survivors who had been
riding between us and the last trooper to die, and moved into the
space in the column that had been the casualties'. Mesrop was there
already, and he grinned at me. "Good thinking. Chances are there
won't be another one here for quite a while." I forbore to disabuse
him.
For a time it seemed he was correct anyway. Having hit us, the
enemy gunners diverted their fire to the savages on our right. Their


shambling infantry shrieked and gibbered as the bolts fell among
them, but the riders reacted, so it appeared, by calling on magic to
protect them. Often their chants sounded so clearly that I could
make out the words, though they were in no language I had ever
heard. Once one actually stood on his saddle like a performer in a
riding exhibition, lifting a hand to the sun and extending the other
toward the Ascians. Each rider seemed to have a personal spell; and
it was easy to see, as I watched their numbers shrink under the
bombardment, how such primitive minds come to believe in their
charms, for the survivors could not but feel their thau-maturgy had
saved them, and the rest could not complain of the failure of theirs.
Though we were advancing, for the most part, at the trot, we were
not the first to engage the enemy. On the lower ground, the
cherkajis had streaked across the valley, crashing against a square of
foot soldiers like a wave of fire.
I had vaguely supposed that the enemy would be provided with
weapons far superior to anything we had in the con-tarü—perhaps
pistols and fusils, such as the man-beasts had carried—and that a
hundred fighters so armed would easily destroy any quantity of
cavalry. Nothing of the kind happened. Several rows of the square
gave way, and I was close enough now to hear the riders' war cries,
distant yet distinct, and see individual foot soldiers in flight. Some
were casting aside immense shields, shields even larger than the
glassy ones of the peltasts, though they shone with the luster of
metal. Their offensive arms seemed to be splay-headed spears no
more than three cubits long, weapons that could produce sheets of
cleaving flame, but short in range.


A second infantry square emerged behind the first, then another and
another, farther down the valley.
Just as I was sure we were about to ride to the assistance of the
cherkajis, we received the order to halt. Looking to the right, I saw
that the savages had already done so, stopping some distance behind
us, and were now driving the hairy creatures that had accompanied
them toward the side of their position farthest from us.
Guasacht called, "We're blocking! Sit easy, lads!"
I looked at Daria, who returned a look equally bewildered. Mesrop
waved an arm toward the eastern end of the valley. "We're watching
the flank. If nobody comes, we ought to have a good enough time of
it today."
I said, "Except for the ones who've already died." The
bombardment, which had been diminishing, now seemed to have
stopped altogether. The silence of its absence lay all about us,
almost more frightening than its screaming bolts had been.
"I suppose so." His shrug announced eloquently that we had lost a
few dozen from a force of hundreds.
The cherkajis had recoiled, retreating behind a screen of hobilers
who directed a shower of arrows at the leading edge of the Ascians'
checkerboard battle line. Most seemed to glance off the shields, but
a few must have buried their heads in the metal, which took fire
from them and burned with a flame as bright as theirs and billowing
white smoke.
When the arrows slackened, the squares of the checkerboard
advanced again with a mechanical jerkiness. The cherkajis had


continued to fall back and were now in the rear of a line of peltasts,
very little in advance of us. I could see their dark faces clearly. They
were all men and bearded, and numbered about two thousand; but
they had among them a dozen or so bejeweled young women borne
in gilded howdahs on the backs of caparisoned arsinoithers.
These women were dark-eyed and dark complexioned like the men,
yet in their lush figures and languishing looks they reminded me of
Jolenta. I pointed them out to Daria and asked if she knew how they
were armed, since I could see no weapons.
"You'd like one, would you? Or two. I'll bet they look good to you
even from here."
Mesrop winked and said, "I wouldn't mind a couple myself."
Daria laughed. "They'd fight like alraunes if either of you tried to
have anything to do with them. They're sacred and forbidden, the
Daughters of War. Have you ever been around those animals they're
riding?"
I shook my head.
"They charge easy and nothing stops them, but they always go the
same way—straight at whatever it is that bothers them and past it
for a chain or two. Then they stop and go back."
I watched. Arsinoithers have two big horns—not spreading horns
like the horns of bulls, but horns that diverge about as much as a
man's first and second fingers can. As I soon saw, they charge head
down, with those horns level with the ground, and these did just as
Daria had said. The cherkajis rallied and attacked again with their
slender lances and forked swords. Trailing far behind that lightning


dash, the arsinoithers lumbered forward, gray-black heads down and
tails up, with the deep-bosomed, dark-faced maidens standing erect
under their canopies and gripping the gilded poles. One could see
from the way these women held themselves that their thighs were as
full as the udders of milch cows and round as the trunks of trees.
The charge carried them through the swirling fight and deep—but
not too deep—into the checkerboard. The Ascian , foot soldiers
blasted the sides of their beasts, which must have been like burning
horn or cuir boli; they tried to mount their heads and were tossed
into the air; they struggled to climb the gray flanks. The cherkajis
came crashing to the rescue, and the checkerboard flowed and
ebbed and lost a square.
Watching it from such a distance, I recalled my own thoughts of
battle as a game of chess, and I felt that somewhere someone else
had entertained the same thoughts and unconsciously allowed them
to shape his plan.
"They're lovely," Daria continued, teasing me. "Chosen at twelve
and fed on honey and pure oils. I've heard their flesh is so tender
they can't lie on the ground without being bruised. Bags of feathers
are carried about for them to sleep on. If those are lost, the girls
have to lie in mud that shapes itself to support their bodies. The
eunuchs who care for them mix it with wine warmed over a fire, so
they will sleep and not be cold."
"We should dismount," Mesrop said. "It'll spare the animals."
But I wanted to watch the battle and would not get down, though
soon only Guasacht and I remained in the saddle out of our entire
bacele.


The cherkajis had been driven back once again, and now came
under a withering bombardment from unseen artillery.
The peltasts dropped to the ground, covering themselves with their
shields. New squares of Ascian infantry emerged from the forest on
the north side of the valley. There seemed to be no end to them; I
felt we had been committed against an inexhaustible enemy.
The feeling grew stronger when the cherkajis charged a third time.
A bolt struck an arsinoither, blowing it and the lovely woman it had
carried to bloody ruin. The infantry was firing at those women now;
one crumpled, and howdah and canopy vanished in a puff of flame.
The infantry squares advanced over brightly clad corpses and dead
destriers.
By each step in war the winner loses. The ground the checkerboard
had won exposed the side of its leading square to us, and to my
astonishment we were ordered to mount, spread into line, and
wheeled against it, first trotting, then cantering, and at last, with the
brass throats of all the graisles shouting, in a desperate rush that
nearly blew the skin from our faces.
If the cherkajis were lightly armed, we were armed more lightly
still. Yet there was a magic in the charge more powerful than the
chants of our savage allies. The wildfire of our weapons played
along the distant ranks as scythes attack a wheat field. I lashed the
piebald with his reins to keep from being outdistanced by the
roaring hoofs I heard behind me. Yet I was, and glimpsed Daria as
she shot past, the flame of her hair flying free, her contus in one
hand and a sabre in the other, her cheeks whiter than the foaming


flanks of her destrier. I knew then how the custom of the cherkajis
had begun, and I tried to charge faster still so that she should not
die, though Thecla laughed through my lips at the thought.
Destriers do not run like common beasts—they skim the ground as
arrows do air. For an instant, the fire of the Ascian infantry half a
league away rose before us like a wall. A moment later we were
among them, the legs of every mount bloody to the knee. The
square that had seemed as solid as a building stone had become only
a crowd of frantic soldiers with big shields and cropped heads,
soldiers who often slew one another in their eagerness to slay us.
Fighting is a stupid business at best; but there are things to be
learned about it, of which the first is that numbers tell only in time.
The immediate struggle is always that of an individual against one
or two others. In this our destriers gave us the upper hand—not only
because of their height and weight, but because they bit and struck
out with their forefeet, and the blows of their hoofs were more
powerful than any man save Baldanders could have delivered with a
mace.
Fire cut through my contus. I dropped it but continued to kill,
slashing left, then right, then left again with the falchion and hardly
noticing that the blast had laid open my leg.
I think I must have cut down half a dozen Ascians before I saw that
they all looked the same—not that they all had the same face (as the
men in some units of our own army do, who are indeed closer than
brothers), but that the differences among them seemed accidental
and trivial. I had observed this among our prisoners when we had
retrieved the steel coach, but it had not really impressed itself upon


my mind. In the madness of battle it did so, for it seemed a part of
that madness. The frenzied figures were male and female: the
women had small but pendulous breasts and were half a head
shorter, but there was no other distinction. All had large, brilliant,
wild eyes, hair clipped nearly to the skull, starved faces, screaming
mouths, and prominent teeth.
We fought free as the cherkajis had; the square had been dented but
not destroyed. While we let our mounts catch breath it reformed, the
light, polished shields to the front. A spearman broke ranks and
came running toward us waving his weapon. At first I thought it
mere bluster; then, as he came nearer (for a normal man runs much
less swiftly than a destrier), that he wished to surrender. At last,
when he had almost reached our line, he fired, and a trooper shot
him down. In his convulsions he threw his blazing spear into the air;
I remember how it twisted against the dark blue sky.
Guasacht came trotting over. "You're bleeding bad. Can you ride
when we charge them again?"
I felt as strong as I ever had in my life and told him so.
"Still, you'd better get a bandage on that leg."
The seared flesh had cracked; blood was oozing out. Daria, who had
not been hurt at all, bound it up.
The charge for which I had been prepared never took place. Quite
unexpectedly (at least as far as I was concerned) the order came to
turn about, and we went trotting off to the northeast over open,
rolling country whisperous with coarse grass.
The savages seemed to have vanished. A new force appeared in


their place, on the flank that had now become our front. At first I
thought they were cavalry on centaurs, creatures whose pictures I
had encountered in the brown book. I could see the heads and
shoulders of the riders above the human heads of their mounts, and
both appeared to bear arms. When they drew nearer, I saw they
were nothing so romantic: merely small men—dwarfs, in fact—
upon the shoulders of very tall ones.
Our directions of advance were nearly parallel but slowly
converged. The dwarfs watched us with what seemed a sullen
attention. The tall men did not look at us at all. At last, when our
column was no more than a couple of chains from theirs, we halted
and turned to face them. With a horror I had not felt before, I
realized that these strange riders and strange steeds were Ascians;
our maneuver had been intended to prevent them from taking the
peltasts in the flank, and had now succeeded in that they would now
have to make their attack, if they could, through us. There seemed
to be about five thousand of them, however, and there were
certainly many more than we had fit to fight.
Yet no attack came. We had halted and formed a tight line, stirrup
to stirrup. Despite their numbers, they surged nervously up and
down before it as though attracted first by the thought of passing it
on the right, then on the left, then on the right again. It was clear,
however, that they could not pass at all unless a part of their force
engaged our front to prevent our striking the rest from behind. As if
hoping to postpone the fight, we did not fire.
Now we saw repetitions of the behavior of the lone spearman who
had left his square to attack us. One of the tall men dashed forward.


In one hand he held a slender staff, hardly more than a switch; in the
other, a sword of the kind called a shotel, which has a very long,
double-edged blade whose forward half is curved into a semicircle.
As he drew nearer he slowed, and I saw that his eyes were
unfocused; that he was in fact blind. The dwarf on his shoulders had
an arrow nocked to the string of a short, recurved bow.
When these two were within half a chain of us, Erblon detailed two
men to drive them off. Before they could close with the blind man,
he broke into a run as swift as any destrier's but eerily silent, and
came flying toward us. Eight or ten troopers fired, but I saw then
how difficult it is to hit a target moving at such speed. The arrow
struck and burst in a blaze of orange light. A trooper tried to parry
the blind man's wand—the shotel flashed down, and its hooked
blade laid open the trooper's skull.
Then a group of three of the blind men with three riders detached
itself from the mass of the enemy. Before they reached us, there
were clusters of five or six coming. Far down the line, our hipparch
raised his arm; Guasacht waved us forward and Erblon blew the
charge, echoed to right and left—a bellowing note that seemed to
have deep-mouthed bells in it.
Though I did not know it at the time, it is axiomatic that encounters
purely between cavalry rapidly degenerate into mere skirmishes. So
it was with ours. We rode at them, and though we lost twenty or
thirty in doing so, we rode through them. At once we turned to
engage them again, both to prevent their flanking the peltasts and to
regain contact with our own army. They, of course, turned to face
us; and in a short time neither we nor they had anything that could


be called a front, or any tactics beyond those each fighter forged for
himself.
My own were to veer away from any dwarf who looked ready to
shoot and try to catch others from behind or from the side. They
worked well enough when I could apply them, but I quickly found
that though the dwarfs appeared almost helpless when the blind men
they rode were killed under them, their tall steeds ran amok without
their riders, attacking anything that stood in their path with frantic
energy, so that they were more dangerous than ever.
Very soon the dwarfs' arrows and our conti had kindled scores of
fires in the grass. The choking smoke rendered the confusion worse
than ever. I had lost sight of Daria and Guasacht—of everyone I
knew—sometime before. Through the acrid gray haze I could just
make out a figure on a plunging destrier fighting off four Ascians. I
went to him, and though one dwarf turned his blind steed and sent
an arrow whizzing by my ear, I rode over them and heard the blind
man's bones snap under the piebald's hoofs. A hairy figure rose
from the smoldering grass behind the other pair and cut them down
as a peon hews a tree—three or four strokes of his ax to the same
spot until the blind man fell.
The mounted soldier I had come to rescue was not one of our
troopers, but one of the savages who had been on our right earlier.
He had been wounded, and when I saw the blood I recalled that I
had been wounded too. My leg was stiff, my strength nearly gone. I
would have ridden back toward the south crest of the valley and our
own lines if I had known which way to go. As it was, I gave the
piebald his head and a good slap from the reins, having heard that


these animals will often return to the place where they last had
water and rest. He broke into a canter that soon became a gallop.
Once he jumped, nearly throwing me from the saddle, and I looked
down to glimpse a dead destrier with Erblon dead beside him, and
the brass graisle and the black and green flag lying on the burning
turf. I would have turned the. piebald and gone back for them, but
by the time I pulled him up, I no longer knew the spot. To my right,
a mounted line showed through the smoke, dark and almost
formless, but serrated. Far behind it loomed a machine that flashed
fire, a machine that was like a tower walking.
At one moment they were nearly invisible; at the next they were
upon me like a torrent. I cannot say who the riders were or on what
beasts they rode; not because I have forgotten (for I forget nothing)
but because I saw nothing clearly. There was no question of
fighting, only of seeking in some way to live. I parried a blow from
a twisted weapon that was neither sword nor ax; the piebald reared,
and I saw an arrow protruding from his chest like a horn of fire. A
rider crashed against us, and we fell into the dark.

XXIII
The Pelagic Argosy Sights Land
When I regained consciousness, it was the pain in my leg that I felt
first. It was pinned beneath the body of the piebald, and I struggled
to free it almost before I knew who I was or how I found myself
where I did. My hands and face, the very ground on which I lay,
were crusted with blood.


And it was quiet—so quiet. I listened for the thudding of hoofs, the
drum roll that makes Urth herself its drum. It was not there. The
shouts of the cherkajis were no more, nor the shrill, mad cries that
had come from the checkerboard of Ascian infantry. I tried to turn
to push against the saddle, but I could not do so.
Somewhere far off, no doubt on one of the ridges that rimmed the
valley, a dire wolf raised its maw to Lune. That inhuman howling,
which Thecla had heard once or twice before when the court went
to hunt near Silva, made me realize that the dimness of my sight
was not due to the smoke of the grass fires that had burned earlier
that day, or, as I had half feared, to some head injury. The land was
twilit, though whether by dusk or dawn I could not say.
I rested and perhaps I slept, then roused again at the sound of
footsteps. It was darker than I remembered. The footsteps were
slow, soft, and heavy. Not the sound of cavalry on the move, nor yet
the measured tread of marching infantry—a walk heavier than
Baldanders's and more slow. I opened my mouth to cry for help,
then closed it again, thinking I might call upon myself something
more terrible than that I had once waked in the mine of the manapes. I lunged away from the dead piebald until it seemed I would
wrench my leg from its socket. Another dire wolf, as frightful as the
first and much closer, howled to the green isle overhead.
As a boy, I was often told I lacked imagination. If it were ever true,
Thecla must have brought it to our nexus, for I could see the dire
wolves in my mind, black and silent shapes, each as large as an
onyger, pouring down into the valley; and I could hear them
cracking the ribs of the dead. I called, and called again, before I


knew what it was I did.
It seemed to me that the heavy footsteps paused. Certainly they
moved toward me, whether they had been coming toward me before
or not. I heard a rustling in the grass, and a little phenocod, striped
like a melon, bounded out, terrified by something I still could not
see. It shied at the sight of me and in a moment was gone.
I have said that Erblon's graisle was silenced. Another blew now, a
deeper, longer, wilder note than I had ever heard. The outline of a
bent orphicleide showed against the dusky sky. When its music was
ended it fell, and in a moment more I saw the head of the player
blotting out the brightening moon at three times the height of a
mounted trooper's helmet—a domed head shaggy with hair.
The orphicleide sounded once more, deep as a waterfall, and this
time I saw it rise, and the white, curling tusks that guarded it on
each side, and I knew I lay in the path of the very symbol of
dominion, the beast called Mammoth.
Guasacht had said I held some mastery over animals, even without
the Claw. I strove to use it now, whispering I know not what,
concentrating my thought until it seemed my temples would burst.
The mammoth's trunk came questing toward me, its tip nearly a
cubit across. Lightly as a child's hand it touched my face, flooding
me with moist, hot breath sweet with hay. The corpse of the piebald
was lifted away; I tried to stand but somehow fell. The mammoth
caught me up, winding its trunk about my waist, and lifted me
higher than its own head.
The first thing I saw was the muzzle of a trilhoen with a dark,
bulging lens the size of a dinner plate. It was fitted with a seat for


the operator, but no one sat there. The gunner had come down and
stood upon the mammoth's neck as a sailor might upon the deck of a
ship, with one hand on the barrel for balance. For a moment a light
shone in my face, blinding me.
"It's you. Miracles converge on us." The voice was not truly either a
man's or a woman's; it might almost have been a boy's. I was laid at
the speaker's feet, and he said, "You're hurt. Can you stand on that
leg?"
I managed to say I did not think I could.
"This is a poor place to lie, but a good one to fall from. There's a
gondola farther back, but I'm afraid Mamillian can't reach it with his
trunk. You'll have to sit up here, with your back against the swivel."
I felt his hands, small, soft, and moist, beneath my arms. Perhaps it
was their touch that told me who he was: The androgyne I had met
in the snow-covered House Azure, and later in that artfully
foreshortened room that posed as a painting hanging in a corridor of
the House Absolute.
The Autarch.
In Thecla's memories I saw him robed in jewels. Although he had
said he recognized me, I could not believe in my dazed state that it
was so, and I gave him the code phrase he had once given me,
saying, "The pelagic argosy sights land."
"It does. It does indeed. Yet if you fall overboard now, I'm afraid
Mamillian's not quite quick enough to catch you… despite his
undoubted wisdom. Give him as much help as you can. I'm not as
strong as I look."


I got some part of the trilhoen's mount in one hand and was able to
pull myself around on the musty-smelling mat that was the
mammoth's hide. "To speak the truth," I said, "you've never looked
strong to me."
"You have the professional eye and ought to know, but I'm not even
as strong as that. You, on the other hand, have always seemed to me
a construction of horn and boiled leather. And you must be, or you'd
be dead by now. What happened to your leg?"
"Burned, I think."
"We'll have to get you something for it." He raised his voice
slightly. "Home! Back home, Mamillian!"
"May I ask what you're doing here?"
"Having a look at the field of battle. You fought here today, I take
it."
I nodded, though I felt my head would tumble from my shoulders.
"I didn't… or rather, I did, but not personally. I ordered certain
bodies of light auxiliaries into action, with a legion of peltasts in
support. I suppose you must have been one of the auxiliaries. Were
any of your friends killed?"
"I only had one. She was all right the last time I saw her."
His teeth flashed in the moonlight. "You maintain your interest in
women. Was it the Dorcas you told me of?"
"No. It doesn't matter." I did not quite know how to phrase what I
was about to say. (It is the worst of bad manners to state openly that
one has penetrated an incognito.) At last I managed, "I can see you
hold high rank in our Commonwealth. If it won't get me pushed


from the back of this animal, can you tell me what someone who
commands legions was doing conducting that place in the
Algedonic Quarter?"
While I spoke, the night had grown rapidly darker, the stars winking
out one after another like the tapers in a hall when the ball is over
and footmen walk among them with snuffers like mitres of gold
dangling from spidery rods. At a great distance I heard the
androgyne say, "You know who we are. We are the thing itself, the
self-ruler, the Autarch. We know more. We know who you are."
Master Malrubius was, as I realize now, a very sick man before he
died. At the time I did not know it, because the thought of sickness
was foreign to me. At least half our apprentices, and perhaps more
than half, died before they were raised to journeyman; but it never
occurred to me that our tower might be an unhealthy place, or that
the lower reaches of Gyoll, where we so often swam, were little
purer than a cesspool. Apprentices had always died, and when we
living apprentices dug their graves we turned up small pelvises and
skulls, which we, the succeeding generation, reburied again and
again until they were so much injured by the spade that their chalky
particles were lost in the tarlike soil. I, however, never suffered
more than a sore throat and a running nose, forms of sickness that
serve only to deceive healthy people into the belief that they know
in what disease consists. Master Malrubius suffered real illness,
which is to see death in shadows.
As he stood at his little table, one felt that he was conscious of
someone standing behind him. He looked straight to the front, never
turning his head and hardly moving a shoulder, and he spoke as


much for that unknown listener as for us.
"I have done my best to teach you boys the rudiments of learning.
They are the seeds of trees that should grow and blossom in your
minds. Severian, look to your Q. It should be round and full like the
face of a happy boy, but one of its cheeks is as fallen-in as your
own. You have all, all you boys, seen how the spinal cord, lifting
itself toward its culmination, expands and at last blossoms in the
myriad pathways of the brain. And this one, one cheek round, the
other seared and shriveled."
His trembling hand reached for the slate pencil, but it escaped his
fingers and rolled over the edge of the table to clatter on the floor.
He did not stoop to pick it up, fearful, I think, that in stooping he
might glimpse the invisible presence.
"I have spent much of my life, boys, in trying to implant those seeds
in the apprentices of our guild. I have had a few successes, but not
many. There was a boy, but he—"
He went to the port and spat, and because I was sitting near it I saw
the twisted shapes formed by the seeping blood and knew that the
reason I could not see the dark figure (for death is of the color that
is darker than fuligin) that accompanied him was that it stood within
him.
Just as I had discovered that death in a new form, in the shape of
war, could frighten me when it could no longer do so in its old ones,
so I learned now that the weakness of my body could afflict me with
the terror and despair my old teacher must have felt. Consciousness
came and went.


Consciousness went and came like the errant winds of spring, and I,
who so often have had difficulty in falling asleep among the
besieging shades of memory, now fought to stay awake as a child
struggles to lift a faltering kite by the string. At times I was
oblivious to everything except my injured body. The wound in my
leg, which I had hardly felt when I received it, and whose pain I had
so effortlessly locked away when Daria had bandaged it, throbbed
with an intensity that formed the background to all my thoughts,
like the rumbling of the Drum Tower at the solstice. I turned from
side to side, thinking always that I lay upon that leg.
I had hearing without sight and occasionally sight without hearing. I
rolled my cheek from the matted hair of Mamillian and laid it on a
pillow woven of the minute, downy feathers of hummingbirds.
Once I saw torches with dancing flames of scarlet and radiant gold
held by solemn apes. A man with the horns and muzzled face of a
bull bent over me, a constellation sprung to life. I spoke to him and
found myself telling him that I was unsure of the precise date of my
birth, that if his benign spirit of meadow and unfeigning force had
governed my life 1 thanked him for it; then remembered that I knew
the date, that my father had given a ball for me each year until his
death, that it fell under the Swan. He listened intently, turning his
head to watch me from one brown eye.

XXIV
The Flier


Sunlight in my face.
I tried to sit up, and in fact succeeded in getting one elbow beneath
me. All about me shimmered an orb of color—purple and cyan,
ruby and azure, with the orpiment of the sun piercing these
enchanted tints like a sword to fall upon my eyes. Then it was
blotted out, and its extinction revealed what its splendor had
obscured: I lay in a domed pavilion of variegated silk, with an open
door.
The rider of the mammoth was walking toward me. He was robed in
saffron, as I had always seen him, and carried an ebony rod too light
to be a weapon. "You have recovered," he said.
"I'd try and say yes, but I'm afraid the effort of speaking might kill
me."
He smiled at that, though the smile was no more than a twitching of
the mouth. "As you should know better than almost anyone, the
sufferings we endure in this life make possible all the happy crimes
and pleasant abominations we shall commit in the next… aren't you
eager to collect?"
I shook my head and laid it on the pillow again. The softness
smelled faintly of musk.
"That is just as well, because it will be some time before you do."
"Is that what your physician says?"
"I am my own, and I've been treating you myself. Shock was the
principal problem… It sounds like a disorder for old women, as you
are no doubt thinking at this moment. But it kills a great many men
with wounds. If all of mine who die of it would only live, I would


readily consent to the death of those who take a thrust in the heart."
"While you were being your own physician—and mine-were you
telling the truth?"
He smiled more broadly at that. "I always do. In my position, I have
to talk too much to keep a skein of lies in order; of course, you must
realize that the truth… the little, ordinary truths that farm wives talk
of, not the ultimate and universal Truth, which I'm no more capable
of uttering than you… that truth is more deceptive."
"Before I lost consciousness, I heard you say you are the Autarch."
He threw himself down beside me like a child, his body making a
distinct sound as it struck the piled carpets. "I did. I am. Are you
impressed?"
"I would be more impressed," I said, "if I did not recall you so
vividly from our meeting in the House Azure."
(That porch, covered with snow, heaped with snow that deadened
our footsteps, stood in the silken pavilion like a specter. When the
Autarch's blue eyes met mine, I felt that Roche stood beside me in
the snow, both of us dressed in unfamiliar and none-too-well-fitting
clothes. Inside, a woman who was not Thecla was transforming
herself into Thecla as I was later to make myself Meschia, the first
man. Who can say to what degree an actor assumes the spirit of the
person he portrays? When I played the Familiar, it was nothing,
because it was so close to what I was—or had at least believed
myself to be—in life; but as Meschia I had sometimes had thoughts
that could never have occurred to me otherwise, thoughts alien
equally to Severian and to Thecla, thoughts of the beginnings of


things and the morning of the world.)
"I never told you, you will recall, that I was only the Autarch."
"When I met you in the House Absolute, you appeared to be a
minor official of the court. I admit you never told me that, and in
fact I knew then who you were. But it was you, wasn't it, who gave
the money to Dr. Talos?"
"I would have told you that without a blush. It is completely true. In
fact, I am several of the minor officials of my court… Why
shouldn't I be? I have the authority to appoint such officials, and I
can just as well appoint myself. An order from the Autarch is often
too heavy an instrument, you see. You would never have tried to slit
a nose with that big headsman's sword you carried. There is a time
for a decree from the Autarch, and a time for a letter from the third
bursar, and I am both and more besides."
"And in that house in the Algedonic Quarter—"
"I am also a criminal… just as you are."
There is no limit to stupidity. Space itself is said to be bounded by
its own curvature, but stupidity continues beyond infinity. I, who
had always thought myself, though not truly intelligent, at least
prudent and quick to learn simple things, who had always counted
myself the practical and foreseeing one when I had traveled with
Jonas or Dorcas, had never until that instant connected the Autarch's
position at the very apex of the structure of legality with his certain
knowledge that I had penetrated the House Absolute as an emissary
of Vodalus. At that moment, I would have leaped up and fled from
the pavilion if I could, but my legs were like water.


"All of us are—all of us must be who must enforce the law. Do you
think your guild brothers would have been so severe with you—and
my agent reports that many of them wished to kill you—if they had
themselves been guilty of something of the same kind? You were a
danger to them unless you were terribly punished because they
might otherwise someday be tempted. A judge or a jailer who has
no crime of his own is a monster, alternately purloining the
forgiveness that belongs to the Increate alone and practicing a
deathly rigor that belongs to no one and nothing.
"So I became a criminal. The violent crimes offended my love of
humanity, and I lack the quickness of hand and thought required of
a thief. After blundering about for some time… that would be in
about the year you were born, I suppose… I found my true
profession. It takes care of certain emotional needs I cannot now
satisfy otherwise… and I have, I really do have, a knowledge of
human nature. I know just when to offer a bribe and how much to
give, and, the most important thing, when not to. I know how to
keep the girls who work for me happy enough with their careers to
continue, and discontented enough with their fates… They're
khaibits, of course, grown from the body cells of exultant women so
an exchange of blood will prolong the exultants' youth. I know how
to make my clients feel that the encounters I arrange are unique
experiences instead of something midway between dewy-eyed
romance and solitary vice. You felt that you had a unique
experience, didn't you?"
"That's what we call them too," I said. "Clients." I had been
listening as much to the tone of his voice as to his words. He was


happy, as I thought he had not been on either of the other occasions
on which I had encountered him, and to hear him was like hearing a
thrush speak. He almost seemed to know it himself, lifting his face
and extending his throat, the Rs in arrange and romance trilled into
the sunlight.
"It is useful too. It keeps me in touch with the underside of the
population, so I know whether or not taxes are really being
collected and whether they're thought fair, which elements are rising
in society and which are going down."
I sensed that he was referring to me, though I had no idea what he
meant. "Those women from the court," I said.
"Why didn't you get the real ones to help you? One of them was
pretending to be Thecla when Thecla was locked under our tower."
He looked at me as though I had said something particularly stupid,
as no doubt I had. "Because I can't trust them, of course. A thing
like that has to remain a secret… Think of the opportunities for
assassination. Do you believe that because all those gilded
personages from ancient families bow so low in my presence, and
smile, and whisper discreet jokes and lewd little invitations, they
feel some loyalty to me? You will learn differently, you may be
sure. There are few at my court I can trust, and none among the
exultants."
"You say I'll learn differently. Does that mean you don't intend to
have me executed?" I could feel the pulse in my neck and see the
scarlet gout of blood.
"Because you know my secret now? No. We have other uses for


you, as I told you when we talked in the room behind the picture."
"Because I was sworn to Vodalus."
At that his amusement mastered him. He threw back his head and
laughed, a plump and happy child who had just discovered the
secret of some clever toy. When the laughter subsided at last into a
merry gulping, he clapped his hands. Soft though they looked, the
sound was remarkably loud.
Two creatures with the bodies of women and the heads of cats
entered. Their eyes were a span apart and as large as plums; they
strode on their toes as dancers sometimes do, but more gracefully
than any dancers I have ever seen, with something in their motions
that told me it was their normal gait. I have said they had the bodies
of women, but that was not quite true, for I saw the tips of claws
sheathed in the short, soft fingers that dressed me. In wonder, I took
the hand of one and pressed it as I have sometimes pressed the paw
of a friendly cat, and saw the claws barred. My eyes brimmed with
tears at the sight of them, because they were shaped like that claw
that is the Claw, that once lay concealed in the gem that I, in my
ignorance, called the Claw of the Conciliator. The Autarch saw I
was weeping, and told the woman-cats they were hurting me and
must put me down. I felt like an infant who has just learned he will
never see his mother again.
"We do not harm him, Legion," one protested in such a voice as I
had never heard before.
"Put him down, I said!"
"They have not so much as grazed my skin, Sieur," I told him.


With the woman-cats' support I was able to walk. It was morning,
when all shadows flee the first sight of the sun; the light that had
wakened me had been the earliest of the new day. Its freshness
filled my lungs now, and the coarse grass over which we walked
darkened my scuffed old boots with its dew; a breeze faint as the
dim stars stirred my hair.
The Autarch's pavilion stood on the summit of a hill. All around lay
the main bivouac of his army—tents of black and gray, and others
like dead leaves; huts of turf and pits that led to shelters
underground, from which streams of soldiers issued now like silver
ants.
"We must be careful, you see," he said. "Though we are some
distance behind the lines here, if this place were plainer it would
invite attack from above."
"I used to wonder why your House Absolute lay beneath its own
gardens, Sieur."
"The need has long passed now, but there was a time when they laid
waste to Nessus."
Below us and all around us, the silver lips of trumpets sounded.
"Was it only the night?" I asked. "Or have I slept a whole day
away?"
"No. Only the night. I gave you medicines to ease your pain and
keep infection from your wound. I would not have roused you this
morning, but I saw you were awake when I came in… and there is
no more time."
I was not certain what he meant by that. Before I could ask, I caught


sight of six nearly naked men hauling at a rope. My first impression
was that they were bringing down some huge balloon, but it was a
flier, and the sight of its black hull brought vivid memories of the
Autarch's court.
"I was expecting—what was its name? Mamillian."
"No pets today. Mamillian is an excellent comrade, silent and wise
and able to fight with a mind independent of my own, but when all
is said and done, I ride him for pleasure. We will thieve a string
from the Ascians' bow and use a mechanism today. They steal many
from us."
"Is it true that it consumes their power to land? I think one of your
aeronauts once told me that."
"When you were the Chatelaine Thecla, you mean. Thecla purely."
"Yes, of course. Would it be impolitic, Autarch, to ask why you had
me killed? And how you know me now?"
"I know you because I see your face in the face of my young friend
and hear your voice in his. Your nurses know you too. Look at
them."
I did, and saw the woman-cats' faces twisted in snarls of fear and
amazement.
"As to why you died, I will speak of that—to him—on board the
flier… have we time. Now, go back. You find it easy to manifest
yourself because he is weak and ill, but I must have him now, not
you. If you will not go, there are means."
"Sieur—"
"Yes, Severian? Are you afraid? Have you entered such a


contrivance before?"
"No," I said. "But I am not afraid."
"Do you recall your question about their power? It is true, in a
sense. Their lift is supplied by the antimaterial equivalent of iron,
held in a penning trap by magnetic fields. Since the anti-iron has a
reversed magnetic structure, it is repelled by promagnetism. The
builders of this flier have surrounded it with magnets, so that when
it drifts from its position at the center it enters a stronger field and is
forced back. On an antimaterial world, that iron would weigh as
much as a boulder, but here on Urth it counters the weight of the
promatter used in the construction of the flier. Do you follow me?"
"I believe so, Sieur."
"The trouble is that it is beyond our technology to seal the chamber
hermetically. Some atmosphere—a few molecules-is always
creeping in through porosities in the welds, or by penetrating the
insulation of the magnetic wires. Each such molecule neutralizes its
equivalent in anti-iron and produces heat, and each time one does
so, the flier loses an infinitesimal amount of lift. The only solution
anyone has found is to keep fliers as high as possible, where there is
effectively no air pressure."
The flier was nosing down now, near enough for me to appreciate
the beautiful sleekness of its lines. It had precisely the shape of a
cherry leaf.
"I didn't understand all of that," I said. "But I would think the ropes
would have to be immensely long to allow the fliers to float high
enough to do any good, and that if the Ascian pentadactyls came


over by night they would cut them and let the fliers drift away."
The woman-cats smiled at that with tiny, secretive twitch-ings of
their lips.
"The rope is only for landing. Without it, our flier would require
sufficient distance for its forward speed to drive it down. Now,
knowing we're below, it drops its cable just as a man in a pond
might extend his hand to someone who would pull him out. It has a
mind of its own, you see. Not like Mamillian's—a mind we have
made for it, but enough of a mind to permit it to stay out of
difficulties and come down when it receives our signal."
The lower half of the flier was of opaque black metal, the upper half
a dome so clear as to be nearly invisible—the same substance, I
suppose, as the roof of the Botanic Gardens. A gun like the one the
mammoth had carried thrust out from the stern, and another twice as
large protruded from the bow.
The Autarch lifted one hand to his mouth and seemed to whisper
into his palm. An aperture appeared in the dome (it was as if a hole
had opened in a soap bubble) and a flight of silver steps, as thin and
insubstantial looking as the web ladder of a spider, descended to us.
The bare-chested men had left off pulling. "Do you think you can
climb those?" the Autarch asked.
"If I can use my hands," I said.
He went before me, and I crawled up ignominiously after him,
dragging my wounded leg. The seats, long benches that followed
the curve of the hull on either side, were upholstered in fur; but
even this fur felt colder than any ice. Behind me, the aperture


narrowed and vanished.
"We will have surface pressure in here no matter how high we go.
You don't have to worry about suffocating."
"I am afraid I am too ignorant to feel the fear, Sieur."
"Would you like to see your old bacele? They're far to the right, but
I'll try to locate them for you."
The Autarch had seated himself at the controls. Almost the only
machinery I had seen before had been Typhon's and Baldanders's,
and that which Master Gurloes controlled in the Matachin Tower. It
was of the machines, not of suffocation, that I was afraid; but I
fought the fear down.
"When you rescued me last night, you indicated that you had not
known I was in your army."
"I made inquiries while you slept."
"And it was you who ordered us forward?"
"In a sense… I issued the order that resulted in youmovement,
though I had nothing to do with your bacele directly. Do you resent
what I did? When you joined, did you think you would never have
to fight?"
We were soaring upward. Falling, as I had once feared to do, into
the sky. But I remembered the smoke and the brassy shout of the
graisle, the troopers blown to red paste by the whistling bolts, and
all my terror turned to rage. "I knew nothing of war. How much do
you know? Have you ever really been in a battle?"
He glanced over his shoulder at me, his blue eyes flashing. "I've
been in a thousand. You are two, as people are usually counted.


How many do you think I am?"
It was a long while before I answered him.

XXV
The Mercy of Agia
At first I thought there could be nothing stranger than to see the
army stretch across the surface of Urth until it lay like a garland
before us, coruscant with weapons and armor, many-hued; the
winged anpiels soaring above it nearly as high as we, circling and
rising on the dawn wind.
Then I beheld something stranger still. It was the army of the
Ascians, an army of watery whites and grayish blacks, rigid as ours
was fluid, deployed toward the northern horizon. I went forward to
stare at it.
"I could show them to you more closely," the Autarch said. "Still,
you would see only human faces."
I realized he was testing me, though I did not know how. "Let me
see them," I said.
When I had ridden with the schiavoni and watched our troops go
into action, I had been struck by their look of weakness in the mass,
the cavalry all ebb and flow like a wave that crashes with great force
—then drains away as mere water, too weak to bear the weight of a
mouse, pale stuff a child might scoop up in his hands. Even the
peltasts, with their serried ranks and crystal shields, had seemed
hardly more formidable than toys on a tabletop. Now I saw how


strong the rigid formations of our enemy appeared, rectangles that
held machines as big as fortresses and a hundred thousand soldiers
shoulder to shoulder.
But on a screen in the center of the control panel I looked under the
visors of their helmets, and all that rigidity, all that strength, melted
into a kind of horror. There were old people and children in the
infantry files, and some who seemed idiots. Nearly all had the mad,
famished faces I had observed the day before, and I recalled the
man who had broken from his square and thrown his spear into the
air as he died. I turned away.
The Autarch laughed. His laughter held no joy now; it was a flat
sound, like the snapping of a flag in a high wind. "Did you see one
kill himself?"
"No," I said.
"You were fortunate. I often do, when I look at them. They are not
permitted arms until they are ready to engage us, and so many take
advantage of the opportunity. The spearmen drive the butts of their
weapons into soft ground, usually, then blast off their own heads.
Once I saw two swordsmen—a man and a woman—who had made
a compact. They stabbed each other in the belly, and I watched
them counting first, moving their left hands… one… two… three,
and dead."
"Who are they?" I asked.
He shot me a look I could not interpret. "What did you say?"
"I asked who they are, Sieur. I know they're our enemies, that they
live to the north in the hot countries, and that they're said to be


enslaved by Erebus. But who are they?"
"Up until now I doubt you knew you did not know. Did you?"
My throat felt parched, though I could not have told why. I said, "I
suppose not. I'd never seen one until I came into the lazaret of the
Pelerines. In the south, the war seems very remote."
He nodded. "We have driven them half as far to the north as they
once drove us south, we autarchs. Who they are you will discover in
due time… What matters is that you wish to know." He paused.
"Both could be ours. Both armies, not just the one to the south…
Would you advise me to take both?" As he spoke, he manipulated
some control and the flier canted forward, its stern pointing at the
sky and its bow to the green earth, as though he meant to pour us
out upon the disputed ground.
"I don't understand what you mean," I told him.
"Half what you said of them was incorrect. They do not come from
the hot countries of the north, but from the continent that lies across
the equator. But you were right when you called them the slaves of
Erebus. They think themselves the allies of those who wait in the
deep. In truth, Erebus and his allies would give them to me if I
would give our south to them. Give you and all the rest."
I had to grip the back of the seat to keep from falling toward him.
"Why are you telling me this?"
The flier righted itself like a child's boat in a puddle, bobbing.
"Because it will soon be necessary for you to know that others have
felt what you will feel."
I could not frame a question I dared to ask. At last I ventured, "You


said you'd tell me here why you killed Thecla."
"Does she not live in Severian?"
A windowless wall in my mind fell to ruins. I shouted: "I died!" Not
realizing what I had said until the words were past my lips.
The Autarch took a pistol from beneath the control panel, letting it
lie across his thighs as he turned to face me.
"You won't need that, Sieur," I said. "I'm too weak."
"You have remarkable powers of recovery… I have seen them
already. Yes, the Chatelaine Thecla is gone, save as she endures in
you, and though the two of you are always together, you are both
lonely. Do you still seek for Dorcas? You told me of her, you
remember, when we met in the Secret House."
"Why did you kill Thecla?"
"I did not. Your error lies in thinking I am at the bottom of
everything. No one is… Not I, or Erebus, or any other. As to the
Chatelaine, you are she. Were you arrested openly?"
The memory came more vividly than I would have thought possible.
I walked down a corridor whose walls were lined with sad masks of
silver and entered one of the abandoned rooms, high-ceilinged and
musty with ancient hangings. The courier I was to meet had not yet
come. Because I knew the dusty divans would soil my gown, I took
a chair, a spindly thing of gilt and ivory. The tapestry spilled from
the wall behind me; I recalled looking up and seeing Destiny
crowned in chains and Discontent with her staff and glass, all
worked in colored wool, descending upon me.
The Autarch said, "You were taken by certain officers, who had


learned that you were conveying information to your half sister's
lover. Taken secretly, because your family has so much influence in
the north, and conveyed to an almost forgotten prison. By the time I
learned what had occurred, you were dead. Should I have punished
those officers for acting in my absence? They are patriots, and you
were a traitor."
"I, Severian, am a traitor too," I said, and I told him, then for the
first time in detail, how I had once saved Vodalus, and of the
banquet I had later shared with him.
When I had concluded, he nodded to himself. "Much of the loyalty
you felt for Vodalus comes, surely, from the Chatelaine. Some she
imparted to you while she was yet living, more after her death.
Naive though you have been, I am certain you are not so naive as to
think it a coincidence that it was she whose flesh was served to you
by the corpse-eaters."
I protested, "Even if he had known of my connection with her, there
was no time to bring her body from Nessus."
The Autarch smiled. "Have you forgotten that you told me a
moment ago that when you had saved him, he fled in such a craft as
this? From that forest, hardly a dozen leagues outside the City Wall,
he could have flown to the center of Nessus, unearthed a corpse
preserved by the chill soil of early spring, and returned in less than a
watch. Actually, he need not have known so much or moved so
swiftly. While you were imprisoned by your guild, he may have
learned that the Chatelaine Thecla, who had been loyal to him even
to death, was no more. By serving her flesh to his followers, he
would strengthen them in his cause. He would require no additional


motive to take her body, and no doubt he reinterred her in hoarded
snow in some cellar, or in one of the abandoned mines with which
that region abounds. You arrived, and wishing to bind you to him,
he ordered her brought out."
Something passed too swiftly to be seen—an instant later the flier
rocked with the violence of its motion. Sparks maneuvered on the
screen.
Before the Autarch could take the controls again, we were scudding
backward. There was a detonation so loud it seemed to paralyze me,
and the reverberating sky opened in a blossom of yellow fire. I have
seen a sparrow, struck by a stone from Eata's sling, reel in the air
just as we did, and fall, like us, fluttering to one side.
I woke to darkness, pungent smoke, and the smell of fresh earth. For
a moment or a watch I forgot my rescue and believed I lay on the
field where Daria and I, with Guasacht, Erblon, and the rest, had
fought the Ascians.
Someone lay near me—I heard the sigh of his breath, and the
creakings and scrapings that betray movement—but at first I paid
no heed to them, and later I came to believe that these sounds were
made by foraging animals, and grew afraid; later still, I recalled
what had happened and knew they were surely made by the
Autarch, who must have survived the crash with me, and I called to
him.
"So you still live, then." His voice was very weak. "I feared you
would die… though I should have known better. I could not revive
you, and your pulse was but faint."


"I have forgotten! Do you remember when we flew over the armies?
For a time I forgot it! I know now what it is to forget."
There was pale laughter in his voice. "Which you will now
remember always."
"I hope so, but it fades even as we speak. It vanishes like mist,
which must itself be a forgetting. What was that weapon that
brought us down?"
"I do not know. But listen. These are the most important words of
my life. Listen. You have served Vodalus, and his dream of
renewed empire. You still wish, do you not, that humankind should
go again to the stars?"
I recalled something Vodalus had told me in the wood and said,
"Men of Urth, sailing between the stars, leaping from galaxy to
galaxy, the masters of the daughters of the sun."
"They were so once… and brought all the old wars of Urth with
them, and in the young suns kindled new ones. Even they," (I could
not see him, yet I knew by his tone that he had indicated the
Ascians) "understand it must not be so again. They wish the race to
become a single individual… the same, duplicated to the end of
number. We wish each to carry all the race and its longings within
himself. Have you noticed the phial I wear at my neck?"
"Yes, often."
"It contains a pharmacon like alzabo, already mixed and held in
suspension. I am cold already below the waist. I will die soon.
Before I die… you must use it."
"I cannot see you," I said. "And I can scarcely move."


"Nevertheless, you will find a way. You remember everything, and
so you must recall the night you came to my House Azure. That
night someone else came to me. I was a servant once, in the House
Absolute… That is why they hate me. As they will hate you, for
what you once were. Paeon, who trained me, who was honeysteward fifty years gone by. I knew what he was in truth, for I had
met him before. He told me you were the one… the next. I did not
think it would be quite so soon…"
His voice fell away, and I began to grope for him, pulling myself
along. My hand found his, and he whispered, "Use the knife. We are
behind the Ascian line, but I have called upon Vodalus to rescue
you… I hear the hoofs of his destriers."
The words were so faint I could hardly hear, though my ear was
within a span of his mouth. "Rest," I said. Knowing that Vodalus
hated him and sought to destroy him, I thought him delirious.
"I am his spy. That is another of my offices. He draws the traitors…
I learn who they are and what they do, what they think. That is one
of his. Now I have told him the Autarch is trapped in this flier and
given him our location. He has served me… as my bodyguard…
before this."
Now even I could hear the sound of feet on the ground outside. I
reached up, searching for some means by which to signal; my hand
touched fur, and I knew the flier had over-turned, leaving us like
hidden toads beneath it.
There was a snap and the scream of tearing metal. Moonlight,
seeming bright as day but green as willow leaves, came flooding
through a rent in the hull that gaped as I watched. I saw the Autarch,

his thin white hair darkened with dried blood.
And above him silhouettes, green shades looking down upon us.
Their faces were invisible; but I knew those gleaming eyes and
narrow heads belonged to no followers of Vodalus. Frantically, I
searched for the Autarch's pistol. My hands were seized. I was
drawn up, and as I emerged I could not help thinking of the dead
woman I had seen pulled from her grave in the necropolis, for the
flier had fallen on soft ground and half buried itself. Where the
Ascian bolt had struck it, its side was torn away, leaving a tangle of
ruined wiring. The metal was twisted and burned.
I did not have much time to look at it. My captors turned me around
and around as one after another took my face in his hands. My cloak
was fingered as though they had never seen cloth. With their large
eyes and hollow cheeks, these evzones seemed to me much like the
infantry we had fought against, but though there were women
among them, there were no old people and no children. They wore
silvery caps and shirts in place of armor, and carried strangely
shaped jezails, so long barreled that when their butt plates rested on
the ground their muzzles were higher than their owners' heads. As I
saw the Autarch lifted from the flier, I said, "Your message was
intercepted, Sieur, I think."
"Nevertheless, it arrived." He was too weak to point, but I followed
the direction of his eyes, and after a moment I saw flying shapes
against the moon.
It almost seemed they slid down the beams to us, they came so
quickly and so straight. Their heads were like the skulls of women,
round and white, capped with miters of bone and stretched at the


jaws into curved bills lined with pointed teeth. They were Winged,
the pinions so great they seemed to have no bodies at all. Twenty
cubits at least these pinions stretched from tip to tip; when they beat
they made no sound, but far below I felt the rush of air.
(Once I had imagined such creatures threshing the forests of Urth
and beating flat her cities. Had my thought helped bring these?)
It seemed a long time before the Ascian evzones saw them. Then
two or three fired at once, and the converging bolts caught one at
their intersection and blew it to rags, then another and another. For
an instant the light was blotted out, and something cold and flaccid
struck my face, knocking me down.
When I could see again, half a dozen of the Ascians were gone, and
the rest were firing into the air at targets almost imperceptible to
me. Something whitish fell from them. I thought it would explode
and put my head down, but instead the hull of the wrecked flier rang
like a cymbal. A body—a human body broken like a doll's—had
struck it, but there was no blood.
One of the evzones jammed his weapon in my back and pushed me
forward. Two more were supporting the Autarch much as the
woman-cats had supported me. I discovered that I had lost all sense
of direction. Though the moon still shone, masses of cloud veiled
most of the stars. I looked in vain for the cross and for those three
stars that are, for reasons no one understands, called The Eight and
hang forever over the southern ice. Several of the evzones were still
firing when there came blazing among us some arrow or spear that
burst in a mass of blinding white sparks.



"That will do it," the Autarch whispered.
I was rubbing my eyes as I stumbled along, but I managed to ask
what he meant.
"Can you see? No more can they. Our friends above… Vodalus's, I
think… did not know our captors were so well armed. Now there
will be no more good shooting, and as soon as that cloud drifts
across the disc of Lune…"
I felt cold, as though a chill mountain wind had cut the tepid air
around us. A few moments before I had been in despair to find
myself among these gaunt soldiers. Now I would have given
anything for some guarantee that I would remain among them.
The Autarch was to my left, hanging limp between two evzones
who had slung their long-barreled jezails aslant their backs. As I
watched, his head lolled to one side, and I knew he was unconscious
or dead. "Legion" the woman-cats had called him, and it did not
take great intellect to combine that name with what he had told me
in the wrecked flier. Just as Thecla and Severian had joined in me,
many personalities were surely united in him. Ever since the night I
had first seen him, when Roche had brought me to the House Azure
(whose odd name I was now, perhaps, beginning to grasp) I had
sensed the complexity of his thought, as we sense, even in a bad
light, the complexity of a mosaic, the myriad, infinitesimal chips
that combine to produce the illuminated face and staring eyes of the
New Sun.
He had said I was destined to succeed him, but for how long a
reign? Preposterous as it was in a prisoner, and in a man so injured
and so weak that a watch of rest on the coarse grass would have


seemed like paradise, I was consumed with ambition. He had said I
must eat his flesh and swallow the drug while he still lived; and,
loving him, I would have torn my own from the grasp of my
captors, if I had possessed the strength, to claim that luxury and
pomp and power. I was Severian and Thecla united now, and
perhaps the torturers' ragged apprentice had, without fully knowing
it, longed for those things more than the young exultant held captive
at court. I knew then what poor Cyriaca had felt in the gardens of
the archon; yet if she had felt fully what I felt at that moment, it
would have burst her heart.
An instant later I was unwilling. Some part of me treasured the
privacy that not even Dorcas had entered. Deep inside the
convolutions of my mind, in the embrace of the molecules, Thecla
and I were twined together. For others—a dozen or a thousand,
perhaps, if in absorbing the personality of the Autarch I was also to
absorb those he had incorporated into himself—to come where we
lay would be for the crowds of the bazaar to enter a bower. I clasped
my heart's companion to me, and felt myself clasped. I felt myself
clasped, and clasped my heart's companion to me.
The moon dimmed as a dark lantern does when one presses the
lever that makes its plates iris closed until there remains no more
than a point of light, then nothing. The Ascian evzones fired their
jezails in a lattice of lilac and heliotrope, beams that diverged high
in the atmosphere and at last pricked the clouds like colored pins;
but without effect.
There was a wind, hot and sudden, and what I can only call a flash
of black. Then the Autarch was gone, and something huge rushed


toward me. I threw myself down.
Perhaps I struck the ground, but I do not remember it. In an instant,
it seemed, I was swooping through the air, turning, climbing surely,
the world below no more than a darker night. An emaciated hand,
hard as stone and three times human size, clutched me about the
waist.
We ducked, turned, lurched, slipped sidewise down a slope of air,
then, catching a rising wind, climbed till the cold stung and
stiffened my skin. When I craned my neck to look upward, I could
see the white, inhuman jaws of the creature that bore me. It was the
nightmare I had known months earlier when I had shared
Baldanders's bed, though in my dream I had ridden the thing's back.
Why that difference between dream and truth should be, I cannot
say. I cried out (I do not know what) and above me the thing opened
its scimitar beak to hiss.
From above, too, I heard a woman's voice call, "Now I have repaid
you for the mine—you are still alive."

XXVI
Above the Jungle
We landed by starlight. It was like awakening; I felt that it was not
the sky but the country of nightmare I was leaving behind. Like a
falling leaf, the immense creature settled in narrowing circles
through regions of progressively warmer air until I could smell the
odor of the Jungle Garden: the mingling of green life and rotting


wood with the perfume of wide, waxen, unnamed blossoms.
A ziggurat lifted its dark head above the trees—yet carried the trees
with it, for they sprouted from its crumbling walls like fungi from a
dead tree. We settled on it weightlessly, and at once there came
torches and excited voices. I was still faint from the thin and icy air
I had been breathing only moments before.
Human hands replaced the claws that had grasped me for so long.
We wound down ledges and stairways of broken stone until at last I
stood before a fire and saw across it the handsome, unsmiling face
of Vodalus and the heart-shaped one of his consort, Thea, our half
sister.
"Who is this?" Vodalus asked.
I tried to lift my arms, but they were held. "Liege," I said, "you must
know me."
From behind me, the voice I had heard in the air answered, "This is
the man of the price, the killer of my brother. For him, I—and
Hethor, who serves me—have served you."
"Then why do you bring him to me?" Vodalus asked. "He is yours.
Did you think that when I had seen him, I would repent of our
agreement?"
Perhaps I was stronger than I felt myself to be. Perhaps I only
caught the man on my right off-balance; however it was, I
succeeded in twisting about, jerking him into the fire, where his feet
sent the red brands flying.
Agia stood behind me, naked to the waist, and Hethor behind her,
showing all his rotten teeth as he cupped her breasts. I fought to


escape. She slapped me with an open hand—there was a pull at my
cheek, tearing pain, then the warm rush of blood.
Since then, I have learned that the weapon is called a lu-civee, and
that Agia had it because Vodalus had forbidden any but his own
bodyguard to carry arms in his presence. It is no more than a small
bar with rings for the thumb and fourth finger, and four or five
curved blades that can be concealed in the palm; but few have
survived its blow.
I was one of those few, and rose after two days to find myself shut
in a bare room. Perhaps in each life one room must become better
known than any other: for prisoners, it is always a cell. I, who had
worked outside so many, thrusting in trays of food to the disfigured
and demented, now knew again a cell of my own. What the ziggurat
had once been, I never guessed. Perhaps a prison indeed; perhaps a
temple, or the atelier of some forgotten art. My cell was about twice
the size of the one I had occupied beneath the tower of the torturers,
six paces wide and ten long. A door of ancient, gleaming alloy
stood against the wall, useless to Vodalus's jailers because they
could not lock it; a new one, roughly made of the ironlike timbers of
some jungle tree, closed the doorway. A window I believe had
never been meant for one, a circular opening hardly bigger than my
arm, pierced the discolored wall high up and gave light to the cell.
Three days more passed before I was strong enough to jump and,
gripping its lower edge with one hand, pull myself up to look out.
When that day came, I saw a rolling green country dotted with
butterflies—a place so foreign to what I had expected that I felt I
might be mad and lost my hold upon the window in my


astonishment. It was, as I eventually realized, the country of
treetops, where ten-chain hardwoods spread a lawn of leaves,
seldom seen save by the birds.
An old man with a knowledgeable, evil face had bandaged my
cheek and changed the dressings on my leg. Later he brought a lad
of about thirteen whose bloodstream he linked with mine until the
boy's lips turned the hue of lead. I asked the old leech where he
came from, and he, apparently thinking me a native of these parts,
said, "From the big city in the south, in the valley of the river that
drains the cold lands. It is a longer river than yours, is the Gyoll,
though its flood is not so fierce."
"You have great skill," I said. "I've never heard of a physician who
did as much. I feel well already, and wish you would stop before
this boy dies."
The old man pinched his cheek. "He'll recover quickly—in time to
warm my bed tonight. At his age they always do. Nay, it's not what
you think. I only sleep beside him because the night-breath of the
young acts as a restorative to those of my years. Youth, you see, is a
disease, and we may hope to catch a mild case. How stands your
wound?"
There was nothing—not even an admission, which might have been
rooted in some perverse desire to maintain an appearance of potency
—that could have convinced me so completely as his denial. I told
him the truth, that my right cheek-was numb save for a vague
burning as irritating as an itch, and wondered which of his duties the
miserable boy minded most.
The old man stripped away my bandages and gave my wounds a


second coating of the foul-smelling brown salve he had used
previously. "I'll be back tomorrow," he told me. "Although I don't
think you'll need Mamas here again. You're coming along nicely.
Her exultancy" (with a jerk of the head to show this was an ironical
reference to Agia's stature) "will be most pleased."
I said, in what I sought to make an offhand way, that I hoped all his
patients were doing as well.
"You mean the delator who was brought in with you? He's as well
as can be expected." He turned aside as he spoke, so that I would
not see his frightened expression.
On the chance that I might gain influence with him that would
enable me to aid the Autarch, I praised his understanding of his craft
extravagantly and ended by saying that I failed to comprehend why
a physician of his ability consorted with these wicked people.
He looked at me narrowly, and his face grew serious. "For
knowledge. There is nowhere a man in my profession can learn as I
learn here."
"You mean the eating of the dead? I have shared in that too, though
they may not have told you so."
"No, no. Learned men—particularly those of my profession—
practice that everywhere, and usually with better effect, since we are
more selective of our subjects and confine ourselves to the most
retentive tissues. The knowledge I seek cannot be learned in that
way, since none of the recently dead possessed it, and perhaps no
one has ever possessed it."
He was leaning against the wall now, and seemed to be speaking as


much to some invisible presence as to me. "The past's sterile science
led to nothing but the exhaustion of the planet and the destruction of
its races. It was founded in the mere desire to exploit the gross
energies and material substances of the universe, without regard to
their attractions, antipathies, and eventual destinies. Look!" He
thrust his hand into the beam of sunshine that was then issuing from
my high, circular window. "Here is light. You will say that it is not
a living entity, but you miss the point that it is more, not less.
Without occupying space, it fills the universe. It nourishes
everything, yet itself feeds upon destruction. We claim to control it,
but does it not perhaps cultivate us as a source of food? May it not
be that all wood grows so that it can be set ablaze, and that men and
women are born to kindle fires? Is it not possible that our claim to
master light is as absurd as wheat's claiming to master us because
we prepare the soil for it and attend its intercourse with Urth?"
"All that is well said," I told him. "But nothing to the point. Why do
you serve Vodalus?"
"Such knowledge is not gained without experiment." He smiled as
he spoke, and touched the shoulder of the boy, and I had a vision of
children in flames. I hope that I was wrong.
That had been two days before I pulled myself up to the window.
The old leech did not come again; whether he had fallen from favor,
or been dispatched to another place, or had merely decided no
further attentions were necessary, I had no way of knowing.
Agia came once, and standing between two of Vodalus's armed
women spat in my face as she described the torments she and
Hethor had contrived for me when I was strong enough to endure


them. When she finished, I told her quite truthfully that I had spent
most of my life assisting at operations more terrible, and advised
her to obtain trained assistance, at which she went away.
Thereafter for the better part of several days I was left alone. Each
time I woke, I felt myself almost a different person, for in that
solitude the isolation of my thoughts in the dark intervals of sleep
was nearly sufficient to deprive me of my sense of personality. Yet
all these Severians and Theclas sought freedom.
The retreat into memory was easy; we made it often, reliving those
idyllic days when Dorcas and I had journeyed toward Thrax, the
games played in the hedge-walled maze behind my father's villa and
in the Old Yard, the long walk down the Adamnian Steps that Agia
and I had taken before I knew her for my enemy.
But often too, I left memory and forced myself to think, sometimes
limping up and down, sometimes only waiting for insects to enter
the window so that I might for my amusement pluck them from the
air. I planned escape, though until my circumstances altered there
seemed no possibility of it; I pondered passages from the brown
book and sought to match them to my own experiences in order to
produce, insofar as possible, some general theory of human action
that would be of benefit to me should I ever free myself.
For if the leech, who was an elderly man, could still pursue
knowledge despite the certainty of imminent death, could not I
whose death appeared more imminent still, take some comfort in the
surety that it was less certain?
Thus I sifted the actions of the magicians, and of the man who had
accosted me outside the jacal of the sick girl, and of many other


men and women I had known, seeking for a key that would unlock
all hearts.
I found none that could be expressed in few words: "Men and
women do as they do because of thus and so…" None of the ragged
bits of metal fit—the desire for power, the lust of love, the need for
reassurance, or the taste for seasoning life with romance. But I did
find one principle, which I came to call that of Primitivity, that I
believe is widely applicable, and which, if it does not initiate action,
at least seems to influence the forms that action takes. I might state
it this way: Because the prehistoric cultures endured for so many
chiliads, they have shaped our heritage in such a way as to cause us
to behave as if their conditions obtained today.
For example, the technology that once might have permitted
Baldanders to observe all the actions of the hetman of the lakeside
village has been dust now for thousands of years; but during the
eons of its existence, it laid upon him a spell, as it were, by which it
remained effective though no longer extant.
In the same way, we all have in us the ghosts of long-vanished
things, of fallen cities and marvelous machines. The story I once
read to Jonas when we were imprisoned (with how much less
anxiety and how much more companionship) showed that clearly,
and I read it over again in the ziggurat. The author, having need for
some sea-born fiend like Erebus or Abaia, in a mythical setting,
gave it a head like a ship— which was the whole of its visible body,
the remainder being underwater—so that it was removed from
protoplasmic reality and became the machine that the rhythms of his
mind demanded.


While I amused myself with these speculations, I became
increasingly aware of the impermanent nature of Vodalus's
occupation of the ancient building. Though the leech came no more,
as I have said, and Agia never visited me again, I frequently heard
the sound of running feet in the corridor outside my door and
occasionally a few shouted words.
Whenever such sounds came, I put my unbandaged ear to the
planks; and in fact I often anticipated them, sitting that way for long
periods in the hope of overhearing some snatch of conversation that
would tell me something of Vodalus's plans. I could not help but
think then, as I listened in vain, of the hundreds in our oubliette who
must have listened to me when I carried their food to Drotte, and
how they must have strained to overhear the fragments of
conversation that drifted from Thecla's cell into the corridor, and
thus into their own cells, when I visited her.
And what of the dead? I own that I thought of myself, at times,
almost as dead. Are they not locked below ground in chambers
smaller than mine was, in their millions of millions? There is no
category of human activity in which the dead do not outnumber the
living many times over. Most beautiful children are dead. Most
soldiers, most cowards. The fairest women and the most learned men
—all are dead.
Their bodies repose in caskets, in sarcophagi, beneath arches of
rude stone, everywhere under the earth. Their spirits haunt our
minds, ears pressed to the bones of our foreheads. Who can say how
intently they listen as we speak, or for what word?


XXVII
Before Vodalus
On the morning of the sixth day, two women came for me. I had
slept very little the night before. One of the blood bats common in
those northern jungles had entered my room by the window, and
though I had succeeded in driving it out and staunching the blood, it
had returned again and again, attracted, I suppose, by the odor of
my wounds. Even now I cannot see the vague green darkness that is
diffused moonlight without imagining I see the bat crawling there
like a big spider, then springing into the air.
The women were as surprised to find me awake as I was to see
them; it was just dawn. They made me stand, and one bound my
hands while the other held her dirk to my throat. She asked how my
cheek was healing, however, and added that she had been told I was
a handsome fellow when I was brought in.
"I was almost as near to death then as I am now," I said to her. The
truth was that though the concussion I had suffered when the flier
crashed had healed, my leg, as well as my face, was still giving me
considerable pain.
The women brought me to Vodalus; not, as I had more or less
expected, somewhere in the ziggurat or on the ledge where he had
sat in state with Thea, but in a clearing embraced on three sides by
slow green water. It was a moment or two—I had to stand waiting
while some other business was conducted—before I realized that
the course of this river was fundamentally to the north and east, and


that I had never seen northeastward-flowing water before; all
streams, in my previous experience, ran south or southwest to join
southwestern-flowing Gyoll.
At last Vodalus inclined his head toward me, and I was brought
forward. When he saw that I could scarcely stand, he ordered my
guards to seat me at his feet, then waved them back out of hearing
distance. "Your entrance is somewhat less impressive than that you
made in the forest beyond Nessus," he said.
I agreed. "But, Liege, I come now, as I did then, as your servant.
Just as I was the first time you met me, when I saved your neck
from the ax. If I appear before you in bloody rags and with bound
hands, it is because you treat your servants so.
"Certainly I would agree that securing your wrists seems a trifle
excessive in your condition." He smiled faintly. "Is it painful?"
"No. The feeling is gone."
"Still, the cords aren't needed." Vodalus stood and drew a slender
blade, and leaning over me, flicked my bonds with the point.
I flexed my shoulders and the last strands parted. A thousand
needles seemed to pierce my hands.
When he had taken his seat again, Vodalus asked if I were not going
to thank him.
"You never thanked me, Liege. You gave me a coin instead. I think
I have one here somewhere." I fumbled in my sabretache for the
money I had been paid by Guasacht.
"You may keep your coin. I'm going to ask you for much more than
that. Are you ready to tell me who you are?"


"I've always been ready to do that, Liege. I'm Severian, formerly a
journeyman of the guild of torturers."
"But are you nothing else besides a former journeyman of that
guild?"
"No."
Vodalus sighed and smiled, then leaned back in his chair and sighed
again. "My servant Hildegrin always insisted you were important.
When I asked him why, he had any number of speculations, none of
which I found convincing. I thought he was trying to get silver from
me for a little easy spying. Yet he was right."
"I have only been important once to you, Liege."
"Each time we meet, you remind me that you saved my life once.
Did you know that Hildegrin once saved yours? It was he who
shouted 'Run!' to your opponent when you dueled in the city. You
had fallen, and he might have stabbed you."
"Is Agia here?" I asked. "She'll try to kill you if she hears that."
"No one can hear you but myself. You may tell her later, if you like.
She will never believe you."
"You can't be sure of that."
He smiled more broadly. "Very well, I'll turn you over to her. You
can then test your theory against mine."
"As you wish."
He brushed my acquiescence aside with an elegant motion of one
hand. "You think you can stalemate me with your willingness to die.
Actually you're offering me an easy exit from a dilemma. Your


Agia came to me with a very valuable thaumaturgist in her train,
and asked as the price of his service and her own only that you,
Severian of the Order of the Seekers for Truth and Penitence,
should be put into her hands. Now you say you are that Severian the
Torturer and no one else, and it is with great embarrassment that I
resist her demands."
"And whom do you wish me to be?" I asked.
"I have, or I should say I had, a most excellent servant in the House
Absolute. You know him, of course, since it was to him that you
gave my message." Vodalus paused and smiled again. "A week or
so ago we received one from him. It was not, to be sure, openly
addressed to me, but I had seen to it not long before that he was
aware of our location, and we were not far from him. Do you know
what he said?"
I shook my head.
"That's odd, because you must have been with him at the time. He
said he was in a wrecked flier—and that the Autarch was in the flier
with him. He would have been an idiot to have sent such a message
in the ordinary course of things, because he gave his location—and
he was behind our lines, as he must have known."
"You are a part of the Ascian army, then?"
"We serve them in certain scouting capacities, yes. I see you are
troubled by the knowledge that Agia and the thaumaturgist killed a
few of their soldiers to take you. You need not be. Their masters
value them even less than I do, and it was not a time for
negotiation."


"But they did not capture the Autarch." I am not a good liar, but I
was too exhausted, I think, for Vodalus to read my face easily.
He leaned forward, and for a moment his eyes glowed as though
candles burned in their depths. "He was there, then. How wonderful.
You have seen him. You have ridden in the royal flier with him."
I nodded once more.
"You see, ridiculous though it sounds, I feared you were he. One
never knows. An Autarch dies and another takes his place, and the
new Autarch may be there for half a century or a fortnight. There
were three of you then? No more?"
"No."
"What did the Autarch look like? Let me have every detail."
I did as he asked, describing Dr. Talos as he had appeared in the
part.
"Did he escape both the thaumaturgist's creatures and the Ascians?
Or do the Ascians have him? Perhaps the woman and her paramour
are holding him for themselves."
"I told you the Ascians did not take him."
Vodalus smiled again, but beneath his glowing eyes his twisted
mouth suggested only pain. "You see," he repeated, "for a time I
thought you might be the one. We have my servant, but he has
suffered a head injury and is never conscious for more than a few
moments. He will die very shortly, I'm afraid. But he has always
told me the truth, and Agia says that you were the only one with
him."
"You think that I am the Autarch? No."


"Yet you are changed from the man I met before."
"You yourself gave me the alzabo, and the life of the Chatelaine
Thecla. I loved her. Did you think that to thus ingest her essence
would leave me unaffected? She is with me always, so that I am
two, in this single body. Yet I am not the Autarch, who in one body
is a thousand."
Vodalus answered nothing, but half closed his eyes as though he
were afraid I would see their fire. There was no sound but the
lapping of the river water and the much-muted voices of the little
knot of armed men and women, who talked among themselves a
hundred paces off and glanced from time to time at us. A macaw
shrieked, fluttering from one tree to another.
"I would still serve you," I told Vodalus, "if you would permit it." I
was not certain it was a lie until the words had left my lips, and then
I was bewildered in mind, seeking to understand how those words,
which would have been true in the past for Thecla and for Severian
too, were now false for me.
" 'The Autarch, who in one body is a thousand,' " Vodalus quoted
me. "That is correct, but how few of us know it."

XXVIII
On the March
Today, this being the last before I am to leave the House Absolute, I
participated in a solemn religious ceremony. Such rituals are
divided into seven orders according to their importance, or as the


heptarchs say, their "transcendence"—something I was quite
ignorant of at the time of which I was writing a moment ago. At the
lowest level, that of Aspiration, are the private pieties, including
prayers pronounced privately, the casting of a stone upon a cairn,
and so forth. The gatherings and public petitionings that I, as a boy,
thought constituted the whole of organized religion, are actually at
the second level, which is that of Integration. What we did today
belonged to the seventh and highest, the level of Assimilation.
In accordance with the principle of circularity, most of the
accretions gathered in the progression through the first six were
now dispensed with. There was no music, and the rich vestments of
Assurance were replaced by starched robes whose sculptural folds
gave all of us something of the air of icons. It is no longer possible
for us to carry out the ceremony, as once we did, wrapped in the
shining belt of the galaxy; but to achieve the effect as nearly as
possible, Urth's attractive field was excluded from the basilica It
was a novel sensation for me, and though I was unafraid, I was
reminded again of that night I spent among the mountains when I
felt myself on the point of falling off the world-something I will
undergo in sober earnest tomorrow. At times the ceiling seemed a
floor, or (what was to me far more disturbing) a wall became the
ceiling, so that one looked upward through its open windows to see
a mountainside of grass that lifted itself forever into the sky.
Startling as it was, this vision was no less true than that we
commonly see.
Each of us became a sun; the circling, ivory skulls were our planets.
I said we had dispensed with music, yet that was not entirely true,


for as they swung about us there came a faint, sweet humming and
whistling, caused by the flow of air through their eye sockets and
teeth; those in nearly circular orbits maintained an almost steady
note, varying only slightly as they rotated on their axes; the songs of
those in elliptical orbits waxed and waned, rising as they
approached me, sinking to a moan as they receded.
How foolish we are to see in those hollow eyes and marble calottes
only death. How many friends are among them! The brown book,
which I carried so far, the only one of the possessions I took from
the Matachin Tower that still remains with me, was sewn and
printed and composed by men and women with those bony faces;
and we, engulfed by their voices, now on behalf of those who are
the past, offered ourselves and the present to the fulgurant light of
the New Sun. Yet at that moment, surrounded by the most
meaningful and magnificent symbolism, I could not but think how
different the actuality had been when we had left the ziggurat on the
day after my interview with Vodalus and had marched (I under the
guard of six women, who were sometimes forced to carry me) for
what must have been a week or more through pestilential jungle. I
did not know-and still do not know-whether we were fleeing the
armies of the Commonwealth or the Ascians who had been
Vodalus's allies. Perhaps we were merely seeking to rejoin the
major part of the insurgent force. My guards complained of the
moisture that dripped from the trees to eat at their weapons and
armor like acid, and of suffocating heat; I felt nothing of either. I
remember looking down once at my thigh and noticing with
surprise that the flesh had fallen away so that the muscles there


stood out like cords and I could see the sliding parts of my knee as
one sees the wheels and shafts of a mill.
The old leech was with us, and now visited me two or three times
each day. At first he tried to keep dry bandages on my face; when
he saw the effort was futile, he removed them all and contented
himself with plastering the wounds there with his salve. After that,
some of my women guards refused to look at me, and if they had
reason to speak to me did so with downcast eyes. Others seemed to
take pride in their ability to confront my torn face, standing straddlelegged (a pose they appeared to consider warlike) and resting their
left hands upon the hilts of their weapons with studied casualness.
I talked with them as often as I could. Not because I desired them—
the illness that had come with my wounds had taken all such desire
from me—but because in the midst of the straggling column I was
lonely in a way I had never been when I was alone in the war-torn
north or even when I had been locked in my ancient, mold-streaked
cell in the ziggurat, and because in some absurd corner of my mind
I still hoped to escape. I questioned them about every subject of
which they might conceivably have knowledge, and I was endlessly
amazed to find how few were the points on which our minds
coincided. Not one of the six had joined Vodalus because of an
appreciation of the difference between the restoration of progress he
sought to represent and the stagnation of the Commonwealth. Three
had merely followed some man into the ranks; two had come in the
hope of gaining revenge for some personal injustice, and one
because she had been fleeing from a detested stepfather. All but the
last now wished they had not joined. None knew with any precision


where we had been or had the slightest idea where we were going.
For guides our column had three savages: a pair of young men who
might have been brothers or even twins, and a much older one,
twisted, I thought, by deformities as well as age, who perpetually
wore a grotesque mask. Though the first two were younger and the
third much older, all three of them recalled to me the naked man I
had once seen in the Jungle Garden. They were as naked as he and
had the same dark, metallic-looking skin and straight hair. The
younger two carried cerbotanas longer than their outstretched arms
and dart bags hand-knotted of wild cotton and dyed a burnt umber,
doubtless with the juice of some plant. The old man had a staff as
crooked as himself, topped with the dried head of a monkey.
A covered palanquin whose place in the column was considerably
more advanced than my own bore the Autarch, whom my leech
gave me to understand was still alive; and one night when my
guards were chattering among themselves and I sat crouched over
our little fire, I saw the old guide (his bent figure and the impression
of an immense head conferred by his mask were unmistakable)
approach this palanquin and slip beneath it. Some time passed
before he scuttled away. This old man was said to be an uturuncu, a
shaman capable of assuming the form of a tiger.
Within a few days of our leaving the ziggurat, without encountering
anything that might be called a road or even a path, we struck a trail
of corpses. They were Ascians, and they had been stripped of their
clothing and equipment, so that their starved bodies seemed to have
dropped from the air to the places where they lay. To me, they
appeared to be about a week dead; but no doubt decay had been


accelerated by the dampness and heat, and the actual time was much
less. The cause of death was seldom apparent.
Until then we had seen few animals larger than the grotesque
beetles that buzzed about our fires by night. Such birds as called
from the treetops remained largely invisible, and if the blood-bats
visited us, their inky wings were lost in the smothering dark. Now
we moved, as it seemed, through an army of beasts drawn to the
corpse trail as flies are to a dead sumpter. Hardly a watch passed
without our hearing the sound of bones crushed by great jaws, and
by night green and scarlet eyes, some of them two spans apart,
shone outside our little circles of firelight. Though it was
preposterous to suppose these carrion-gorged predators would
molest us, my guards doubled their sentries; those who slept did so
in their corslets, with curtelaxes in their hands.
With each new day the bodies were fresher, until at last not all were
dead. A madwoman with cropped hair and staring eyes stumbled
into the column just ahead of our party, shouted words no one could
understand, and fled among the trees. We heard cries for help,
screams, and ravings, but Vodalus permitted no one to turn aside,
and on the afternoon of that day we plunged—much in the same
sense we might earlier have been said to have plunged into the
jungle—into the Ascian horde.
Our column consisted of the women and supplies, Vodalus himself
and his household, and a few of his aides with their retinues. In all it
surely amounted to no more than a fifth of his force; but if every
insurgent he could have called to his banner had been there, and
every fighter become a hundred, they would still have been among


that multitude as a cupful of water in Gyoll.
Those we encountered first were infantry. I recalled that the Autarch
had told me their weapons were kept from them until the time of
battle; but if it were so, their officers must have thought that time to
be at hand, or nearly. I saw thousands armed with the ransieur, so
that at length I came to believe that all their infantry was equipped
in that way; then, as night was falling, we overtook thousands more
carrying demilunes.
Because we marched faster than they, we moved more deeply into
their force; but we camped sooner than they (if they camped at all)
and all that night, until at last I fell asleep, I heard their hoarse cries
and the shuffling of their feet. In the morning we were again among
their dead and dying, and it was a watch or more before we
overtook the stumbling ranks.
These Ascian soldiers had a rigidity, a will-less attachment to order,
that I have never seen elsewhere, and that appeared to me to have
no roots in either spirit or discipline as I understand them. They
seemed to obey because they could not conceive of any other course
of action. Our soldiers nearly always carry several arms—at the
very least an energy weapon and a long knife (among the schiavoni
I was exceptional in not possessing such a knife in addition to my
falchion). But I never saw an Ascian with more than one, and most
of their officers bore no weapon at all, as if they regarded actual
fighting with contempt.

XXIX


Autarch of the Commonwealth
By the middle of the day, we had again passed all those whom we
had passed the afternoon before and came upon the baggage train. I
think all of us were amazed to discover that the enormous force we
had seen was no more than the rear guard of an army inconceivably
greater.
The Ascians used uintathers and platybelodons as beasts of burden.
Mixed with them were machines with six legs, machines apparently
built to serve that purpose. So far as I could see, the drivers made no
distinction between these devices and the animals; if a beast lay
down and could not be made to rise again, or a machine fell and did
not right itself, its load was distributed among those nearest to hand,
and it was abandoned. There appeared to be no effort to slaughter
the beasts for their meat or to repair or take parts from the machines.
Late in the afternoon some great excitement passed down our
column, though neither I nor my guards could discover what it was.
Vodalus himself and several of his lieutenants came hurrying by,
and afterward there was much coming and going between the end of
the column and its head. When dark came we did not camp, but
continued to tramp through the night with the Ascians. Torches
were passed back to us, and since I had no weapons to carry and
was somewhat stronger than I had been, I carried them, feeling
almost as though I commanded the six swords who surrounded me.
About midnight, as nearly as I could judge, we halted. My guards
found sticks for a fire, which we kindled from a torch. Just as we
were about to lie down, I saw a messenger rouse the palanquin


bearers ahead of us and send them blundering forward in the dark.
They were no sooner gone than he loped back to us and held a
quick, whispered conversation with the sergeant of my guards. At
once my hands were bound (as they had not been since Vodalus had
cut them free) and we were hurrying after the palanquin. We passed
the head of the column, marked by the Chatelaine Thea's little
pavilion, without pausing, and were soon wandering among the
myriad Ascian soldiers of the main body.
Their headquarters was a dome of metal. I suppose it must have
folded or collapsed in some way as a tent does, but it appeared as
permanent and solid as any building, black externally but glowing
with a sourceless, pale light within when the side opened to admit
us. Vodalus was there, stiff and deferential; beside him the
palanquin stood with its curtains opened to show the immobile body
of the Autarch. At the center of the dome, three women sat around a
low table. Neither then nor later did they look at Vodalus, or the
Autarch in his palanquin, or at me when I was brought forward,
save for an occasional glance. There were stacks of papers before
them, but they did not look at those at all—only at one another. In
appearance they were much like the other Ascians I had seen, save
that their eyes were saner and they were less starved looking.
"Here he is," Vodalus said. "Now you see them both before you."
One of the Ascians spoke to the other two in their own tongue. Both
nodded and the one who had spoken said, "Only he who acts against
the populace need hide his face."
There was a lengthy pause, then Vodalus hissed at me, "Answer
her!"


"Answer what? There has been no question."
The Ascian said, "Who is the friend of the populace? He who aids
the populace. Who is the enemy of the populace?"
Speaking very rapidly, Vodalus asked, "To the best of your
knowledge are you, or is this unconscious man here, the leader of
the peoples of the southern half of this hemisphere?"
"No," I said. It was an easy lie, since from what I had seen, the
Autarch was the leader of very few in the Commonwealth. To
Vodalus I added under my breath, "What kind of foolishness is this?
Do they believe I would tell them if I were the Autarch?"
"All we say is being transmitted to the north."
One of the Ascians who had not spoken previously spoke now.
Once she gestured in our direction. When she was finished, all three
sat deathly still. I had the impression that they heard some voice
inaudible to me, and that they did not dare move while it spoke; but
that may have been mere imagination on my part. Vodalus fidgeted,
I shifted my position to put a little less weight on my injured leg,
and the Autarch's narrow chest heaved to the unsteady rhythm of his
breathing, but the three of them remained as immobile as figures in
a painting.
At last the one who had spoken first said, "All persons belong to the
populace." At that the others seemed to relax.
"This man is ill," Vodalus said, looking toward the Autarch, "and he
has been a useful servant to me, though I suppose his usefulness is
now ended. The other I have promised to one of my followers."
"The merit of sacrifice falls on him who without thought to his own


convenience offers what he has toward the service of the populace."
The Ascian woman's tone made it clear that no further argument
was possible.
Vodalus looked toward me and shrugged, then turned on his heel
and strode out of the dome. Almost at once a file of Ascian officers
entered carrying lashes.
We were imprisoned in an Ascian tent perhaps twice the size of my
cell in the ziggurat. There was a fire there but no bedding, and the
officers who had carried in the Autarch had merely dropped him on
the ground beside it. After working my hands free, I tried to make
him comfortable, turning him over on his back as he had been in the
palanquin and arranging his arms at his sides.
About us the army lay quiet, or at least as quiet as an Ascian army
ever is. From time to time someone far off cried out—in sleep, it
seemed—but for the most part there was no sound but the slow
pacing of the sentries outside. I cannot express the horror that the
thought of going north to Ascia evoked in me then. To see only the
Ascians' wild, starved faces and to encounter myself, no doubt for
the remainder of my life, whatever it was that had driven them mad,
seemed to me a more horrible fate than any the clients in the
Matachin Tower were ever forced to endure. I tried to lift the skirt
of the tent, thinking that the sentries could do nothing worse than
take my life; but the edges were welded to the ground by some
means I did not understand. All four walls were of a slick, tough
substance I could not tear, and Miles's razor had been taken from
me by my six female guards. I was about to rush out the door when
the Autarch's well-remembered voice whispered, "Wait." I dropped


to my knees beside him, suddenly afraid we would be overheard.
"I thought you were—sleeping."
"I suppose I have been in a coma most of the time. But when I was
not, I feigned, so Vodalus would not question me. Are you going to
escape?"
"Not without you, Sieur. Not now. I had given you up for dead."
"You were not far wrong… certainly not by so much as a day. Yes,
I think that is best, you must escape. Father Inire is with the
insurgents. He was to bring you what is necessary, then help you get
away. But we are no longer there… are we? He may not be able to
aid you. Open my robe. What you first require is thrust into my
waistband."
I did as he asked; the flesh my fingers brushed was as cold as a
corpse's. Near his left hip I saw a hilt of silvery metal no thicker
than a woman's finger. I drew the weapon forth; the blade was not
half a span in length, but thick and strong, and of that deadly
sharpness I had not felt since Baldanders's mace had shattered
Terminus Est.
"You must not go yet," the Autarch whispered.
"I will not leave you while you live," I said. "Do you doubt me?"
"We will both live, and both go. You know the abomination…" His
hand closed on mine. "The eating of the dead, to devour their dead
lives. But there is another way you do not know, and another drug.
You must take it, and swallow the living cells of my forebrain."
I must have drawn away, for his hand gripped my own harder.
"When you lie with a woman, you thrust your life into hers so that


perhaps there will be new life. When you do as I have commanded
you, my life and the lives of all those who live in me will be
continued in you. The cells will enter your own nervous system and
multiply there. The drug is in the vial I wear at my neck, and that
blade will split the bones of my skull like pine. I have had occasion
to use it, and I promise it. Do you recall how you swore to serve me
when I shut the book? Use the knife now, and go as quickly as you
can."
I nodded and promised I would.
"The drug will be stronger than any you have known, and though all
but mine will be faint, there will be hundreds of personalities… We
are many lives."
"I understand," I said.
"The Ascians march at dawn. Can there be more than a single watch
remaining of the night?"
"I hope that you will live it out, Sieur, and many more. That you'll
recover."
"You must kill me now, before Urth turns to face the sun. Then I
will live in you… never die. I live by mere volition now. I am
relinquishing my life as I speak."
To my utter surprise, my eyes were streaming with tears. "I've hated
you since I was a boy, Sieur. I've done you no harm, but I would
have harmed you if I could, and now I'm sorry."
His voice had faded until it was softer than the chirping of a cricket.
"You were right to hate me, Severian. I stand… as you will stand…
for so much that is wrong."


"Why?" I asked. "Why?" I was on my knees beside him.
"Because all else is worse. Until the New Sun comes, we have but a
choice of evils. All have been tried, and all have failed. Goods in
common, the rule of the people… everything. You wish for
progress? The Ascians have it. They are deafened by it, crazed by
the death of Nature till they are ready to accept Erebus and the rest
as gods. We hold humankind stationary… in barbarism. The
Autarch protects the people from the exultants, and the exultants…
shelter them from the Autarch. The religious comfort them. We
have closed the roads to paralyze the social order…"
His eyes fell shut. I put my hand upon his chest to feel the faint
stirring of his heart.
"Until the New Sun…"
This was what I had sought to escape, not Agia or Vodalus or the
Ascians. As gently as I could, I lifted the chain from his neck,
unstoppered the vial and swallowed the drug. Then with that short,
stiff blade I did what had to be done.
When it was over, I covered him from head to toe with his own
saffron robe and hung the empty vial about my own neck. The
effect of the drug was as violent as he had warned me it would be.
You that read this, who have never, perhaps, possessed more than a
single consciousness, cannot know what it is to have two or three,
much less hundreds. They lived in me and were joyful, each in his
own way, to find they had new life. The dead Autarch, whose face I
had seen in scarlet ruin a few moments before, now lived again. My
eyes and hands were his, I knew the work of the hives of the bees of


the House Absolute and the sacredness of them, who steer by the
sun and fetch gold of Urth's fertility. I knew his course to the
Phoenix Throne, and to the stars, and back. His mind was mine and
filled mine with lore whose existence I had never suspected and
with the knowledge other minds had brought to his. The
phenomenal world seemed dim and vague as a picture sketched in
sand over which an errant wind veered and moaned. I could not
have concentrated on it if I had wished to, and I had no such wish.
The black fabric of our prison tent faded to a pale dove-gray, and
the angles of its top whirled like the prisms of a kaleidoscope. I had
fallen without being aware of it and lay near the body of my
predecessor, where my attempts to rise resulted in nothing more
than the beating of my hands upon the ground.
How long I lay there I do not know. I had wiped the knife—now,
still, my knife—and concealed it as he had. I could vividly picture a
self of dozens of superposed images slitting the wall and slipping
out into the night. Severian, Thecla, myriad others all escaping. So
real was the thought that I often believed I had done it; but always,
when I ought to have been running between the trees, avoiding the
exhausted sleepers of the army of the Ascians, I found myself
instead in the familiar tent, with the draped body not far from my
own.
Hands clasped mine. I supposed that the officers had returned with
their lashes, and tried to see and to rise so I would not be struck. But
a hundred random memories intruded themselves like the pictures
the owner holds up to us in rapid succession in a cheap gallery: a
footrace, the towering pipes of an organ, a diagram with labeled


angles, a woman riding in a cart.
Someone said, "Are you all right? What's happened to you?" I felt
the spittle dribbling from my lips, but no words came.

XXX
The Corridors of Time
Something struck my face a tingling blow.
"What's happened? He's dead. Are you drugged?"
"Yes. Drugged." Someone else was speaking, and after a moment I
knew who it was: Severian, the young torturer.
But who was I?
"Get up. We've got to get out."
"Sentry."
"Sentries," the voice corrected us. "There were three of them. We
killed them."
I was walking down a stair white as salt, down to nenuphars and
stagnant water. Beside me walked a suntanned girl with long and
slanting eyes. Over her shoulder peered the sculptured face of one
of the eponyms. The carver had worked in jade; the effect was that
of a face of grass.
"Is he dying?"
"He sees us now. See his eyes."
I knew where I was. Soon the pitchman would thrust his head
through the doorway of the tent to tell me to be gone. "Above


ground," I said. "You told me I would see her above ground. But
that was easy. She is here."
"We must go." The green man took my left arm and Agia my right,
and they led me out.
We walked a long way, just as I had envisioned myself running,
stepping sometimes over sleeping Ascians.
"They keep little guard," Agia whispered. "Vodalus told me their
leaders are so well obeyed they can scarcely conceive of treacherous
attack, In the war, our soldiers surprise them often."
I did not understand and repeated, " 'Our soldiers…' " like a child.
"Hethor and I will no longer fight for them. How could we, after we
have seen them? My business is with you."
I was beginning to find myself again, the minds that made up my
mind all falling into place. I had been told once that autarch meant
"self-ruler," and I glimpsed the reason that title had come into
being. I said, "You wanted to kill me. Now you are freeing me. You
could have stabbed me." I saw a crooked dagger from Thrax
quivering in Casdoe's shutter.
"I could have killed you more readily than that. Hethor's mirrors
have given me a worm, no longer than your hand, that glows with
white fire. I have only to fling it, and it kills and crawls back to me
—one by one I slew the sentries so. But this green man would not
permit it, and I would not wish it. Vodalus promised me your agony
spread over weeks, and I will not have less."
"You're taking me back to him?"
She shook her head, and in the faint, gray dawn light that had crept


through the leaves I saw her brown curls bounce on her shoulders as
they had when I had watched her raise the gratings outside the rag
shop. "Vodalus is dead. With the worm at my command, do you
think I would let him cheat me and live? They would have taken
you away. Now I will let you go free—because I have some inkling
of where you will go—and in the end you will come into my hands
again, as you did when our pteriopes took you from the evzones."
"You are rescuing me because you hate me then," I said, and she
nodded. Vodalus, I suppose, had hated that part of me that had been
the Autarch in the same way.
Or rather, he had hated his conception of the Autarch, for he had
been loyal, in so far as he was capable of it, to the real Autarch,
whom he supposed his servant. When I had been a boy in the
kitchens of the House Absolute, there was a cook who so despised
the armigers and exultants for whom he prepared food that, in order
that he should never have to bear the indignity of their reproaches,
he did everything with a feverish perfection. He was eventually
made chief of the cooks of that wing. I thought of him, and while I
did, Agia's touch on my arm, which had become almost
imperceptible as we hastened along, vanished altogether. When I
looked for her, she was gone; I was alone with the green man.
"How did you come to be here?" I asked him. "You nearly lost your
life in these times, and I know you cannot thrive under our sun."
He smiled. Though his lips were green, his teeth were white; they
gleamed in the faint light. "We are your children, and we are not
less honest than you, though we do not kill to eat. You gave me half
your stone, the stone that gnawed the iron and set me free. What did


you think I would do when the chain no longer bound me?"
"I supposed you would return to your own day," I said. The spell of
the drug had faded sufficiently for me to fear our talk would wake
the Ascian soldiers. Yet I could see none-only the dark, towering
boles of the jungle hardwoods.
"We requite our benefactors. I have been running up and down the
corridors of Time, seeking for a moment in which you also were
imprisoned, that I might free you."
When I heard that, I did not know what to say. At last I told him,
"You cannot imagine how strange I feel now, knowing that
someone has been searching my future, looking for an opportunity
to do me good. But now, now that we are quits, surely you
understand that I did not help you because I believed you could help
me."
"You did—you desired my help in finding the woman who just left
us, the woman whom since that occasion you have found several
times. However, you ought to know that I was not alone: There are
others questing there—I shall send two of them to you. And you and
I are not yet at a balance, for although I found you captive here, the
woman found you also and would have freed you without my help.
So I shall see you again."
As he said these words, he let go of my arm and stepped in that
direction I had never seen until I watched the ship vanish into it
from the top of Baldanders's castle and could only see, it seemed,
when there was something there. Immediately he turned and began
to run, and despite the dimness of the dawn sky I could see his
running figure for a long time, illuminated by intermittent but


regular flashes. At last he faded to a point of darkness; but then, just
when I expected that point to disappear utterly, it began to grow, so
that I had the impression of something huge rushing toward me
down that strangely angled tunnel.
It was not the ship I had seen but another and much smaller one.
Still, it was so large that when it moved at last entirely into our field
of consciousness, its gunwales touched several of the thick trunks at
once. The hull dilated, and a pont, much shorter than the steps that
had descended from the Autarch's flier, slid out to touch the ground.
Down it came Master Malrubius and my dog, Triskele.
At that moment I regained a command of my personality that I had
not truly possessed since I had drunk alzabo with Vodalus and eaten
Thecla's flesh. It was not that Thecla was gone (and indeed I could
not wish her gone, though I knew that in many respects she had
been a cruel and foolish woman) or that my predecessor and the
hundred minds that had been enveloped in his had vanished. The
old, simple structure of my single personality was no more; but the
new, complex structure no longer dazzled and bewildered me. It
was a maze, but I was the owner and even the builder of that maze,
with the print of my thumb on every passageway. Malrubius
touched me, and then taking my wondering hand in his laid it gently
against his own cool cheek.
"You are real, then," I said.
"No. We are almost what you think us—powers from above the
stage. Only not quite deities. You are an actor, I believe."
I shook my head. "Don't you know me, Master? You taught me


when I was a boy, and I have become a journeyman of the guild."
"Yet you are an actor too. You have as much right to think of
yourself in that way as the other. You had been performing when
we spoke to you in the field near the Wall, and the next time we saw
you, at the House Absolute, you were acting again. It was a good
play; I should have liked to see the end."
"You were in our audience?"
Master Malrubius nodded. "As an actor, Severian, you surely know
the phrase I hinted at a moment ago. It refers to some supernatural
force, personified and brought onto the stage in the last act in order
that the play may end well. None but poor playwrights do it, they
say, but those who say so forget that it is better to have a power
lowered on a rope, and a play that ends well, than to have nothing,
and a play that ends badly. Here is our rope—many ropes, and a
stout ship too. Will you come aboard?"
I said, "Is that why you are as you are? In order that I will trust
you?"
"Yes, if you like." Master Malrubius nodded, and Triskele, who had
been sitting at my feet and looking up into my face, ran with his
bumping, three-legged gallop halfway up the pont and turned to
look back at me, his stump tail wagging and his eyes pleading as a
dog's eyes do.
"I know you can't be what you seem. Perhaps Triskele is, but I saw
you buried, Master. Your face is no mask, but there's a mask
somewhere, and under that mask you're what the common people
call a cacogen, although Dr. Talos explained to me once that you


prefer to be called Hierodules."
Again Malrubius laid his hand on mine. "We would not deceive you
if we could. But I hope that you will deceive yourself, to your good
and all Urth's. Some drug now dulls your mind—more than you
realize—just as you were under the sway of sleep when we spoke to
you in that meadow near the Wall. If you were undrugged now,
perhaps you would lack the courage to come with us, even if you
saw us, even if your reason convinced you that you should."
I said, "So far it hasn't convinced me of that, or of anything else.
Where do you want to take me, and why do you want to take me
there? Are you Master Malrubius or a Hiero-dule?" As I spoke I
became more conscious of the trees, standing as soldiers stand while
the officers of the staff discuss some point of strategy. Night was
upon us still, but it had become a thinner darkness, even here.
"Do you know the meaning of that word Hierodule you use? I am
Malrubius, and no Hierodule. Rather I serve those the Hierodules
serve. Hierodule means holy slave. Do you think there can be slaves
without masters?"
"And you take me—"
"To Ocean, to preserve your life." As if he had read my thought, he
continued, "No, we do not take you to the paramours of Abaia,
those who spared and succored you because you had been a torturer
and would be Autarch. In any event, you have much worse to fear.
Soon the slaves of Erebus, who held you captive here, will discover
you have escaped; and Erebus would hurl that army, and many
others like it, into the abyss to capture you. Come." He drew me
onto the pont.


XXXI
The Sand Garden
That ship was worked by hands I could not see. I had supposed we
would float up as the flier had or vanish like the green man down
some corridor in time. Instead we rose so quickly I felt sick;
alongside I heard the crashing of great limbs.
"You are the Autarch now," Malrubius told me. "Do you know it?"
His voice seemed to blend with the whistle of the wind in the
rigging.
"Yes. My predecessor, whose mind is now one of mine, came to
office as I have. I know the secrets, the words of authority, though I
haven't had time yet to think about them. Are you returning me to
the House Absolute?"
He shook his head. "You are not ready. You believe that all the old
Autarch knew is available to you now. You are correct—but it is not
yet in your grasp, and when the tests come, you will encounter
many who will slay you should you falter. You were nurtured in the
Citadel of Nessus—what are the words for its castellan? How are
the man-apes of the treasure mine to be commanded? What phrases
unlock the vaults of the Secret House? You need not tell me,
because these things are the arcana of your state, and I know them
in any case. But do you yourself know them, without thinking long?"
The phrases I required were present in my mind, yet I failed when I
sought to pronounce them to myself. Like little fish, they slipped


aside, and in the end I could only lift my shoulders.
"And there is one thing more for you to do. One adventure more,
beside the waters."
"What is it?"
"If I were to tell you, it would not come to pass. Do not be alarmed.
It is a simple thing, over in a breath. But I must explain a great deal,
and I have not much time in which to do it. Have you faith in the
coming of the New Sun?"
As I had looked within myself for the words of command, so I
looked within for my belief; and I could no more find it than I had
found them. "I have been taught so all my life," I said. "But by
teachers—the true Malrubius was one—who I think did not
themselves believe. So I cannot now say whether I believe or not."
"Who is the New Sun? A man? If a man, how can it be that every
green thing is to grow darkly green again at his coming, and the
granaries full?"
It was unpleasant to be drawn back to things half heard in childhood
now, when I was just beginning to understand that I had inherited
the Commonwealth. I said, "He will be the Conciliator come again—
his avatar, bringing justice and peace. In pictures he is shown with a
shining face, like the sun. I was an apprentice of the torturers, not an
acolyte, and that is all I can tell you." I drew my cloak about me for
shelter from the cold wind. Triskele was huddled at my feet.
"And which does humanity need more? Justice and peace? Or a
New Sun?"
At that I tried to smile. "It has occurred to me that though you

cannot possibly be my old teacher, you may incorporate his
personality as I do the Chatelaine Thecla's. If that is so, you already
know my answer. When a client is driven to the utmost extremity, it
is warmth and food and ease from pain he wants. Peace and justice
come afterward. Rain symbolizes mercy and sunlight charity, but
rain and sunlight are better than mercy and charity. Otherwise they
would degrade the things they symbolize."
"To a large extent you are correct. The Master Malrubius you knew
lives in me, and your old Triskele in this Triskele. But that is not
important now. If there is time, you will understand before we go."
Malrubius closed his eyes and scratched the gray hair on his chest,
just as I remembered him doing when I was among the youngest of
the apprentices. "You were afraid to board this little ship, even
when I told you it would not carry you away from Urth, or even to a
continent other than your own. Suppose I were to tell you—I do not
tell you, but suppose I did—that it would in fact take you from Urth,
past the orbit of Phaleg, which you call Ver-thandi, past Bethor and
Aratron, and at last into the outer dark, and across the dark to
another place. Would you be frightened, now that you have sailed
with us?"
"No man enjoys saying he is afraid. But yes, I would."
"Afraid or not, would you go if it might bring the New Sun?"
It seemed then that some icy spirit from the gulf had already
wrapped its hands about my heart. I was not deceived, nor, I think,
did he mean I should be. To answer yes would be to undertake the
journey. I hesitated, in silence except for the roar of my own blood
in my ears.


"You need not answer now if you cannot. We will ask again. But I
can tell you nothing more until you answer."
For a long time I stood on that strange deck, sometimes walking up
and down, blowing on my fingers in the freezing wind while all my
thoughts crowded around me. The stars watched us, and it seemed
to me that Master Malrubius's eyes were two more such stars.
At last I returned to him and said, "I have long wanted… if it would
bring the New Sun, I would go."
"I can give you no assurance. If it might bring the New Sun, would
you then? Justice and peace, yes, but a New Sun—such an
outpouring of warmth and energy upon Urth as she knew before the
birth of the first man?"
Now came the strangest happening I have to tell in all this already
overlong tale; yet there was no sound or sight associated with it, no
speaking beast or gigantic woman. It was only that as I heard him I
felt a pressure against my breastbone, as I had felt it in Thrax when
I knew I should be going north with the Claw. I remembered the girl
in the jacal. "Yes," I said. "If it might bring the New Sun, I would
go."
"What if you were to stand trial there? You knew him who was
autarch before you, and in the end you loved him. He lives in you.
Was he a man?"
"He was a human being—as you, I think, are not, Master."
"That was not my question, as you know as well as I. Was he a man
as you are a man? Half the dyad of man and woman?"
I shook my head.


"So you will become, should you fail the trial. Will you still go?"
Triskele laid his scarred head against my knee, the ambassador of
all crippled things, of the Autarch who had carried a tray in the
House Absolute and lain paralyzed in the palanquin waiting to pass
to me the humming voices in his skull, of Thecla writhing under the
Revolutionary, and of the woman even I, who had boasted I could
forget nothing, had nearly forgotten, bleeding and dying beneath our
tower. Perhaps after all it was my discovery of Triskele, which I
have said changed nothing, that in the end changed everything. I did
not have to answer this time; Master Malrubius saw my answer in
my face.
"You know of the chasms of space, which some call the Black Pits,
from which no speck of matter or gleam of light ever returns. But
what you have not known until now is that these chasms have their
counterparts in White Fountains, from which matter and energy
rejected by a higher universe flow in endless cataract into this one.
If you pass—if our race is judged ready to reenter the wide seas of
space—such a white fountain will be created in the heart of our sun."
"But if I fail?"
"If you fail, your manhood will be taken from you, so that you
cannot bequeath the Phoenix Throne to your descendants. Your
predecessor also accepted the challenge."
"And failed. That is clear from what you said."
"Yes. Still, he was braver than many who are called heroes, the first
to go in many reigns. Ymar, of whom you may have heard, was the
last before him."


"Yet Ymar too must have been judged unfit. Are we going now? I
can see only stars beyond the rail."
Master Malrubius shook his head. "You are not looking as carefully
as you think. We are already near our destination."
Swaying, I walked to the railing. Some of my unsteadiness had its
origin in the motion of the ship, I think; but some, too, came from
the lingering effects of the drug.
Night still covered Urth, for we had flown swiftly to the west, and
the faint dawn that had come to the Ascian army in the jungle had
not yet appeared here. After a moment I saw that the stars over the
side seemed to slip, and slide in their heaven, with an uneasy and
wavering motion. Almost it seemed that something moved among
the stars as the wind moves through wheat. Then I thought, It is the
sea… and at that moment Master Malrubius said, "It is that great
sea called Ocean."
"I have longed to visit it."
"In a short time you will be standing at its margin. You asked when
you would leave this planet. Not until your rule here is secure.
When the city and the House Absolute obey you and your armies
have repelled the incursions of the slaves of Erebus. Within a few
years, perhaps. But perhaps not for decades. We two will come for
you."
"You are the second tonight to tell me I will see you again," I said.
Just as I spoke, there was a slight shock, like the sensation one feels
when a boat is brought skillfully to the dock. I walked down the
pont and out upon sand, and Master Malrubius and Triskele


followed me. I asked if they would not stay with me for a time to
counsel me.
"For a short time only. If you have further questions, you must ask
them now."
The silver tongue of the pont was already creeping back into the
hull. It seemed that it had hardly come home before the ship lifted
itself and scudded down the same aperture in reality into which the
green man had run.
"You spoke of the peace and justice that the New Sun is to bring. Is
there justice in his calling me so far? What is the test I must pass?"
"It is not he who calls you. Those who call hope to summon the
New Sun to them," Master Malrubius said, but I did not understand
him. Then he recounted to me in brief words the secret history of
Time, which is the greatest of all secrets, and which I will set down
here in the proper place. When he had finished, my mind reeled and
I feared I would forget all he had said, because it seemed too great a
thing for any living man to know, and because I had learned at last
that the mists close for me as for other men.
"You will not forget, you above all. At Vodalus's banquet, you said
you felt sure you would forget the foolish passwords he taught you
in imitation of the words of authority. But you did not. You will
remember everything. Remember too, not to be afraid. It may be
that the epic penance of mankind is at an end. The old Autarch told
you the truth—we will not go to the stars again until we go as a
divinity, but that time may not be far off now. In you all the
divergent tendencies of our race may have achieved synthesis."


Triskele stood on his hind legs for a moment as he used to, then
spun around and galloped down the starlit beach, three paws
scattering the little cat's-paw waves. When he was a hundred strides
off he turned and looked back at me, as though he wished me to
follow.
I took a few steps toward him, but Master Malrubius said, "You
cannot go where he is going, Severian. I know you think us
cacogens of a kind, and for a time I felt it would not be wise to
wholly undeceive you, but I must do so now. We are aquastors,
beings created and sustained by the power of the imagination and
the concentration of thought."
"I have heard of such things," I told him. "But I have touched you."
"That is no test. We are as solid as most truly false things are—a
dance of particles in space. Only the things no one can touch are
true, as you should know by now. Once you met a woman named
Cyriaca, who told you tales of the great thinking machines of the
past. There is such a machine on the ship in which we sailed. It has
the power to look into your mind."
I asked, "Are you that machine, then?" A feeling of loneliness and
vague fear grew in me.
"I am Master Malrubius, and Triskele is Triskele. The machine
looked among your memories and found us. Our lives in your mind
are not so complete as those of Thecla and the old Autarch, but we
are there nevertheless, and live while you live. But we are
maintained in the physical world by the energies of the machine,
and its range is but a few thousand years."


As he spoke these final words, his flesh was already fading into
bright dust. For a moment it glinted in the cold starlight. Then it was
gone. Triskele remained with me a few breaths longer, and when his
yellow coat was already silvered and blowing away in the gentle
breeze, I heard his bark.
Then I stood alone at the edge of the sea I had longed for so often;
but though I was alone, I found it cheering, and breathed the air that
is like no other, and smiled to hear the soft song of the little waves.
Land—Nessus, the House Absolute, and all the rest—lay to the
east; west lay the sea; I walked north because I was reluctant to
leave it too soon, and because Triskele had run in that direction,
along the margin of the sea. There great Abaia might wallow with
his women, yet the sea was older far, and wiser than he; we human
beings, like all the life of the land, had come from the sea; and
because we could not conquer it, it was ours always. The old, red
sun rose on my right and touched the waves with his fading beauty,
and I heard the calling of the sea birds, the innumerable birds.
By the time the shadows were short, I was tired. My face and my
wounded leg pained me; I had not eaten since noon of the previous
day and had not slept save for my trance in the Ascian tent. I would
have rested if I could, but the sun was warm, and the line of cliffs
beyond the beach offered no shade. At last I followed the tracks of a
two-wheeled cart and came to a clump of wild roses growing from a
dune. There I halted, and seated myself in their shadow to take off
my boots and pour out the sand that had entered their splitting
seams.
A thorn caught my forearm and broke from its branch, remaining


embedded in my skin, with a scarlet drop of blood, no bigger than a
grain of millet, at its tip. I plucked it out-then fell to my knees.
It was the Claw.
The Claw perfect, shining black, just as I had placed it under the
altar stone of the Pelerines. All that bush and all the other bushes
growing with it were covered with white blossoms and these perfect
Claws. The one in my palm flamed with transplendent light as I
looked at it.
I had surrendered the Claw, but I had retained the little leather sack
Dorcas had sewn for it. I took it from my sabretache and hung it
about my neck in the old way, with the Claw once more inside. It
was only when I had thus put it away that I recalled seeing just such
a bush in the Botanic Gardens at the beginning of my journey.
No one can explain such things. Since I have come to the House
Absolute, I have talked with the heptarch and with various acaryas;
but they have been able to tell me very little save that the Increate
has chosen before this to manifest himself in these plants.
At that time I did not think of it, being filled with wonder—but may
it not be that we were guided to the unfinished Sand Garden? I
carried the Claw even then, though I did not know it; Agia had
already slipped it under the closure of my sabretache. Might it not
be that we came to the unfinished garden so that the Claw, flying as
it were against the wind of Time, might make its farewell? The idea
is absurd. But then, all ideas are absurd.
What struck me on the beach—and it struck me indeed, so that I
staggered as at a blow—was that if the Eternal Principle had rested


in that curved thorn I had carried about my neck across so many
leagues, and if it now rested in the new thorn (perhaps the same
thorn) I had only now put there, then it might rest in anything, and
in fact probably did rest in everything, in every thorn on every bush,
in every drop of water in the sea. The thorn was a sacred Claw
because all thorns were sacred Claws; the sand in my boots was
sacred sand because it came from a beach of sacred sand. The
cenobites treasured up the relics of the sannyasins because the
sannyasins had approached the Pancreator. But everything had
approached and even touched the Pancreator, because everything
had dropped from his hand. Everything was a relic. All the world
was a relic. I drew off my boots, that had traveled with me so far,
and threw them into the waves that I might not walk shod on holy
ground.

XXXII
The Samru
And I walked on as a mighty army, for I felt myself in the company
of all those who walked in me. I was surrounded by a numerous
guard; and I was the guard about the person of the monarch. There
were women in my ranks, smiling and grim, and children who ran
and laughed and, daring Erebus and Abaia, hurled seashells into the
sea.
In half a day I came to the mouth of Gyoll, so wide that the farther
shore was lost in distance. Three-sided isles lay in it, and through
them vessels with billowing sails picked their way like clouds


among the peaks of the mountains. I hailed one passing the point on
which I stood and asked for passage to Nessus. A wild figure I must
have appeared, with my scarred face and tattered cloak and every
rib showing.
Her captain sent a boat for me nonetheless, a kindness I have not
forgotten. I saw fear and awe in the eyes of the rowers. Perhaps it
was only at the sight of my half-healed wounds; but they were men
who had seen many wounds, and I recalled how I had felt when I
first saw the face of the Autarch in the House Azure, though he was
not a tall man, or even a man, truly.
Twenty days and nights the Samru made her way up Gyoll. We
sailed when we could, and rowed, a dozen sweeps to a side, when
we could not. It was a hard passage for the sailors, for though the
current is almost imperceptibly slow, it runs day and night, and so
long and so wide are the meanders of the channel that an oarsman
often sees at evening the spot from which he labored when the
beating of the drum first roused the watch.
For me it was as pleasant as a yachting expedition. Although I
offered to make sail and row with the rest, they would not permit it.
Then I told the captain, a sly-faced man who looked as though he
lived by bargaining as much as by sailing, that I would pay him well
when we reached Nessus; but he would not hear of it, and insisted
(pulling at his mustache, which he did whenever he wished to show
the greatest sincerity) that my presence was reward enough for him
and his crew. I do not believe they guessed I was their Autarch, and
for fear of such as Vodalus had been I was careful to drop no hints
to them; but from my eyes and manner they seemed to feel I was an


adept.
The incident of the captain's sword must have strengthened their
superstition. It was a craquemarte, the heaviest of the sea swords,
with a blade as wide as my palm, sharply curved and graven with
stars and suns and other things the captain did not understand. He
wore it when we were close enough to a riverbank village or
another ship to make him feel the occasion demanded dignity; but
for the most part he left it lying on the little quarterdeck. I found it
there, and having nothing else to do but watch sticks and fruit skins
bob in the green water, I took out my half stone and sharpened it.
After a time he saw me testing the edge with my thumb and began
to boast of his swordsmanship. Since the craquemarte was at least
two-thirds the weight of Terminus Est, with a short grip, it was
amusing to hear him; I listened with delight for half a watch or so.
As it happened there was a hempen cable about the thickness of my
wrist coiled nearby, and when he began to lose interest in his own
inventions, I had him and the mate hold up three cubits or so
between them. The craquemarte severed it like a hair; then before
either of them could recover breath, I threw it flashing toward the
sun and caught it by the hilt.
As I fear that incident shows too well, I was beginning to feel better.
There is nothing to enthrall the reader in rest, fresh air, and plain
food; but they can work wonders against wounds and exhaustion.
The captain would have given me his cabin if I had let him, but I
slept on deck rolled in my cloak, and on our one night of rain found
shelter under the boat, which was stowed bottom-up amidships. As I
learned on board, it is the nature of breezes to die when Urth turns


her back to the sun; so I went to sleep, on most nights, with the
chant of the rowers in my ears. In the morning I woke to the rattle
of the anchor chain.
Sometimes, though, I woke before morning, when we lay close to
shore with only a sleepy lookout on deck. And sometimes the
moonlight roused me to find us gliding forward under reefed sails,
with the mate steering and the watch asleep beside the halyards. On
one such night, shortly after we had passed through the Wall, I went
aft and saw the phosphorescence of our wake like cold fire on the
dark water and thought for a moment that the man-apes of the mine
were coming to be cured by the Claw, or to gain an old revenge.
That, of course, was not truly strange—only the foolish error of a
mind still half in dream. What happened the next morning was not
truly strange either, but it affected me deeply.
The oarsmen were rowing a slow beat to get us around a leagueslong bend to a point where we could catch what little wind there
was. The sound of the drum and the hissing of the water falling
from the long blades of the sweeps are hypnotic, I think because
they are so similar to the beating of one's own heart in sleep and the
sound the blood makes as it moves past the inner ear on its way to
the brain.
I was standing by the rail looking at the shore, still marshy here
where the plains of old have been flooded by silt-choked Gyoll; and
it seemed to me that I saw forms in the hillocks and hummocks, as
though all that vast, soft wilderness had a geometrical soul (as
certain pictures do) that vanished when I stared at it, then
reappeared when I took my eyes away. The captain came to stand


beside me, and I told him I had heard that the ruins of the city
extended far downriver and asked when we would sight them. He
laughed and explained that we had been among them for the past
two days, and loaned me his glass so I could see that what I had
taken for a stump was in actuality a broken and tilted column
covered with moss.
At once everything—walls, streets, monuments—seemed to spring
from hiding, just as the stone town had reconstructed itself while we
watched from the tomb roof with the two witches. No change had
occurred outside my own mind, but I had been transported, far
faster than Master Malrubius's ship could have taken me, from the
desolate countryside to the midst of an ancient and immense ruin.
Even now I cannot help but wonder how much any of us see of
what is before us. For weeks my friend Jonas had seemed to me
only a man with a prosthetic hand, and when I was with Baldanders
and Dr. Talos, I had overlooked a hundred clues that should have
told me Baldanders was master. How impressed I was outside the
Piteous Gate because Baldanders did not escape the doctor when he
could.
As the day wore on, the ruins became plainer and plainer still. At
each loop of the river, the green walls rose higher, from ever firmer
ground. When I woke the next morning, some of the stronger
buildings retained their upper stories.
Not long afterward, I saw a little boat, newly built, tied to an ancient
pier. I pointed it out to the captain, who smiled at my naivety and
said, "There are families who live, grandson following grandsire, by
sifting these ruins."


"So I've been told, but that cannot be one of their boats. It's too
small to take much loot away in."
"Jewelry or coins. No one else goes ashore here. There's no law—
the pillagers murder each other, and anyone else who lands."
"I must go there. Will you wait for me?"
He stared at me as though I were mad. "How long?"
"Until noon. No later."
"Look," he said, and pointed. "Ahead is the last big bend. Leave us
here and meet us there, where the channel bows around again. It
will be afternoon before we get there."
I agreed, and he had the Samru's boat put into the water for me, and
told four men to row me ashore. As we were about to cast off, he
unbelted his craquemarte and handed it to me, saying solemnly, "It
has stood by me in many a grim fight. Go for their heads, but be
careful not to knick the edge on their belt buckles."
I accepted his sword with thanks, and told him I had always favored
the neck. "That's good," he said, "if you don't have shipmates by
that might be hurt when you swing it flat," and he pulled his
mustache.
Sitting in the stern, I had ample opportunity to observe the faces of
my rowers, and it was plain they were nearly as frightened of the
shore as they were of me. They laid us alongside the small boat,
then nearly capsized their own in their haste to be away. After
determining that what I had seen from the rail was in fact what I had
taken it to be, a wilted scarlet poppy left lying on the single seat, I
watched them row back to the Samru and saw that though a light


wind now favored the billowing mains'l, the sweeps had been
brought out and were beating a quick-stroke. Presumably the
captain planned to round the long meander as swiftly as he could; if
I were not at the spot he had pointed out, he could proceed without
me, telling himself (and others, should others inquire) that it was I
who had failed our appointment and not he. By parting with the
craquemarte he had further salved his conscience.
Stone steps very like those I had swum from as a boy had been cut
into the sides of the pier. Its top was empty, nearly as lush as a lawn
with the grass that had rooted between its stones. The ruined city,
my own city of Nessus though it was the Nessus of a time now long
past, lay quiet before me. A few birds wheeled overhead, but they
were as silent as the sun-dimmed stars. Gyoll, whispering to itself in
midstream, already seemed detached from me and the empty hulks
of buildings among which I limped. As soon as I was out of sight of
its waters, it fell silent, like some uncertain visitor who ceases to
speak when we step into another room.
It seemed that this could hardly be the quarter from which (as
Dorcas had told me) furniture and utensils were taken. At first I
looked in often at doors and windows, but nothing had been left
within but wrack and a few yellow leaves, drifted already from the
young trees that were overturning the paving blocks. Nor did I see
any sign of human pillagers, although there were animal droppings
and a few feathers and scattered bones.
I do not know how far inland I walked. It seemed a league, though it
may have been much less. Losing the transportation of the Samru
did not much bother me. I had walked from Nessus most of the way


to the mountain war, and although my steps were uneven still, my
bare feet had been toughened on the deck. Because I had never
really become accustomed to carrying a sword at my waist, I drew
the craquemarte and put it on my shoulder, as I had often borne
Terminus Est. The summer sunshine held that special, luxurious
warmth it gains when a suggestion of chill has crept into the
morning air. I enjoyed it, and would have enjoyed it more, and the
silence and solitude too, if I had not been thinking of what I would
say to Dorcas, if I found her, and what she might say to me.
Had I only known, I might have saved myself that concern; I came
upon her sooner than I could reasonably have expected, and I did
not speak to her—nor did she speak to me, or so far as I could
judge, even see me.
The buildings, which had been large and solid near the river, had
long since given way to lesser, fallen-in structures that must once
have been houses and shops. I do not know what guided me to hers.
There was no sound of weeping, though there may have been some
small, unconscious noise, the creaking of a hinge or the scrape of a
shoe. Perhaps it was no more than the perfume of the blossom she
wore, because when I saw her she had an arum, freckled white and
sweet as Dorcas herself had always been, thrust into her hair. No
doubt she had brought it there for that purpose, and had taken out
the wilted poppy and cast it down when she had tied up her boat.
(But I have gotten ahead of my story.)
I tried to enter the building from the front, but the rotting floor was
falling into the foundation in places as the arches under it collapsed.
The storeroom at the rear was less open; the silent, shadowed walk,


green with ferns, had been a dangerous alley once, and shopkeepers
had put small windows there or none. Still, I found a narrow door
hidden under ivy, a door whose iron had been eaten like sugar by
the rain, whose oak was falling into mould. Stairs nearly sound led
to the floor above.
She was kneeling with her back to me. She had always been
slender; now her shoulders made me think of a wooden chair with a
woman's jupe hung over it. Her hair, like the palest gold, was the
same—unchanged since I had seen her first in the Garden of
Endless Sleep. The body of the old man who had poled the skiff
there lay on a bier before her, his back so straight, his face, in death,
so youthful, that I hardly knew him. On the floor near her was a
basket—not small yet not large either, and a corked water jar.
I said nothing, and when I had watched her for a time I went away.
If she had been there long, I would have called to her and embraced
her. But she had just arrived, and I saw that it was impossible. All
the time I had spent in journeying from Thrax to Lake Diuturna, and
from the lake to the war, and all the time I had spent as a prisoner of
Vodalus, and in sailing up Gyoll, she had spent in returning here to
her place, where she had lived forty years ago or more though it had
now fallen into decay.
As I had myself, an ancient buzzing with antiquity as a corpse with
flies. Not that the minds of Thecla and the old Autarch, or the
hundred contained in his, had made me old. It was not their
memories but my own that aged me, as I thought of Dorcas
shivering beside me on the brown track of floating sedge, both of us
cold and dripping, drinking together from Hildegrin's flask like two


infants, which in fact we had been.
I paid no heed to where I walked after that. I went straight down a
long street alive with silence, and when it ended at last I turned at
random. After a time I reached Gyoll, and looking downstream saw
the Samru riding at anchor at the meeting place. A basilosaur
swimming up from the open sea would not have astounded me more.
In a few moments I was mobbed by smiling sailors. The captain
wrung my hand, saying, "I was afraid we'd come too late. In my
mind's eye I could see you struggling for your life in sight of the
river, and us still half a league off."
The mate, a man so abysmally stupid that he thought the captain a
leader, clapped me on the back and shouted, "He'd have given 'em a
good fight!"

XXXIII
The Citadel of the Autarch
Though every league that separated me from Dorcas tore my heart,
it was better than I can tell you to be back on the Samru again after
seeing the empty, silent south.
Her decks were of the impure but lovely white of new-cut wood,
scrubbed daily with a great mat called a bear—a sort of scouring
pad woven from old cordage and weighed with the gross bodies of
our two cooks, whom the crew had to drag over the last span of
planking before breakfast. The crevices between the planks were
sealed with pitch, so that the decks seemed terraces paved in a bold,


fantastic design.
She was high in the bow, with a stem that curled back upon her.
Eyes, each with a pupil as big as a plate and a sky-blue iris of the
brightest obtainable paint, stared out across the green waters to help
find her way; her left eye wept the anchor.
Forward of her stem, held there by a triangular wooden brace itself
carved, pierced, gilded, and painted, was her figurehead, the bird of
immortality. Its head was a woman's, the face long and aristocratic,
the eyes tiny and black, its expres-sionlessness a magnificent
commentary on the somber tranquillity of those who will never
know death. Painted wooden feathers grew from its wooden scalp to
clothe its shoulders and cup its hemispherical breasts; its arms were
wings lifted up and back, their tips reaching higher than the
termination of the stem and their gold and crimson primary feathers
partially obscuring the triangular brace. I would have thought it a
creature wholly fabulous—as no doubt the sailors did—had I not
seen the Autarch's anpiels.
A long bowsprit passed to starboard of the stem, between the wings
of the samru. The foremast, only slightly longer than this bowsprit,
rose from the forecastle. It was raked forward to give the foresail
room, as though it had been pulled out of true by the forestay and
the laboring jib. The mainmast stood as straight as the pine it had
once been, but the mizzenmast was raked back, so the mastheads of
the three masts were considerably more separated than their bases.
Each mast held a slanting yard made by lashing together two
tapering spars that had once been entire saplings, and each of these
yards carried a single, triangular, rust-colored sail.


The hull itself was painted white below the water and black above
it, save for the figurehead and eyes I have already mentioned, and
the quarterdeck rail, where scarlet had been used to symbolize both
the captain's high state and his sanguinary background. This
quarterdeck actually occupied no more than a sixth of the Samru's
length, but the wheel and the binnacle were there, and it was there
that one had the finest view, short of that provided by the rigging.
The ship's only real armament, a swivel gun not much larger than
Mamillian's, was there, ready alike for freebooters and mutineers.
Just aft of the sternrail, two iron posts as delicately curved as the
horns of a cricket lifted many-faceted lanterns, one of palest red, the
other viridescent as moonlight.
I was standing by these lanterns the next evening, listening to the
thudding of the drum, the soft splashing of the sweep-blades, and
the rowers' chant, when I saw the first lights along the riverbank.
Here was the dying edge of the city, the home of the poorest of the
poorest of the poor—which only meant that the living edge of the
city was here, that death's dominion ended here. Human beings
were preparing to sleep here, perhaps still sharing the meal that
marked the day's end. I saw a thousand kindnesses in each of those
lights, and heard a thousand fireside stories. In some sense I was
home again; and the same song that had urged me forth in the spring
now bore me back:
Row, brothers, row!
The current is against us.
Row, brothers, row!
Yet God is for us.


Row, brothers, row!
The wind is against us.
Row, brothers, row!
Yet God is for us.

I could not help but wonder who was setting out that night.
Every long story, if it be told truly, will be found to contain all the
elements that have contributed to the human drama since the first
rude ship reached the strand of Lune: not only noble deeds and
tender emotion, but grotesquerie, bathos, and so on. I have striven to
set down the unem-bellished truth here, without the least worry that
you, my reader, would find some parts improbable and others
insipid; and if the mountain war was the scene of high deeds
(belonging more to others than to me), and my imprisonment by
Vodalus and the Ascians a time of horror, and my passage on the
Samru an interlude of tranquillity, then we are come to the interval
of comedy.
We approached that part of the city where the Citadel stands—
which is southern but not the southernmost—under sail and by day.
I watched the sun-gilt eastern bank with great care, and had the
captain land me on those slimy steps where I had once swum and
fought. I hoped to pass through the necropolis gate and so enter the
Citadel through the breach in the curtain wall that was near the
Matachin Tower; but the gate was closed and locked, and no
convenient party of volunteers arrived to admit me. Thus I was
forced instead to walk many chains along the margin of the
necropolis, and several more along the curtain wall to the barbican.


There I encountered a numerous guard who carried me before their
officer, who, when I told him I was a torturer, supposed me to be
one of those wretches that, most often at the onset of winter, seek to
gain admission to the guild. He decided (very properly, had he been
correct) to have me whipped; and to prevent it I was forced to break
the thumbs of two of his men, and then demand while I held him in
the way called the kitten and ball that he take me to his superior, the
castellan.
I admit I was somewhat awed at the thought of this official, whom I
had seldom so much as seen in all the years I had been an
apprentice in the fortress he commanded. I found him an old soldier,
silver-haired and as lame as I. The officer stammered out his
accusations while I stood by: I had assaulted and insulted (not true)
his person, maimed two of his men, and so on. When he had
finished, the castellan looked from me to him and back again,
dismissed him, and offered me a seat.
"You are unarmed," he said. His voice was hoarse but soft, as
though he had strained it shouting commands.
I admitted that I was.
"But you have seen fighting, and you have been in the jungle north
of the mountains, where no battle has been since they turned our
flank by crossing the Uroboros."
"That's true," I said. "But how can you know?"
"That wound in your thigh came from one of their spears. I've seen
enough to recognize them. The beam flashed up through the muscle,
reflected by the bone. You might have been up a tree and been stuck


by a hastarus on the ground, I suppose, but the most likely thing is
that you were mounted and charging infantry. Not a cataphract, or
they wouldn't have got you so easily. The demilances?"
"Only the light irregulars."
"You'll have to tell me about that later, because you're a city man
from your accent, and they're eclectics and suchlike for the most
part. You have a double scar on your foot too, white and clean, with
the marks half a span apart. That was a blood bat's bite, and they
don't come that large except in the true jungle at the waist of the
world. How did you get there?"
"Our flier crashed. I was taken prisoner."
"And escaped?"
In a moment more I would have been forced to talk of Agia and the
green man, and of my journey from the jungle to the mouth of
Gyoll, and those were high matters which I did not wish to disclose
thus casually. Instead of an answer, I pronounced the words of
authority applicable to the Citadel and its castellan.
Because he was lame, I would have had him remain seated if I
could; but he sprang to his feet and saluted, then dropped to his
knees to kiss my hand. He was thus, though he could not have
known it, the first to pay me homage, a distinction that entitles him
to a private audience once a year—an audience he has not yet
requested and perhaps never will.
For me to proceed now, clothed as I was, was impossible. The old
castellan would have died of a stroke had I demanded it, and he was
so concerned for my safety that any incognito would have been


accompanied by at least a platoon of lurking halberdiers. I soon
found myself arrayed in lapis lazuli jazerant, cothurni, and a
stephane, the whole set off by an ebony baculus and a voluminous
damassin cape embroidered with rotting pearls. All these things
were inde-scribably ancient, having been taken from a store
preserved from the period when the Citadel was the residence of the
autarchs.
Thus in place of entering our tower, as I had intended, in the same
cloak in which I had left it, I returned as an unrecognizable being in
ceremonial fancy dress, skeletally thin, lame, and hideously scarred.
It was with this appearance that I entered Master Palaemon's study,
and I am certain I must almost have frightened him to death, since
he had been told only a few moments before that the Autarch was in
the Citadel and wished to converse with him.
He seemed to me to have aged a great deal while I was gone.
Perhaps it was simply that I recalled him not as he was when I was
exiled, but as I had seen him in our little classroom when I was a
boy. Still, I like to think he was concerned for me, and it is not
really so unlikely that he was: I had always been his best pupil and
his favorite; it was his vote, beyond doubt, that had countered
Master Gurloes's and saved my life; he had given me his sword.
But whether he had worried much or little, his face seemed more
deeply lined than it had been; and his scant hair, which I had
thought gray, was now of that yellow hue seen in old ivory. He
knelt and kissed my fingers, and was more than a little surprised
when I helped him to rise and told him to seat himself behind his
table again.


"You are too kind, Autarch," he said. Then, using an old formula,
"Your mercy extends from sun to Sun."
"Do you not recall us?"
"Were you confined here?" He peered at me through the curious
arrangement of lenses that alone permitted him to see at all, and I
decided that his vision, exhausted long before I was born on the
faded ink of the records of the guild, must have deteriorated further.
"You have suffered torment, I see. But it is too crude, I hope, for
our work."
"It was not your doing," I said, touching the scars on my cheek.
"Nevertheless, we were confined for a time in the oubliette beneath
this tower." He sighed—an old man's shallow breath—and looked
down at the gray litter of his papers. When he spoke I could not hear
the words, and had to ask him to repeat them.
"It has come," he said. "I knew it would, but I hoped to be dead and
forgotten. Will you dismiss us, Autarch? Or put us to some other
task?"
"We have not yet decided what we will do with you and the guild
you serve."
"It will not avail. If I offend you, Autarch, I ask your indulgence for
my age… but still it will not avail. You will find in the end that you
require men to do what we do. You may call it healing, if you wish.
That has been done often. Or ritual, that has been done too. But you
will find the thing itself grows more terrible in its disguise. Will you
imprison those undeserving of death? You will find them a mighty
army in chains. You will discover that you hold prisoners whose


escape would be a catastrophe, and that you need servants who will
wreak justice on those who have caused scores to die in agony. Who
else will do that?"
"No one will wreak such justice as you. You say our mercy extends
from sun to Sun, and we hope it is so. By our mercy we will grant
even the foulest a quick death. Not because we pity them, but
because it is intolerable that good men should spend a lifetime
dispensing pain."
His head came up and the lenses flashed. For the only time in all the
years I had known him, I was able to see the youth he had been. "It
must be done by good men. You are badly advised, Autarch! What
is intolerable is that it should be done by bad men."
I smiled. His face, as I had seen it then, had recalled something I
had thrust from my mind months before. It was that this guild was
my family, and all the home I should ever have. I would never find
a friend in the world if I could not find friends here. "Between us,
Master," I told him, "we have decided it should not be done at all."
He did not reply, and I saw from his expression that he had not even
heard what I had said. He had been listening instead to my voice,
and doubt and joy flickered over his worn, old face like shadow and
firelight.
"Yes," I said. "It is Severian," and while he was struggling to regain
possession of himself, I went to the door and got my sabretache,
which I had ordered one of the officers of my guard to bring. I had
wrapped it in what had been my fuligin guild cloak, now faded to
mere rusty black. Spreading the cloak over Master Palaemon's table,
I opened the sabretache and poured out its contents. "This is all we


have brought back," I said.
He smiled as he used to in the schoolroom when he had caught me
out in some minor matter. "That and the throne? Will you tell me
about it?"
And so I did. It took a long while, and more than once my
protectors rapped at the door to ascertain that I was unharmed, and
at last I had a meal brought in to us; and when the pheasant was
mere bones and the cakes were eaten and the wine drunk, we were
still talking. It was then that I conceived the idea that has at last
borne fruit in this record of my life. I had originally intended to
begin it at the day I left our tower and to end it when I returned. But
I soon saw that though such a construction would indeed supply the
symmetry so valued by artists, it would be impossible for anyone to
understand my adventures without knowing something of my
adolescence. In the same way, some elements of my story would
remain incomplete if I did not extend it (as I propose to do) a few
days beyond my return. Perhaps I have contrived for someone The
Book of Gold. Indeed, it may be that all my wanderings have been
no more than a contrivance of the librarians to recruit their numbers;
but perhaps even that is too much to hope.

XXXIV
The Key to the Universe
When he had heard everything, Master Palaemon went to my little
heap of possessions and took up the grip, pommel, and silver guard


that were all that remained of Terminus Est. "She was a good
sword," he said. "Nearly I gave you your death, but she was a good
sword."
"We were always proud to bear her, and never found reason to
complain of her."
He sighed, and the breath seemed to catch in his throat. "She is
gone. It is the blade that is the sword, not the sword furniture. The
guild will preserve these somewhere, with your cloak and
sabretache, because they have belonged to you. When you and I
have been dead for centuries, old men like me will point them out to
the apprentices. It's a pity we haven't the blade too. I used her for
many years before you came to the guild, and never thought she
would be destroyed fighting some diabolical weapon." He put down
the opal pommel and frowned at me. "What's troubling you? I've
seen men wince less when their eyes were torn out."
"There are many kinds of diabolical weapons, as you call them, that
steel cannot withstand. We saw something of them when we were in
Orithyia. And there are tens of thousands of our soldiers there
holding them off with firework lances and javelins, and swords less
well forged than Terminus Est. They succeed in so far as they do
because the energy weapons of the Ascians are not numerous, and
they are few because the Ascians lack the sources of power needed
to produce them. What will happen if Urth is granted a New Sun?
Won't the Ascians be better able to use its energy than we can?"
"Perhaps that may be," Master Palaemon acknowledged.
"We have been thinking with the autarchs who have gone before us
—our guild brothers, as it were, in a new guild. Master Malrubius


said that only our predecessor has dared the test in modern times.
When we touch the minds of the others, we often find that they have
refused it because they felt our enemies, who have retained so much
more of the ancient sciences, would gain a greater advantage. Is it
not possible they were right?"
Master Palaemon thought a long time before he answered. "I cannot
say. You believe me wise because I taught you once, but I have not
been north, as you have. You have seen armies of Ascians, and I
have never seen one. You flatter me by asking my opinion. Still—
from all you've said, they are rigid, cast hard in their ways. I would
guess that very few among them think much."
I shrugged. "That is true in any aggregate, Master. But as you say, it
is possibly more true among them. And what you call their rigidity
is terrible—a deadness that surpasses belief. Individually they seem
men and women, but together they are like a machine of wood and
stone."
Master Palaemon rose and went to the port and looked out upon the
thronging towers. "We are too rigid here," he said. "Too rigid in our
guild, too rigid in the Citadel. It tells me a great deal that you, who
were educated here, saw them as you did; they must be inflexible
indeed. I think it may be that despite their science, which may
amount to less than you suppose, the people of the Commonwealth
will be better able to turn new circumstances to their benefit."
"We are not flexible or inflexible," I said. "Except for an unusually
good memory, we are only an ordinary man."
"No, no!" Master Palaemon struck his table, and again the lenses


flashed. "You are an extraordinary man in an ordinary time. When
you were a little apprentice, I beat you once or twice—you will
recall that, I know. But even when I beat you, I knew you would
become an extraordinary personage, the greatest master our guild
would ever have. And you will be a master. Even if you destroy our
guild, we will elect you!"
"We have already told you we mean to reform the guild, not destroy
it. We're not even sure we're competent to do that. You respect us
because we've moved to the highest place. But we reached it by
chance, and know it. Our predecessor reached it by chance too, and
the minds he brought to us, which we touch only faintly even now,
are not, with one or two exceptions, those of genius. Most are only
common men and women, sailors and artisans, farmwives and
wantons. Most of the rest are eccentric second-rate scholars of the
sort Thecla used to laugh at."
"You have not just moved into the highest place," Master Palaemon
said, "you have become it. You are the state."
"We are not. The state is everyone else—you, the castellan, those
officers outside. We are the people, the Commonwealth." I had not
known it myself until I spoke.
I picked up the brown book. "We are going to keep this. It was one
of the good things, like your sword. The writing of books shall be
encouraged again. There are no pockets in these clothes; but
perhaps it will do good if we are seen to carry it when we leave."
"Carry it where?" Master Palaemon cocked his head like an old
raven.


"To the House Absolute. We've been out of touch, or the Autarch
has, if you wish to put it so, for over a month. We have to find out
what's happening at the front, and perhaps dispatch reinforcements."
I thought of Lomer and Nicarete, and the other prisoners in the
antechamber. "We have other tasks there too," I said.
Master Palaemon stroked his chin. "Before you go, Severian—
Autarch—would you like to tour the cells, for old times' sake? I
doubt those fellows out there know of the door that opens to the
western stair."
It is the least-used staircase in the tower, and perhaps the oldest.
Certainly it is the one least altered from its original condition. The
steps are narrow and steep, and wind down around a central column
black with corrosion. The door to the room where I, as Thecla, had
been subjected to the device called the Revolutionary stood half
open, so that though we did not go inside, I nevertheless saw its
ancient mechanisms: frightful, yet less hideous to me than the
gleaming but far older things in Baldanders's castle.
Entering the oubliette meant returning to something I had, from the
time I left for Thrax, assumed gone forever. Yet the metal corridors
with their long rows of doors were unchanged, and when I peered
through the tiny windows that pierced those doors I saw familiar
faces, the faces of men and women I had fed and guarded as a
journeyman.
"You are pale, Autarch," Master Palaemon said. "I feel your hand
tremble." (I was supporting him a little with one hand on his arm.)
"You know that our memories never fade," I said. "For us the
Chatelaine Thecla still sits in one of these cells, and the Journeyman


Severian in another."
"I had forgotten. Yes, it must be terrible for you. I was going to take
you to the Chatelaine's old one, but perhaps you would rather not
see it."
I insisted that we visit it; but when we arrived, there was a new
client inside, and the door was locked. I had Master Palaemon call
the brother on duty to let us in, then stood for a moment looking at
the cramped bed and the tiny table. At last I noticed the client, who
sat upon the single chair, with wide eyes and an indescribable
expression blended of hope and wonder. I asked him if he knew me.
"No, exultant."
"We are no exultant. We are your Autarch. Why are you here?"
He rose, then fell to his knees. "I am innocent! Believe me!"
"All right," I said. "We believe you. But we want you to tell us what
you were accused of, and how you came to be convicted."
Shrilly, he began to pour forth one of the most complex and
confused accounts I have ever heard. His sister-in-law had
conspired with her mother against him. They said he had struck his
wife, that he had neglected his ill wife, that he had stolen certain
moneys from her that she had been entrusted with by her father, for
purposes about which they disagreed. In explaining all this (and
much more) he boasted of his own cleverness while decrying the
frauds, tricks, and lies of the others that had sent him to the
oubliette. He said that the gold in question had never existed, and
also that his mother-in-law had used a part of it to bribe the judge.
He said he had not known his wife was ill, and that he had procured


the best physician he could afford for her.
When I left him, I went to the next call and heard the client there,
and then to the next and the next, until I had visited fourteen. Eleven
clients protested their innocence, some better than the first, some
even worse; but I found none whose protestations convinced me.
Three admitted that they were guilty (though one swore, I think
sincerely, I that though he had committed most of the crimes with
which he had been charged, he had also been charged with several
he had not committed). Two of these promised earnestly to do
nothing that would return them to the oubliette if only I would
release them; which I did. The third—a woman who had stolen
children and forced them to serve as articles of furniture in a room
she had set aside for the purpose, in one instance nailing the hands
of a little girl to the underside of a small tabletop so that she became
in effect its pedestal—told me with apparently equal frankness that
she felt sure she would return to what she called her sport because it
was the only activity that really interested her. She did not ask to be
released, only to have her sentence commuted to simple
imprisonment. I felt certain she was mad; yet nothing in her
conversation or her clear blue eyes indicated it, and she told me she
had been examined prior to her trial and pronounced sane. I touched
her forehead with the New Claw, but it was as inert as the old Claw
had been when I had attempted to use it to help Jolenta and
Baldanders.
I cannot escape the thought that the power manifested in both Claws
is drawn from myself, and that it is for this reason that their
radiance, said by others to be warm, has always seemed cold to me.


This thought is the psychological equivalent of that aching abyss in
the sky into which I feared to fall when I slept in the mountains. I
reject and fear it because I desire so fervently that it be true; and 1
feel that if there were the least echo of truth in it, I would detect it
within myself. I do not.
Furthermore, there are profound objections to it besides this lack of
internal resonance, the most important, convincing, and apparently
inescapable being that the Claw unquestionably reanimated Dorcas
after many decades of death—and did so before I knew I carried it.
That argument appears conclusive; and still I am not sure that it is
so. Did I in fact know? What is meant by know, in an appropriate
sense? I have assumed I was unconscious when Agia slipped the
Claw into my sabretache; but I may have been merely dazed, and in
any case, many have long believed that unconscious persons are
aware of their surroundings and respond internally to speech and
music. How else explain the dreams dictated by external sounds?
What portion of the brain is unconscious, after all? Not the whole of
it, or the heart would not beat and the lungs no longer breathe.
Much of the memory is chemical. All that, in fact, I have from
Thecla and the former Autarch is fundamentally so—the drugs
serving only to permit the complex compounds of thought to enter
my own brain as information. May it not be that certain information
derived from external phenomena are chemically impressed on our
brains even when the electrical activity on which we depend for
conscious thought has temporarily ceased?
Besides, if the energy has its origins in me, why should it have been
necessary for me to be aware of the presence of the Claw for them


to operate, any more than it would be necessary if they had their
origin in the Claw itself? A strong suggestion of another kind might
be equally effective, and certainly our careening invasion of the
sacred precincts of the Pelerines and the way in which Agia and I
emerged unhurt from the accident that killed the animals might have
furnished such a suggestion. From the cathedral we had gone to the
Botanic Gardens, and there, before we entered the Garden of
Endless Sleep, I had seen a bush covered with Claws. At that time I
believed the Claw to be a gem, but may not they have suggested it
nonetheless? Our minds often play such punning tricks. In the
yellow house we had met three persons who believed us
supernatural presences.
If the supernatural power is mine (and yet clearly it is not mine),
how did I come to have it? I have devised two explanations, both
wildly improbable. Dorcas and I talked once of the symbolic
significance of real-world things, which by the teachings of the
philosophers stand for things higher than themselves, and in a lower
order are themselves symbolized. To take an absurdly simple
example, suppose an artist in a garret limning a peach. If we put the
poor artist in the place of the Increate, we may say that his picture
symbolizes the peach, and thus the fruits of the soil, while the
glowing curve of the peach itself symbolizes the ripe beauty of
womanhood. Were such a woman to enter the artist's garret (an
improbability we must entertain for the sake of the explanation), she
would doubtless remain unaware that the fullness of her hip and the
hardness of her heart found their echoes in a basket on the table by
the window, though perhaps the artist might be able to think of


nothing else.
But if the Increate is in actual fact in place of the artist, is it not
possible that such connections as these, many of which must always
be unguessable by human beings, may have profound effects on the
structure of the world, just as the artist's obsession may color his
picture? If I am he who is to renew the youth of the sun with the
White Fountain of which I have been told, may it not be that I have
been given, almost unconsciously (if that expression may be used),
the attributes of life and light that will belong to the renewed sun?
The other explanation I mentioned is hardly more than a
speculation. But if, as Master Malrubius told me, those who will
judge me among the stars will take my manhood should I fail their
judgment, is it not possible also that they will confirm me in some
gift of equal worth should I, as Humanity's representative, conform
to their desires? It seems to me that justice demands it. If that is the
case, may it not be that their gift transcends time, as they do
themselves? The Hierodules I met in Baldanders's castle said they
interested themselves in me because I would gain the throne—but
would their interest have been so great if I were to be no more than
the embattled ruler of some part of this continent, one of many
embattled rulers in the long history of Urth?
On the whole, I think the first explanation the most probable; but
the second is not wholly unlikely. Either would seem to indicate
that the mission I am about to set out on will succeed. I will go with
good heart.
And yet there is a third explanation. No human being or near-human
being can conceive of such minds as those of Abaia, Erebus, and the


rest. Their power surpasses understanding, and I know now that
they could crush us in a day if it were not that they count only
enslavement, and not annihilation, as victory. The great undine I
saw was their creature, and less than their slave: their toy. It is
possible that the power of the Claw, the Claw taken from a growing
thing so near their sea, comes ultimately from them. They knew my
destiny as well as Ossipago, Barbatus, and Famulimus, and they
saved me when I was a boy so that I might fulfill it. After I departed
from the Citadel they found me again, and thereafter my course was
twisted by the Claw. Perhaps they hope to triumph by raising a
torturer to the Autarchy, or to that position that is higher than the
Autarch's.
Now I think that it is time to record what Master Malrubius
explained to me. I cannot vouch for its truth, but I believe it to be
true. I know no more than I set down here.
Just as a flower blooms, throws down its seed, dies, and rises from
its seed to bloom again, so the universe we know diffuses itself to
nullity in the infinitude of space, gathers its fragments (which
because of the curvature of that space meet at last where they
began) and from that seed blooms again. Each such cycle of
flowering and decay marks a divine year.
As the flower that comes is like the flower from which it came, so
the universe that comes repeats the one whose ruin was its origin;
and this is as true of its finer features as of its grosser ones: The
worlds that arise are not unlike the worlds that perished, and are
peopled by similar races, though just as the flower evolves from
summer to summer, all things advance by some minute step.


In a certain divine year (a time truly inconceivable to us, though that
cycle of the universes was but one in an endless succession), a race
was born that was so like to ours that Master Malrubius did not
scruple to call it human. It expanded among the galaxies of its
universe even as we are said to have done in the remote past, when
Urth was, for a time, the center, or at least the home and symbol, of
an empire.
These men encountered many beings on other worlds who had
intelligence to some degree, or at least the potential for intelligence,
and from them—that they might have comrades in the loneliness
between the galaxies and allies among their swarming worlds—they
formed beings like themselves.
It was not done swiftly or easily. Uncountable billions suffered and
died under their guiding hands, leaving ineradicable memories of
pain and blood. When their universe was old, and galaxy so far
separated from galaxy that the nearest could not be seen even as
faint stars, and the ships were steered thence by ancient records
alone, the thing was done. Completed, the work was greater than
those who began it could have guessed. What had been made was
not a new race like Humanity's, but a race such as Humanity wished
its own to be: united, compassionate, just.
I was not told what became of the Humanity of that cycle. Perhaps
it survived until the implosion of the universe, then perished with it.
Perhaps it evolved beyond our recognition. But the beings
Humanity had shaped into what men and women wished to be
escaped, opening a passage to Yesod, the universe higher than our
own, where they created worlds suited to what they had become.


From that vantage point they look both forward and back, and in so
looking they have discovered us. Perhaps we are no more than a
race like that who shaped them. Perhaps it was we who shaped them
—or our sons—or our fathers. Malrubius said he did not know, and
I believe he told the truth. However it may be, they shape us now as
they themselves were shaped; it is at once their repayment and their
revenge.
The Hierodules they have found too, and formed more quickly, to
serve them in this universe. On their instructions, the Hierodules
construct such ships as the one that bore me from the jungle to the
sea, so that aquastors like Malrubius and Triskele may serve them
also. With these tongs, we are held in the forge.
The hammer they wield is their ability to draw their servants back,
down the corridors of time, and to send them hurtling forward to the
future. (This power is in essence the same as that which permitted
them to evade the death of their universe—to enter the corridors of
time is to leave the universe.) On Urth at least, their anvil is the
necessity of life: our need in this age to fight against an ever-morehostile world with the resources of the depleted continents. Because
it is as cruel as the means by which they themselves were shaped,
there is a conservation of justice; but when the New Sun appears, it
will be a signal that at least the earliest operations of the shaping are
complete.

XXXV
Father Inire's Letter


The quarters assigned to me were in the most ancient part of the
Citadel. The rooms had been empty so long that the old castellan
and the steward charged with maintaining them supposed the keys
to have been lost, and offered, with many apologies and much
reticence, to break the locks for me. I did not permit myself the
luxury of watching their faces, but I heard their indrawn breath as I
pronounced the simple words that controlled the doors.
It was fascinating, that evening, to see how much the fashions of the
period in which those chambers were furnished differed from our
own. They did without chairs as we know them, having for seats
only complex cushions; and their tables lacked drawers and that
symmetry we have come to consider essential. By our standards too,
there was too much fabric and not enough wood, leather, stone, and
bone; I found the effect at once sybaritic and uncomfortable.
Yet it was impossible that I should occupy a suite other than that
anciently set aside for the autarchs; and impossible too that I should
have it refurnished to a degree that would imply criticism of my
predecessors. And if the furniture had more to recommend it to the
mind than to the body, what a delight it was to discover the
treasures those same predecessors had left behind: There were
papers relating to matters now utterly forgotten and not always
identifiable; mechanical devices ingenious and enigmatic; a
microcosm that stirred to life at the warmth of my hands, and whose
minute inhabitants seemed to grow larger and more human as I
watched them; a laboratory containing the fabled "emerald bench"
and many other things, the most interesting of which was a
mandragora in spirits.


The cucurbit in which it floated was about seven spans in height and
half as wide; the homuncule itself no more than two spans tall.
When I tapped the glass, it turned eyes like clouded beads toward
me, eyes blinder far in appearance than Master Palaemon's. I heard
no sound when its lips twitched, yet I knew at once what words they
shaped—and in some inexplicable sense I felt the pale fluid in
which the mandragora was immersed had become my own bloodtinged urine.
"Why have you called me, Autarch, from the contemplation of your
world?"
I asked, "Is it truly mine? I know now that there are seven
continents, and none but a part of this are obedient to the hallowed
phrases."
"You are the heir," the wizened thing said and turned, I could not
tell if by accident or design, until it no longer faced me.
I tapped the cucurbit again. "And who are you?"
"A being without parents, whose life is passed immersed in blood."
"Why, such have I been! We should be friends then, you and I, as
two of similar background usually are."
"You jest."
"Not at all. I feel a real sympathy for you, and I think we are more
alike than you believe."
The tiny figure turned again until its little face looked up into my
own. "I wish that I might credit you, Autarch."
"I mean it. No one has ever accused me of being an honest man, and
I've told lies enough when I thought they would serve my turn, but


I'm quite sincere. If I can do anything for you, tell me what it is."
"Break the glass."
I hesitated. "Won't you die?"
"I have never lived. I will cease thinking. Break the glass."
"You do live."
"I neither grow, nor move, nor respond to any stimulus save
thought, which is counted no response. I am incapable of
propagating my kind, or any other. Break the glass."
"If you are indeed unliving, I would rather find some way to stir you
to life."
"So much for brotherhood. When you were imprisoned here, Thecla,
and that boy brought you the knife, why did not you look for more
life then?"
The blood burned in my cheek, and I lifted the ebony baculus, but I
did not strike. "Alive or dead, you have a penetrating intelligence.
Thecla is that part of me most prone to anger."
"If you had inherited her glands with her memories, I would have
succeeded."
"And you know that. How can you know so much, who are blind?"
"The acts of coarse minds create minute vibrations that stir the
waters of this bottle. I hear your thoughts."
"I notice that I hear yours. How is it that I can hear them, and not
others?"
Looking now directly into the pinched face, which was lit by the
sun's last shaft penetrating a dusty port, I could not be sure the lips


moved at all. "You hear yourself, as ever. You cannot hear others
because your mind shrieks always, like an infant crying in a basket.
Ah, I see you remember that."
"I remember a time very long ago when I was cold and hungry. I lay
upon my back, encircled by brown walls, and heard the sound of my
own screams. Yes, I must have been an infant. Not old enough to
crawl, I think. You are very clever. What am I thinking now?"
"That I am but an unconscious exercise of your own power, as the
Claw was. It is true, of course. I was deformed, and died before
birth, and have been kept here since in white brandy. Break the
glass."
"I would question you first," I said.
"Brother, there is an old man with a letter at your door."
I listened. It was strange, after having listened only to his words in
my mind, to hear real noises again—the calling of the sleepy
blackbirds among the towers and the tapping at the door.
The messenger was old Rudesind, who had guided me to the pictureroom of the House Absolute. I motioned him in (to the surprise, I
think, of the sentries) because I wanted to talk to him and knew that
with him I had no need to stand upon my dignity.
"Never been in here in all my years," he said. "How can I help you,
Autarch?"
"We're served already, just by the sight of you. You know who we
are, don't you? You recognized us when we met before."
"If I didn't know your face, Autarch, I'd know a couple dozen times
over anyhow. I've been told that often. Nobody here talks about


anything else, seems like. How you was licked to shape right here.
How they seen you this time and that time. How you looked, and
what you said to them. There ain't one cook that didn't treat you to a
pastry often. All them soldiers told you stories. Been a while now
since I met a woman didn't kiss you and sew up a hole in your
pants. You had a dog—"
"That's true enough," I said. "We did."
"And a cat and a bird and a coti that stole apples. And you climbed
every wall in this place. And jumped off after, or else swung on a
rope, or else hid and pretended you'd jumped. You're every boy
that's ever been here, and I've heard stories put on you that belong to
men that was old when I was just a boy, and I've heard about things
I did myself, seventy years ago."
"We've already learned that the Autarch's face is always concealed
behind the mask the people weave for him. No doubt it's a good
thing; you can't become too proud once you understand how
different you really are from the thing they bow to. But we want to
hear about you. The old Autarch told us you were his sentinel in the
House Absolute, and now we know you're a servant of Father
Inire's."
"I am," the old man said. "I have that honor, and it's his letter I
carry." He held up a small and somewhat smudged envelope.
"And we are Father Inire's master." He made a countrified bow. "I
know so, Autarch."
"Then we order you to sit down, and rest yourself. We've questions
to ask you, and we don't want to keep a man your age standing.


When we were that boy you say everyone's talking of, or at least not
much older, you directed us to Master Ultan's stacks. Why did you
do that?"
"Not because I knew something others didn't. Not because my
master ordered it, either, if that's what you're thinking. Won't you
read his letter?"
"In a moment. After an honest answer, in a few words." The old
man hung his head and pulled at his thin beard. I could see the dry
skin of his face rise in hollow-sided, tiny cones as it sought to
follow the white hairs. "Autarch, you think I guessed at something
back then. Perhaps some did. Perhaps my master did, I don't know."
His rheumy eyes rolled up under his brows to look at me, then fell
again. "You were young, and seemed a likely-looking boy, so I
wanted you to see."
"To see what?"
"I'm an old man. An old man then, and an old man now. You've
grown up since. I see it in your face. I'm hardly any older, because
that much time isn't anything to me. If you counted all the time I've
spent just going up and down my ladder, it'd be longer than that. I
wanted you to see there has been a lot come before you. That there
was thousands and thousands that lived and died before you was
ever thought of, some better than you. I mean, Autarch, the way you
was then. You'd think anybody growing up here in the old Citadel
would be born knowing all that, but I've found they're not. Being
around it all the time, they don't see it. But going down there to
Master Ultan brings it home to the cleverer ones."
"You are the advocate of the dead."


The old man nodded. "I am. People talk about being fair to this one
and that one, but nobody I ever heard talks about doing right by
them. We take everything they had, which is all right. And spit,
most often, on their opinions, which I suppose is all right too. But
we ought to remember now and then how much of what we have we
got from them. I figure while I'm still here I ought to put a word in
for them. And now, if you don't mind, Autarch, I'll just lay the letter
here on this funny table—"
"Rudesind…"
"Yes, Autarch?"
"Are you going to clean your paintings?"
He nodded again. "That's one reason I'm eager to be gone, Autarch.
I was at the House Absolute until my master—" here he paused and
seemed to swallow, as men do when they feel they have perhaps
said too much "—went away north. Got a Fechin to clean, and I'm
behind."
"Rudesind, we already know the answers to the question you think
we are going to ask. We know your master is what the people call a
cacogen, and that for whatever reason, he is one of those few who
have chosen to cast their lots entirely with humanity, remaining on
Urth as a human being. The Cumaean is another such, though
perhaps you did not know that. We even know that your master was
with us in the jungles of the north, where he tried until it was too
late to rescue my predecessor. We only want to say that if a young
man with an errand comes past again while you are on your ladder,
you are to send him to Master Ultan. That is our order."


When he had gone, I tore open the envelope. The sheet within was
not large, but it was covered with tiny writing, as though a swarm of
hatchling spiders had been pressed into its surface.
His servant Inire hails the bridegroom of the Urth, Master
of Nessus and the House Absolute, Chief of his Race,
Gold of his People, Messenger of Dawn, Helios,
Hyperion, Surya, Sav-itar, and Autarch!
I hasten, and will reach you within two days.
It was a day and more ere I learned what had taken place.
Much of my information came from the woman Agia,
who at least by her own account was instrumental in
freeing you. She told me also something of your past
dealings with her, for I have, as you know, means of
extracting information.
You will have learned from her that the Exultant Vodalus
is dead by her act. His paramour, the Chatelaine Thea, at
first attempted to gain control of those myrmidons who
were about him at his death; but as she is by no means
fitted to lead them, and still less to hold in check those in
the south, I have contrived to set this woman Agia in her
place. From your former mercy toward her, I trust that
will meet with your approval. Certainly it is desirable to
maintain in being a movement that has proved so useful
in the past, and as long as the mirrors of the caller Hethor
remain unbroken, she provides it with a plausible
commander.
You will perhaps consider the ship I summoned to aid my


master, the autarch of his day, inadequate—as for that
matter do I—yet it was the best I could obtain, and I was
hard pressed to get it. I myself have been forced to travel
south otherwise, and much more slowly; the time may
come soon when my cousins are ready to side not just
with humankind but with us— but for the present they
persist in viewing Urth as somewhat less significant than
many of the colonized worlds, and ourselves on a par
with the Ascians, and for that matter with the
Xanthoderms and many others.
You will perhaps already have gained news both fresher
and more precise than mine. On the chance that you have
not: The war goes well and ill. Neither point of their
envelopment penetrated far, and the southern thrust,
particularly, suffered such losses that it may fairly be said
to have been destroyed. I know the death of so many
miserable slaves of Erebus will bring no joy to you, but at
least our armies have a respite.
That they need badly. There is sedition among the Paralians, which must be rooted out. The Tarentines, your
Antrus-tiones, and the city legions—the three groups that
bore the brunt of the fighting—having suffered almost as
badly as the enemy. There are cohorts among them that
could not muster a hundred able soldiers.
I need not tell you we should obtain more small arms and,
particularly, artillery, if my cousins can be persuaded to
part with them at a price we can pay. In the meanwhile,
what can be done to raise fresh troops must be done, and


in time for the recruits to be trained by spring. Light units
capable of skirmishing without scattering are the present
need; but if the Ascians break out next year, we will
require piquenaires and pilani by the hundreds of
thousands, and it might be well to bring at least a part of
them under arms now.
Any news you have of Abaia's incursions will be fresher
than mine; I have had none since I left our lines.
Hormisdas has gone into the South, I believe, but Olaguer
may be able to inform you.
In haste and reverence, INIRE

XXXVI
Of Bad Gold and Burning
Not much remains to be told. I knew I would have to leave the city
in a few days, so all I hoped to do here would have to be done
quickly. I had no friends in the guild I could be sure of beyond
Master Palaemon, and he would be of little use in what I planned. I
summoned Roche, knowing that he could not deceive me to my face
for long. (I expected to see a man older than myself, but the redhaired journeyman who came at my command was hardly more
than a boy; when he had gone, I studied my own face in a mirror,
something I had not done before.)
He told me that he and several others who had been friends of mine
more or less close had argued against my execution when the will of


most of the guild was to kill me, and I believed him. He also
admitted quite freely that he had proposed that I be maimed and
expelled, though he said he had only done so because he had felt it
to be the only way to save my life. I think he expected to be
punished in some way—his cheeks and forehead, normally so
ruddy, were white enough to make his freckles stand out like
splatters of paint. His voice was steady, however, and he said
nothing that seemed intended to excuse himself by throwing blame
on someone else.
The fact was, of course, that I did intend to punish him, together
with the rest of the guild. Not because I bore him or them any ill
will, but because I felt that being locked below the tower for a time
would arouse in them a sensitivity to that principle of justice of
which Master Palaemon had spoken, and because it would be the
best way to assure that the order forbidding torture I intended to
issue would be carried out. Those who spend a few months in dread
of that art are not likely to resent its being discontinued.
However, I said nothing about that to Roche but only asked him to
bring me a journyman's habit that evening, and to be ready with
Drotte and Eata to aid me the next morning.
He returned with the clothing just after vespers. It was an
indescribable pleasure to take off the stiff costume I had been
wearing and put on fuligin again. By night, its dark embrace is the
nearest approach to invisibility I know, and after I had slipped out
of my chambers by one of the secret exits, I moved between tower
and tower like a shadow until I reached the fallen section of the
curtain wall.


Day had been warm; but the night was cool, and the necropolis
filled with mist, just as it had been when I had come from behind
the monument to save Vodalus. The mausoleum where I had played
as a boy stood as I had left it, its jammed door three-quarters shut.
I had brought a candle, and I lit it when I was inside. The funeral
brasses I had once kept polished were green again; drifted leaves lay
uncrushed everywhere. A tree had flung a slender limb through the
little, barred window.
Where I put you, there you lie, Never let a stranger spy, Like grass
grow to any eye, Not of me.
Here be safe, never leave it, Should a hand come, deceive it, Let
strange eyes not believe it, Till I see.
The stone was smaller and lighter than I remembered. The coin
beneath it had grown dull with damp; but it was still there, and in a
moment I held it again and recalled the boy I had been, walking
shaken back to the torn wall through the fog.
Now I must ask you, you that have pardoned so many deviations
and digressions from me, to excuse one more. It is the last.
A few days ago (which is to say, a long time after the real
termination of the events I have set myself to narrate) I was told that
a vagabond had come here to the House Absolute saying that he
owed me money, and that he refused to pay it to anyone else. I
suspected that I was about to see some old acquaintance, and told
the chamberlain to bring him to me.
It was Dr. Talos. He appeared to be in funds, and he had dressed
himself for the occasion in a capot of red velvet and a Chechia of


the same material. His face was still that of a stuffed fox; but it
seemed to me at times that some hint of life crept into it, that
something or someone now peered through the glass eyes.
"You have bettered yourself," he said, making such a low bow that
the tassel of his cap swept the carpet. "You may recall that I
invariably affirmed you would. Honesty, integrity, and intelligence
cannot be kept down."
"We both know that nothing is easier to keep down," I said. "By my
old guild, they were kept down every day. But it is good to see you
again, even if you come as the emissary of your master."
For a moment the doctor looked blank. "Oh, Baldanders, you mean.
No, he has dismissed me, I'm afraid. After the fight. After he dived
into the lake."
"You believe he survived, then."
"Oh, I'm quite sure he survived. You didn't know him as I did,
Severian. Breathing water would be nothing to him. Nothing! He
had a marvelous mind. He was a supreme genius of a unique sort:
everything turned inward. He combined the objectivity of the
scholar with the self-absorption of the mystic."
I said, "By which you mean he carried out experiments on himself."
"Oh, no, not at all. He reversed that! Others experiment upon
themselves in order to derive some rule they can apply to the world.
Baldanders experimented on the world and spent the proceeds, if I
can put it so bluntly, upon his person. They say—" here he looked
about nervously to make sure no one but myself was in earshot "—
they say I'm a monster, and so I am. But Baldanders was more


monster than I. In some sense he was my father, but he had built
himself. It's the law of nature, and of what is higher than nature, that
each creature must have a creator. But Baldanders was his own
creation; he stood behind himself, and cut himself off from the line
linking the rest of us with the Increate. However, I stray from my
subject." The doctor had a wallet of scarlet leather at his belt; he
loosened the strings and began to rummage in it. I heard the chink
of metal.
"Do you carry money now?" I asked. "You used to give everything
to him."
His voice sank until I could hardly hear it. "Wouldn't you, in my
present position, do the same thing? Now I leave coins, little stacks
of aes and orichalks, near water." He spoke more loudly: "It does no
harm, and reminds me of the great days. But I am honest, you see!
He always demanded that of me. And he was honest too, after his
fashion. Anyway, do you recall the morning before we came out the
gate? I was handing round the receipts from the night before, and
we were interrupted. There was a coin left, and it was to go to you. I
saved it and meant to give it to you later, but I forgot, and then
when you came to the castle…" He gave me a sidelong glance. "But
fair trade ends paid, as they say, and I have it here."
The coin was precisely like the one I had taken from under the stone.
"You see now why I couldn't give it to your man—I'm sure he
thought me mad."
I flipped the coin and caught it. It felt as though it had been lightly
greased. "To tell the truth, Doctor, we don't."


"Because it's false, of course. I told you so that morning. How could
I have told him I had come to pay the Autarch, and then given him a
bad coin? They're terrified of you, and they'd have disemboweled
me looking for a good one! Is it true you've an explosive that takes
days to go up, so you can blow people apart slowly?"
I was looking at the two coins. They had the same brassy shine and
appeared to have been struck in the same die.
But that little interview, as I have said, took place a long time after
the proper close of my narrative. I returned to my chambers in the
Flag Tower by the way I had come, and when I reached them again,
took off the dripping cloak and hung it up. Master Gurloes used to
say that not wearing a shirt was the hardest thing about belonging to
the guild. Though he meant it ironically, it was in some sense true.
I, who had gone through the mountains with a naked chest, had
been softened sufficiently by a few days in the stifling autarchial
vestments to shiver at a foggy autumn night.
There were fireplaces in all the rooms, and each was piled with
wood so old and dry that I suspected it would fall to dust should I
strike it against an andiron. I had never lit any of these fires; but I
decided to do so now, and warm myself, and spread the clothes
Roche had brought over the back of a chair to dry. When I looked
for my firebox, however, I discovered that in my excitement I had
left it in the mausoleum with the candle. Thinking vaguely that the
autarch who had inhabited these rooms before me (a ruler far
beyond the reach of my memory) must surely have kept some
means of kindling his numerous fires close to hand, I began
searching the drawers of the cabinets.


These were largely filled with the papers that had so fascinated me
before; but instead of stopping to read them, as I had when I had
made my original survey of the rooms, I lifted them from each
drawer to see if there was not a steel, igniter, or syringe of amadou
beneath them.
I found none; but instead, in the largest drawer of the largest
cabinet, concealed under a filigree pen case, I discovered a small
pistol.
I had seen such weapons before—the first time having been when
Vodalus had given me the false coin I had just reclaimed. Yet I had
never held one in my own hands, and I found now that it was a very
different thing from seeing them in the hands of others. Once when
Dorcas and I were riding north toward Thrax we had fallen in with a
caravan of tinkers and peddlers. We still had most of the money Dr.
Talos had shared out when we met him in the forest north of the
House Absolute; but we were uncertain how far it might carry us
and how far we had to go, and so I was plying my trade with the
rest, inquiring at each little town if there were not some malefactor
to be mutilated or beheaded. The vagrants considered us two of
themselves, and though some accorded us more or less exalted rank
because I labored only for the authorities, others affected to despise
us as the instruments of tyranny.
One evening, a grinder who had been friendlier than most and had
done us several trifling favors offered to sharpen Terminus Est for
me. I told him I kept her quite sharp enough for the work and
invited him to test her edge with a finger. After he had cut himself
slightly (as I had known he would) he grew quite taken with her,


admiring not only her blade but her soft sheath, her carven guard,
and so on. When I had answered innumerable questions regarding
her making, history, and mode of use, he asked if I would permit
him to hold her. I cautioned him about the weight of the blade and
the danger of striking its fine edge against something that might
injure it, then handed her over. He smiled and gripped the hilt as I
had instructed him; but as he began to lift that long and shining
instrument of death, his face went pale and his arms began to
tremble so that I snatched her away from him before he dropped
her. Afterward all he would say was I've sharpened soldiers' swords
often, over and over.
Now I learned how he had felt. I laid the pistol on the table so
quickly I nearly lost hold of it, then walked around and around it as
though it had been a snake coiled to strike.
It was shorter than my hand, and so prettily made that it might have
been a piece of jewelry; yet every line of it told of an origin beyond
the nearer stars. Its silver had not yellowed with time, but might
have come fresh from the buffing wheel. It was covered with
decorations that were, perhaps, writing—I could not really tell
which, and to eyes like mine, accustomed to patterns of straight
lines and curves, they sometimes appeared to be no more than
complex or shimmering reflections, save that they were reflections
of something not present. The grips were encrusted with black
stones whose name I did not know, gems like tourmalines but
brighter. After a time I noticed that one, the smallest of all, seemed
to vanish unless I looked at it straight on, when it sparkled with fourrayed brilliancy. Examining it more closely, I found it was not a


gem at all, but a minute lens through which some inner fire shone.
The pistol retained its charge then, after so many centuries.
Illogical though it might be, the knowledge reassured me. A weapon
may be dangerous to its user in two ways: by wounding him by
accident, or by failing him. The first remained; but when I saw the
brightness of that point of light, I knew the second could be
dismissed.
There was a sliding stud under the barrel that seemed likely to
control the intensity of the discharge. My first thought was that
whoever had last handled it would probably have set it to maximum
intensity, and that by reversing the setting I would be able to
experiment with some safety. But it was not so—the stud was
positioned at the center of its range. At last I decided, by analogy
with a bowstring, that the pistol was likely to be least dangerous
when the stud was as far forward as possible. I put it there, pointed
the weapon at the fireplace, and pulled the trigger.
The sound of a shot is the most horrible in the world. It is the
scream of matter itself. Now the report was not loud, but
threatening, like distant thunder. For an instant—so brief a time I
might almost have believed I dreamed it—a narrow cone of violet
flashed between the muzzle of the pistol and the heaped wood. Then
it was gone, the wood was blazing, and slabs of burned and twisted
metal fell with the noise of cracked bells from the back of the
fireplace. A rivulet of silver ran out onto the hearth to scorth the mat
and send up nauseous smoke.
I put the pistol into the sabretache of my new journeyman's habit.


XXXVII
Across the River Again
Before dawn, Roche was at my door, with Drotte and Eata. Drotte
was the oldest of us, yet his face and flashing eyes made him seem
younger than Roche. He was still the very picture of wiry strength,
but I could not help but notice that I was now taller than he by the
width of two fingers. I must surely have been so already when I left
the Citadel, though I had not been conscious of it. Eata was still the
smallest, and not yet even a journeyman—so I had only been away
one summer, after all. He seemed a bit dazed when he greeted me,
and I suppose he was having trouble believing I was now Autarch,
particularly since he had not seen me again until now, when I was
once more dressed in the habit of the guild.
I had told Roche that the three of them were to be armed; he and
Drotte carried swords similar in form (though vastly inferior in
workmanship) to Terminus Est, and Eata a clava I recalled having
seen displayed at our Masking Day festivities. Before I had seen the
fighting in the north, I would have thought them well-enough
equipped; now all three, not only Eata, seemed like boys burdened
with sticks and pinecones, ready to play at war.
For the last time we went out through the rent in the wall and
threaded the paths of bone that wound among the cypresses and
tombs. The death roses I had hesitated to pick for Thecla still
showed a few autumnal blooms, and I found myself thinking of
Morwenna, the only woman whose life I have ever taken, and of her


enemy, Eusebia.
When we had passed the gate of the necropolis and entered the
squalid city streets, my companions seemed to become almost
lighthearted. I think they must have been subconsciously afraid they
would be seen by Master Gurloes and punished in some way for
having obeyed the Autarch.
"I hope you're not planning on going for a swim," Drotte said.
"These choppers would sink us." Roche chuckled. "Eata can float
with his."
"We're going far to the north. We'll need a boat, but I think we'll be
able to hire one if we walk along the embankment."
"If anybody will rent to us. And if we're not arrested. You know,
Autarch—"
"Severian," I reminded him. "For as long as I wear these clothes."
"—Severian, we're only supposed to carry these things to the block,
and it will take a lot of talking to make the peltasts think three of us
are necessary. Will they know who you are? I don't-"
This time it was Eata who interrupted him, pointing toward the
river. "Look, there's a boat!"
Roche bellowed, all three waved, and I held up one of the chrisos I
had borrowed from the castellan, turning it so it would flash in the
sunlight that was then just beginning to show over the towers
behind us. The man at the tiller waved his cap, and what appeared to
be a slender lad sprang forward to put the dipping lugsails on the
other tack.
She was two-masted, rather narrow of beam and low of freeboard—


an ideal craft, no doubt, for running untaxed merchandise past the
patrol cutters that had suddenly become mine. The grizzled old
moonraker of a steersman looked capable of much worse, and the
slender "lad was a girl with laughing eyes and a facility for looking
from them sidelong.
"Well, this 'pears to be a day," the steersman said when he saw our
habits. "I thought you was in mournin', I did, till I got up close.
Eyes? I never heard of 'um, no more than a crow in court."
"We are," I told him as I got on board. It gave me a ridiculous
pleasure to find I had not lost the sea legs I had acquired on the
Samru, and to watch Drotte and Roche grab for the sheets when the
lugger rocked beneath their weight.
"Mind if I've a look at that yellow boy? Just to see if he's good. I'll
send him right home."
I tossed him the coin, which he rubbed and bit and at last
surrendered with a respectful look.
"We may need your boat all day."
"For the yellow boy, you can have her all night too. We'll both be
glad of the company, like the undertaker remarked to the ghost.
There was things in the river up till first light, which I suppose
might have something to do with you optimates being out on the
water this mornin'?"
"Cast off," I said. "You can tell me, if you will, what these strange
things were while we are under way."
Although he had broached the subject himself, the steersman
seemed reluctant to go into much detail—perhaps only because he


had difficulty in finding words to express what he had felt and to
describe what he had seen and heard. There was a light west wind,
so that with the lugger's batten-stiffened sails drawn taut we were
able to run upstream handily. The brown girl had little to do but sit
in the bow and trade glances with Eata. (It is possible she thought
him, in his dirty gray shirt and trousers, only a paid attendant of
ours.) The steersman, who called himself her uncle, kept a steady
pressure on the tiller as he talked, to keep the lugger from flying off
the wind.
"I'll tell you what I saw myself, like the carpenter did when he had
the shutter up. We was eight or nine leagues north of where you
hailed us. Clams was our cargo, you see, and there's no stoppin'
with them, not when there's a chance of a warm afternoon. We goes
down to the lower river and buys them off the diggers, do you see,
then runs them up the channel quick so's they can be et before they
goes bad. If they goes off you lose all, but you make double or
better if you can sell them good.
"I've spent more nights on the river in my life than anywhere else—
it's my bedroom, you might say, and this boat's my cradle, though I
don't usually get to sleep until mornin'. But last night—sometimes I
felt like I wasn't on old Gyoll at all, but on some other river, one
that run up into the sky, or under the ground.
"I doubt you noticed unless you was out late, but it was a still night
with just little breaths of wind that would blow for about as long as
it takes a man to swear, then die down, then blow again. There was
mist too, thick as cotton. It hung over the water the way mists
always does, with about so much clear space as you could roll a keg


through between it and the river. Most of the time we couldn't see
the lights on either shore, just the mist. I used to have a horn I
blowed for those that couldn't see our lights, but it went over the
side last year, and being copper it sunk. So I shouted last night,
whenever I felt like there was another boat or anything close by us.
"About a watch after the mist came I let Maxellindis go to sleep.
Both sails was set, and when each puff of air come we would go up
river a bit, and then I'd set out the anchor again. You maybe don't
know it, optimates, but the rule of the river is that them that's goin'
up keeps to the sides and them that's goin' down takes the middle.
We was goin' up and ought to have been over to the east bank, but
with the mist I couldn't tell.
"Then I heard sweeps. I looked in the mist, but I couldn't see lights,
and I hollered so they'd sheer off. I leaned over the gunnel and put
my ear close to the water so's to hear better. A mist soaks up noises,
but the best hearin' you can ever have is when you gets your head
under one, because the noise runs right along the water. Anyway, I
did that, and she was a big one. You can't count how many sweeps
there is with a good crew pullin', because they all go in and come up
together, but when a big vessel goes fast you can hear water breakin'
under her bow, and this was a big one. I got up on top of the
deckhouse tryin' to see her, but there still wasn't any lights, though I
knew she had to be close.
"Just when I was climbin' down I caught the sight of her— a
galleass, four-masted and four-banked, no lights, comin' right up the
channel, as near as I could judge. Pray for them that's comin' down,
thinks I to myself, like the ox said when he fell out of the riggin'.


"Of course I only saw her for a minute before she was gone in the
mist again, but I heard her a long while after. Seein' her like that
made me feel so queer I yelled every once in a while even if no
other craft was by. We had made another half league, I suppose, or
maybe a little less, when I heard somebody yell back. Only it wasn't
like answerin' my hail, but like somebody'd laid a rope end to him. I
called again, and he called back regular, and it was a man I know
named Trason what has his own boat just like I do. 'Is it you?' he
called, and I said it was and asked if he was all right. 'Tie up!' he
says.
"I told him I couldn't. I had clams, and even if the night was cool, I
wanted to sell soon as I could. 'Tie up,' Trason calls again, 'Tie up
and go ashore.' So I call back, 'Why don't you?' Just then he come in
sight, and there was more on his boat than I would've thought it
would hold—pandours, I'd have said, but every pandour ever I saw
had a face brown as mine or nearly, and these was white as the mist.
They had scorpions and voulges—I could see the heads of them
stickin' up over the crests of their helmets."
I interrupted him to ask if the soldiers he had seen were starved
looking and if they had large eyes.
He shook his head, one corner of his mouth twisting up.
"They was big men, bigger than you or me or anybody in this boat,
a head taller than Trason. Anyway, they were gone in a moment,
just like the galleass. That was the only other craft I saw till the mist
lifted. But…"
I said, "But you saw something else. Or heard something."


He nodded. "I thought maybe you and your people here was out
because of them. Yes, I saw and I heard things. There was things in
this river I never saw before. Maxellindis, when she woke up and I
told her about it, said it was the manatees. They're pale in moonlight
and look human enough if you don't come too close. But I've seen
'em since I was a boy and never been fooled once. And there was
women's voices, not loud but big. And something else. I couldn't
understand what any of 'em was sayin', but I could hear the tone of
it. You know how it is when you're listenin' to people over the
water? They would say so-and-so-and-so. Then the deeper voice—I
can't call it a man's because I don't think it was one—the deeper
voice'd say go-and-do-that-and-this-and-that. I heard the women's
voices three times and the other voice twice. You won't believe it,
optimates, but sometimes it sounded like the voices was coming up
out of the river."
With that he fell silent, looking out over the nenuphars. We were
well above that part of Gyoll opposite the Citadel, but they were
still packed more densely than wildflowers in any meadow this side
of paradise.
The Citadel itself was visible now as a whole, and for all its
vastness seemed a glittering flock fluttering upon the hill, its
thousand metal towers ready to leap into the air at a word. Below
them the necropolis spread an embroidery of mingled white and
green. I know it is fashionable to speak in tones of faint disgust of
the "unhealthy" growth of the lawns and trees in such places, but I
have never observed that there is actually anything unhealthy about
it. Green things die that men may live, and men die that green things


may live, even that ignorant and innocent man I killed with his own
ax there long ago. All our foliage is faded, so it is said, and no doubt
it is so; and when the New Sun comes, his bride, the New Urth, will
give glory to him with leaves like emeralds. But in the present day,
the day of the old sun and old Urth, I have never seen any other
green so deep as the great pines' in the necropolis when the wind
swells their branches. They draw their strength from the departed
generations of mankind, and the masts of argosies, that are built up
of many trees, are not so high as they.
The Sanguinary Field stands far from the river. We four drew
strange looks as we journeyed there, but no one halted us. The Inn
of Lost Loves, which had ever seemed to me the least permanent of
the houses of men, still stood as it had on the afternoon when I had
come there with Agia and Dorcas. The fat innkeeper very nearly
fainted when he saw us; I made him fetch Ouen, the waiter.
I had never really looked at him on that afternoon when he had
carried in a tray for Dorcas, Agia, and me. I did so now. He was a
balding man about as tall as Drotte, thin and somehow pinched
looking; his eyes were deep blue, and there was a delicacy to the
molding of his eyes and mouth that I recognized at once.
"Do you know who we are?" I asked him.
Slowly, he shook his head.
"Have you never had a torturer to serve?"
"Once this spring, sieur," he said. "And I know these two men in
black are torturers. But you're no torturer, sieur, though you're
dressed like one."


I let that pass. "You have never seen me?"
"No, sieur."
"Very well, perhaps you have not." (How strange it was to realize
that I had changed so much.) "Ouen, since you do not know me, it
might be well if I knew you. Tell me where you were born and who
your parents were, and how you came to be employed at this inn."
"My father was a shopkeeper, sieur. We lived in Oldgate, on the
west bank. When I was ten or so, I think, he sent me to an inn to be
a potboy, and I've worked in one or another since."
"Your father was a shopkeeper. What of your mother?"
Ouen's face still held a waiter's deference, but his eyes were
puzzled. "I never knew her, sieur. Cas they called her, but she died
when I was young. In childbirth, my father said."
"But you know what she looked like."
He nodded. "My father had a locket with her likeness. Once when I
was twenty or so I came to see him and found out he'd pledged it.
I'd come into a bit of money then helping a certain optimate with his
affairs—carrying messages to the ladies and standing watch outside
doors and so on, and I went to the pawnbroker's and paid the pledge
and took it. I still wear it, sieur. In a place like ours, where there's so
many in 'n out all the time, it's best to keep your valuables about
you."
He reached into his shirt and drew out a locket of cloisonne enamel.
The pictures inside were of Dorcas in full face and profile, a Dorcas
hardly younger than the Dorcas I had known.
"You say you became a potboy at ten, Ouen. But you can read and


write."
"A bit, sieur." He looked embarrassed. "I've asked people, various
times, what writing said. I don't forget much."
"You wrote something when the torturer was here this spring," I
told him. "Do you recall what you wrote?"
Frightened, he shook his head. "Only a note to warn the girl."
"I do. It was, 'The woman with you has been here before. Do not
trust her. Trudo says the man is a torturer. You are my mother come
again.' "
Ouen tucked his locket under his shirt. "It was only that she was so
much like her, sieur. When I was a younger man, I used to think that
someday I'd find such a woman. I told myself, you know, that I was
a better man than my father, and he had, after all. But I never did,
and now I'm not so sure I'm a better man."
"At that time, you did not know what a torturer's habit looked like,"
I said. "But your friend Trudo, the ostler, knew. He knew a good
deal more about torturers than you, and that was why he ran away."
"Yes, sieur. When he heard the torturer was asking for him, he did."
"But you saw the innocence of the girl and wanted to warn her
against the torturer and the other woman. You were right about both
of them, perhaps."
"If you say it, sieur."
"Do you know, Ouen, you look a bit like her."
The fat innkeeper had been listening more or less openly. Now he
chuckled. "He looks more like you!"


I am afraid I turned to stare at him.
"No offense intended, sieur, but it's true. He's a bit older, but when
you were talking I saw both your faces from the side, and there isn't
a patch of difference."
I studied Ouen again. His hair and eyes were not dark like mine, but
with that coloring aside, his face might almost have been my own.
"You said you never found a woman like Dorcas—like that one in
your locket. Still you found a woman, I think."
His eyes would not meet mine. "Several, sieur."
"And fathered a child."
"No, sieur!" He was startled. "Never, sieur!"
"How interesting. Were you ever in difficulties with the law?"
"Several times, sieur."
"It is well to keep your voice low, but it need not be so low as that.
And look at me when you speak to me. A woman you loved—or
perhaps only one who loved you—a dark woman-was taken once?"
"Once, sieur," he said. "Yes, sieur. Catherine was her name. It's an
old-fashioned name, they tell me." He paused and shrugged. "There
was trouble, as you say, sieur. She'd run off from some order of
monials. The law got her, and I never saw her again."
He did not want to come, but we brought him with us when we
returned to the lugger.
When I had come upriver by night on the Samru, the line between
the living and the dead city had been like that between the dark
curve of the world and the celestial dome with its stars. Now, when


there was so much more light, it had vanished. Half-ruinous
structures lined the banks, but whether they were the homes of the
most wretched of our citizens or mere deserted shells I could not
determine until I saw a string on which three rags flapped.
"In the guild we have the ideal of poverty," I said to Drotte as we
leaned on the gunnel. "But those people do not need the ideal; they
have achieved it."
"I should think they'd need it most of all," he answered.
He was wrong. The Increate was there, a thing beyond the
Hierodules and those they serve; even on the river, I could feel his
presence as one feels that of the master of a great house, though he
may be in an obscure room on another floor. When we went ashore,
it seemed to me that if I were to step through any doorway there, I
might surprise some shining figure; and that the commander of all
such figures was everywhere invisible only because he was too
large to be seen.
We found a man's sandal, worn but not old, lying in one of the grassgrown streets. I said, "I'm told there are looters wandering this
place. That is one reason I asked you to come. If there were no one
but myself involved, I would do it alone."
Roche nodded and drew his sword, but Drotte said, "There's no one
here. You've become a great deal wiser than we are, Severian, but
still, I think you've grown a little too accustomed to things that
terrify ordinary people."
I asked what he meant.
"You knew what the boatman was talking about. I could see that in


your face. You were afraid too, or at least concerned. But not
frightened like he was in his boat last night, or like Roche or Ouen
there or I would have been if we'd been close to the river and knew
what was going on. The looters you're talking about were around
last night, and they must keep a watch out for revenue boats. They
won't be anywhere near water today, or for several days to come."
Eata touched my arm. "Do you think that girl—Maxellin-dis—is
she in danger, back there on the boat?"
"She's not in as much danger as you are from her," I said. He did not
know what I meant, but I did. His Maxellindis was not Thecla; his
story could not be the same as my own. But I had seen the revolving
corridors of Time behind the gamin face with the laughing brown
eyes. Love is a long labor for torturers; and even if I were to
dissolve the guild, Eata would become a torturer, as all men are,
bound by the contempt for wealth without which a man is less than
a man, inflicting pain by his nature, whether he willed it or not. I
was sorry for him, and more sorry for Maxellindis the sailor girl.
Ouen and I went into the house, leaving Roche, Drotte, and Eata to
keep watch from some distance away. As we stood at the door, I
could hear the soft sound of Dorcas's steps inside.
"We will not tell you who you are," I said to Ouen. "And we cannot
tell you what you may become. But we are your Autarch, and we
tell you what you must do."
I had no words for him, but I discovered I did not need them. He
knelt at once, as the castellan had.
"We brought the torturers with us so that you might know what was


in store for you if you disobeyed us. But we do nowish you to
disobey, and now, having met you, we doubt they were needed.
There is a woman in this house. In a moment you will go in. You
must tell her your story, as you told it to us, and you must remain
with her and protect her, even if she tries to send you away." — -I
will do my best, Autarch," Ouen said.
"When you can, you must persuade her to leave this city of death.
Until then, we give you this." I took out the pistol and handed it to
him. "It is worth a cartload of chrisos, but as long as you are here, it
is far better for you to have than chrisos. When you and the woman
are safe, we will buy it back from you, if you wish." I showed him
how to operate the pistol and left him.
I was alone then, and I do not doubt that there are some who,
reading this too-brief account of a summer more than normally
turbulent, will say that I have usually been so. Jonas, my only real
friend, was in his own eyes merely a machine; Dorcas, whom I yet
love, is in her own eyes merely a kind of ghost.
I do not feel it is so. We choose—or choose not—to be alone when
we decide whom we will accept as our fellows, and whom we will
reject. Thus an eremite in a mountain cave is in company, because
the birds and coneys, the initiates whose words live in his "forest
books," and the winds— the messengers of the Increate—are his
companions. Another man, living in the midst of millions, may be
alone, because there are none but enemies and victims around him.
Agia, whom I might have loved, has chosen instead to become a
female Vodalus, taking all that lives most fully in humanity as her
opponent. I, who might have loved Agia, who loved Dorcas deeply


but perhaps not deeply enough, was now alone because I had
become a part of her past, which she loved better than she had ever
(except, I think, at first) loved me.

XXXVIII
Resurrection
Almost nothing remains to be told. Dawn has come, the red sun like
a bloody eye. The wind blows cold through the window. In a few
moments, a footman will carry in a steaming tray; with him, no
doubt, will be old, twisted Father Inire, eager to confer during the
last few moments that remain; old Father Inire, alive so long beyond
the span of his short-lived kind; old Father Inire, who will not, I
fear, long survive the red sun. How upset he will be to find I have
been sitting up writing all night here in the clerestory.
Soon I must don robes of argent, the color that is more pure than
white. Never mind.
There will be long, slow days on the ship. I will read. I still have so
much to learn. I will sleep, dozing in my berth, listening to the
centuries wash against the hull. This manuscript I shall send to
Master Ultan; but while I am on the ship, when I cannot sleep and
have tired of reading, I shall write it out again—I who forget nothing
—every word, just as I have written it here. I shall call it The Book
of the New Sun, for that book, lost now for so many ages, is said to
have predicted his coming. And when it is finished again, I shall
seal that second copy in a coffer of lead and set it adrift on the seas


of space and time.
Have I told you all I promised? I am aware that at various places in
my narrative I have pledged that this or that should be made clear in
the knitting up of the story. I remember them all, I am sure, but then
I remember so much else. Before you assume that I have cheated
you, read again, as I will write again.
Two things are clear to me. The first is that I am not the first
Severian. Those who walk the corridors of Time saw him gain the
Phoenix Throne, and thus it was that the Autarch, having been told
of me, smiled in the House Azure, and the undine thrust me up
when it seemed I must drown. (Yet surely the first Severian did not;
something had already begun to reshape my life.) Let me guess
now, though it is only a guess, at the story of that first Severian.
He too was reared by the torturers, I think. He too was sent forth to
Thrax. He too fled Thrax, and though he did not carry the Claw of
the Conciliator, he must have been drawn to the fighting in the north
—no doubt he hoped to escape the archon by hiding himself among
the army. How he encountered the Autarch there I cannot say; but
encounter him he did, and so, even as I, he (who in the final sense
was and is myself) became Autarch in turn and sailed beyond the
candles of night. Then those who walk the corridors walked back to
the time when he was young, and my own story—as I have given it
here in so many pages—began.
The second thing is this. He was not returned to his own time but
became himself a walker of the corridors. I know now the identity
of the man called the Head of Day, and why Hildegrin, who was too
near, perished when we met, and why the witches fled. I know too


in whose mausoleum I tarried as a child, that little building of stone
with its rose, its fountain, and its flying ship all graven. I have
disturbed my own tomb, and now I go to lie in it.
When Drotte, Roche, Eata, and I returned to the Citadel, I received
urgent messages from Father Inire and from the House Absolute,
and yet 1 lingered. I asked the castellan for a map. After much
searching he produced one, large and old, cracked in many places. It
showed the curtain wall whole, but the names of the towers were
not the names I knew—or that the castellan knew, for that matter—
and there were towers on that map that are not in the Citadel, and
towers in the Citadel that were not on that map.
I ordered a flier then, and for half a day soared among the towers.
No doubt I saw the place I sought many times, but if so I did not
recognize it.
At last, with a bright and unfailing lamp, I went down into our
oubliette once more, down flight after flight of steps until I had
reached the lowest level. What is it, I wonder, that has given so
great a power to preserve the past to underground places? One of
the bowls in which I had carried soup to Triskele was there still.
(Triskele, who had stirred back to life beneath my hand two years
before I bore the Claw.) I followed Triskele's footprints once more,
as I had when still an apprentice, to the forgotten opening, and from
there my own into the dark maze of tunnels.
Now in the steady light of my lamp I saw where I had lost the track,
running straight on when Triskele had turned aside. I was tempted
then to follow him instead of myself, so that I might see where he
had emerged, and in that way perhaps discover who it was who had


befriended him and to whom he used to return after greeting me,
sometimes, in the byways of the Citadel. Possibly when I come
back to Urth I shall do so, if indeed I do come back.
But once again, I did not turn aside. I followed the boy-man I had
been, down a straight corridor floored with mud and pierced at rare
intervals with forbidding vents and doors. The Severian I pursued
wore ill-fitting shoes with run-down heels and worn soles; when I
turned and flashed my light behind me, I observed that though the
Severian who pursued him had excellent boots, his steps were of
unequal length and the toe of one foot dragged at each. I thought,
One Severian had good boots, the other good legs. And I laughed to
myself, wondering who should come here in afteryears, and whether
he would guess that the same feet left both tracks.
To what use these tunnels were once put, I cannot say. Several
times I saw stairs that had once descended farther still, but always
they led to dark, calm water. I found a skeleton, its bones scattered
by the running feet of Severian, but it was only a skeleton, and told
me nothing. In places there was writing on the walls, writing in
faded orange or sturdy black; but it was in a character I could not
read, as unintelligible as the scrawlings of the rats in Master Ultan's
library. A few of the rooms into which I looked held walls in which
there had once ticked a thousand or more clocks of various kinds,
and though all were dead now, their chimes silenced and their hands
corroded at hours that would never come again, I thought them
good omens for one who sought the Atrium of Time.
And at last I found it. The little spot of sunshine was just as I had
remembered it. No doubt I acted foolishly, but I extinguished my


lamp and stood for a moment in the dark, looking at it. All was
silence, and its bright, uneven square seemed at least as mysterious
as it had before.
I had feared I would have difficulty in squeezing through its narrow
crevice, but if the present Severian was somewhat larger of bone, he
was also leaner, so that when I had worked my shoulders through
the rest followed easily enough.
The snow I recalled was gone, but a chill had come into the air to
say that it would soon return. A few dead leaves, which must have
been carried in some updraft very high indeed, had come to rest
here among the dying roses. The tilted dials still cast their crazy
shadows, useless as the dead clocks beneath them, though not so
unmoving. The carven animals stared at them, unwinking still.
I crossed to the door and tapped on it. The timorous old woman who
had served us appeared, and I, stepping into that musty room in
which I had warmed myself before, told her to bring Valeria to me.
She hurried away, but before she was out of sight, something had
wakened in the time-worn walls, its disembodied voices, hundredtongued, demanding that Valeria report to some antiquely titled
personage who I realized with a start must be myself.
Here my pen shall halt, reader, though I do not. I have carried you
from gate to gate—from the locked and fog-shrouded gate of the
necropolis of Nessus to that cloud-racked gate we call the sky, the
gate that shall lead me, as I hope, beyond the nearer stars.
My pen halts, though I do not. Reader, you will walk no more with
me. It is time we both take up our lives.


To this account, I, Severian the Lame, Autarch, do set my hand in
what shall be called the last year of the old sun.


APPENDIX
The Arms of the Autarch and the Ships of the Hierodules
Nowhere are the manuscripts of The Book of the New Sun more
obscure than in their treatment of weapons and military organization.
The confusion concerning the equipment of Severian's allies and
adversaries appears to derive from two sources, of which the first is
his marked tendency to label every variation in design or purpose
with a separate name. In translating these, I have endeavored to bear
in mind the radical meaning of the words employed as well as what
I take to be the appearance and function of the weapons themselves.
Thus falchion, fuscina, and many others. At one point I have put the
athame, the warlock's sword, into Agia's hands.
The second source of difficulty seems to be that three quite different
gradations of technology are involved. The lowest of these could be
termed the smith level. The arms produced by it appear to consist of
swords, knives, axes, and pikes, such as might have been forged by
any skilled metalworker of, say, the fifteenth century. These appear
to be readily obtained by the average citizen and to represent the
technological ability of the society as a whole.
The second gradation might be called the Urth level. The long
cavalry weapons I have chosen to call lances, conti, and so on
undoubtedly belong to this group, as do the "spears" with which the
hastarü menaced Severian outside the door of the antechamber and


other arms used by infantry. How widely available such weapons
were is not clear from the text, which at one point speaks of
"arrows" - and "long-shafted khetens" being offered for sale in
Nessus. It seems certain that Guasacht's irregulars were issued their
conti before battle and that these were collected and stored
somewhere (possibly in his tent) afterward. Perhaps it should be
noted that small arms were issued and collected in this way in the
navies of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, although cutlasses
and firearms could be freely purchased ashore. The arbalests used
by Agia's assassins outside the mine are surely what I have called
Urth weapons, but it is likely these men were deserters.
The Urth weapons, then, appear to represent the highest technology
to be found on the planet, and perhaps in its solar system. How
efficient they would be in comparison with our own arms is difficult
to say. Armor appears to be not wholly ineffective against them, but
precisely this is true with regard to our rifles, carbines, and
submachine guns.
The third gradation I would call the stellar level. The pistol given
Thea by Vodalus and the one given Ouen by Severian are
unquestionably stellar weapons, but about many other arms
mentioned in the manuscript we cannot be so sure. Some, or even
all, of the artillery used in the mountain war may be stellar. The
fusils and jezails carried by special troops on both sides may or may
not belong to this gradation, though I am inclined to think they do.
It seems fairly clear that stellar weapons could not be produced on
Urth and had to be obtained from the Hierodules at great cost. An
interesting question—to which I can offer no certain answer—


concerns the goods given in exchange. The Urth of the old sun
seems, by our standards, destitute of raw materials; when Severian
speaks of mining, he appears to mean what we should call
archaeological pillaging, and the new continents said (in Dr. Talos's
play) to be ready to rise with the coming of the New Sun have
among their attractions "gold, silver, iron, and copper . . ." (Italics
added.) Slaves—some slavery certainly exists in Severian's societyfurs, meat and other foodstuffs, and labor-intensive items such as
handmade jewelry would appear to be among the possibilities.
We would like to know more about almost everything mentioned in
these manuscripts; but most of all, certainly, we would like to know
more about the ships that sail between the stars, commanded by the
Hierodules but sometimes crewed by human beings. (Two of the
most enigmatic figures in the manuscripts, Jonas and Hethor, seem
once to have been such crewmen.) But here the translater is forced
against one of the most maddening of all his difficulties—
Severian's failure to distinguish clearly between space-going and
ocean-going craft.
Irritating though it is, it seems quite natural, given his
circumstances. If a distant continent is as remote as the moon, then
the moon is no more remote than a distant continent. Furthermore,
the star-traveling ships appear to be propelled by light pressure on
immense sails of metal foil, so that an applied science of masts,
cables, and spars is common to ships of both kinds. Presumably,
since many skills (and perhaps most of all that of enduring long
periods of isolation) would be required equally on both types of
craft, crewmen from vessels that would only excite our contempt


may sign aboard others whose capabilities would astonish us. One
notes that the captain of Severian's lugger shares some of Jonas's
habits of speech.
And now, a final comment. In my translations and in these
appendixes I have attached to them, I have attempted to eschew all
speculations; it seems to me that now, near the close of seven years'
labor, I may be permitted one. It is that the ability to traverse hours
and aeons possessed by these ships may be no more than the natural
consequence of their ability to penetrate interstellar and even
intergalactic space, and to escape the death throes of the universe;
and that to travel thus in time may not be so complex and difficult
an affair as we are prone to suppose. It is possible that from the
beginning Severian had some presentiment of his future.
