Four Ways to Forgiveness
URSULA K. LE  GUIN


Betrayals
On the planet 0 there has not been a war for



thollsand
years,' she read ,‘and on Gethen there has never been a war.'
She stopped reading, to rest her eyes and beCallSe she was trying
to train herself to read slowly, not gobble words down in chunks
the way Tikuli gulped his food. 'There has never been a war:' in
her mind the words stood clear and bright, surrounded by and
sinking into an infinite, dark , soft incredulity. Wh at would that
world be , a world without war? It wOllld be the real world. Peace
was the true life , the life of working and learning and bringing
up children to work and learn. War , which devoured work ,
learning , and children , was the denial of reality. But my people ,
she thought, know only how to deny. Born in the dark shadow
of power misused , we set peace outside our world , a glliding
and unattainable ligh t. Al I we know 如 do is figh t. Any peace
one of llS can make in our life is only a denial that the war is
going on , a shadow of the shadow, a dOllbled llnbelie f.
So as the cloud-shadows swept over the marshes and the
page of the book open on her lap , she sighed and closed her
eyes , thinking,‘1 am a liar.' Then she opened her eyes and read
more about the other worlds , the far realities.
Tikuli , sleeping curled up arollnd his tail in the weak
sunshine , sighed as if imitating her , and scratched a dreamflea.
Gubu was Ollt in the reeds , hllnting; she could not see him ,
but now and then the pl11me of a reed quivered , and once a
marsh hen flew up cackling in indignation.



Four Ways to Forgiveness

Absorbed in a description of the peculiar social customs of
the 1吭吭， she did not see Wada till he was at the gate letting
himself in. 'Oh , you're here already,' she said , taken by surprise
and feeling unready , incompetent, old, as she always felt with
other people. Al one, she only felt old when she was overtired
or ill. Maybe living alone was the right thing for her after all.
‘Come on in,' she said, getting up and dropping her book and
picking it up and feeling her back hair where the knot was
coming loose. '1'11 jllst get my bag and be off, then.'
‘No hurry ,' the young man said in his soft voice. ‘Eyid won't
be here for a while yet.'
Very kind of yOll to tell me 1 don't have to hurry to leave my
own house , Yoss thought, but said nothing, obedient to the
insllfferable, adorable selfishness of the yOllng. She went in
and got her shopping bag, reknotted her hair , tied a scarf over
it, and came Ollt onto the li ttI e open porch. Wada had sat down
in her chair; he jumped up when she came ou t. He was a shy
boy, the gentler, she thought, of the two lovers. ‘Have fun ,' she
said with a smile , knowing she embarrassed him. '1'11 be back
in a cOllple of hours - before sllnset.' She went down to her
gate , let herself out, and set off the way Wada had come , along
the path up to the winding wooden causeway across the
marshes to the village.
She would not meet Eyid on the way. Th e girl would be
coming from the north on one of the bog-paths, having left the
village at a different time and in a different direction than
Wada , so that nobody would notice that for a few hours every
week or so the two yOllng people were gone at the same time.
They were madly in love , had been in love for three years, and
would have lived in partnership long since ifWada's father and
Eyid's father's brother hadn't quarreled over a piece of reallocated Corporation land and set up a feud between the families
that had so far stopped short of bloodshed , bllt put a love match
out of the question. Th e land was valuable; the families ,
though poor, each aspired to be leaders of the village. Nothing

Betrayals

9

would heal the grudge. The whole vil1 age took sides in it. Eyid
and Wada had nowhere to go , no sk il1 s to keep them alive in
the cities , no tribal relations in another vil1 age who might take
them in. Their passion was trapped in the hatred of the old.
Yoss had come on them , a year ago now , in each other's arms
on the cold ground of an island in the marshes - blundering
onto them as once she had blundered onto a pair of fendeer
fawns holding utterly stil1 in the nest of grass where the doe
had left them. This pair had been as frightened , as beautiful
and vulnerable as the fawns , and they had begged her 'not to
tell' so humbly , what could she do? They were shivering with
cold , Eyid's bare legs were muddy , they clung to each other
like children. ~Come to my house ,' she said sternly. 中or mercy
sake!' She stalked off. Timid峙， they fo l1 owed he r. '1 wil1 be
back in an hour or so ,' she said when she had got them indoors ,
into her one room with the bed alcove right beside the
chimney. ‘Don't get things muddy!'
That time she had roamed the paths keeping watch , in case
anybody was out looking for them. Nowadays she mosÙY went
into the village while 'the fawns' were in her house having
their sweet hour.
They were too ignorant to think of any way to thank her.
Wada , a peat-cutter, might have supplied her fire without
anyone being SUSplC lO US , but they never left so much as a
flower , though they always made up the bed very neat and
tigh t. Perhaps indeed they were not very gratefu l. Wh y should
they be? She gave them only what was their due: a bed , an
hour of pleasure , a moment of peace. It wasn't their fault , or
her virtue , that nobody else would give it to them.
Her errand today took her in to Eyid's uncle's shop. He was
the village sweets-selle r. Al I the holy abstinence she had
intended when she came here two years ago , the single bowl
of unflavored grain , the draft of pure water, she'd given that up
in no time. She got diarrhea from a cereal diet, and the water
of the marshes was undrinkable. She ate every fresh vegetable

10

Four Ways to Forgiveness

she cOllld blly or grow , drank wine or bottled water or fruit
jllice from the city, and kept a large sllpply of sweets - dried
fruits , raisins , sllgar-brittle , even the cakes Eyid's mother and
aunts made , fat disks with a nutmeat squashed onto the top ,
dry, greasy , tasteless , b叫 curiously 叫i有i時 She bought a
bagful of them and a brown wheel of sllgar-bri脹， and gossiped
with the aunts , dark , darting-eyed little women who had been
at old Uad's wake last night and wanted to talk about it. 'Those
people' 一 Wada's family , indicated by a glance , a shrug , a sneer
- had misbehaved as llsual , got drunk , picked fights , boasted ,
got sick, and vomited a11 over the place , greedy upstart louts
that they were. When she stopped by the newsstand to pick up
a paper (another vow long since broken; she had been going to
read only the Arkamye and learn it by heart) , Wada's rnother
was there , and she heard how 'those people' - Eyid's family had boasted and picked fights and vomited a11 over the place at
the wake last nigh t. She did not merely hear; she asked for
details , she drew the gossip out; she loved it.
What a fool , she thought , starting slowly home on the
causeway path , what a fool 1 was to think 1 could ever drink
water and be silent! 1'11 never, never be able to let anything go ,
anything at all. 1'11 never be free , never be worthy of freedom.
Even old age can't make me let go. Even losing Safnan can't
rnake me let go.
Before the Fíve Anníes they stood. Holding uþ hís sword, Enar
saíd to Kamye: My hands hold your death , my Lo rd! Kamye
answered: Brother, it ís your death they hold.
She knew those lines , anyway. Everybody knew those lines.
And so then Enar dropped hís sword , because he was a hero and
a holy man, the Lord's younger brothe r. But 1 can't drop my
death. 1'11 hold ít to the end , I'll cherísh 祉， hate 祉， eat 祉， drink
ít , listen to it , give it my bed , mourn 祉， everythíng but let ít go
She looked up out of her thoughts into the afternoon on the
marshes: the sky a cloudless misty blue , reßected in one distant
cllrving channel of water, and the sllnlight golden over the dun

Betrayals

11

leve\ s of the reedbeds and among the stems of the reeds. The
rare , soft west wind blew. A perfect day. The beauty of the
world , the beallty of the world! A sword ín my hand , turned
agaínst me. Why do yOll make beauty to kíll us , my Lord?
She trudged on , pulling her headscarf tighter with a li吐le
díssatisfied jerk. At thís rate she wOllld soon be wandering
around the marshes shouting alolld , like Abberkam.
An d there he was , the thought had summoned him: lurching
along in the blind way he had as if he never saw anything but
his thoughts , striking at the roadway with his big stick as if he
was killing a snake. Long grey hair blowing around his face.
He wasn't shouting, he only shouted at night, and not for a
long tíme nοw， but he was talking , she saw his lips move; then
he saw her, and shut his mouth , and drew hims e\ f into hims e\ f,
wary as a wild anímal. They approached each other on the
narrow causeway path , not another human being in all the
wilderness of reeds and mud and water and wind.
'Good evening, Chief Abberkam ,' Yoss said when there were
only a few paces between them. What a big man he was; she
never could believe how tall and broad and heavy he was till
she saw him again , his dark skin still smooth as a young man's ,
but hís head stooped and his hair grey and wild. A huge hook
nose and the mistrustful , unseeing eyes. He muttered some
kind of greetíng, hardly slowing his gai t.
The mischíef was in Yoss today; she was síck of her own
thoughts and sorrows and shortcomings. She stopped , so that
he had to stop or else run right into her , and said ,‘Were you at
the wake last night?'
He stared down at her; she felt he was getting her into focus ,
or part of her; he finally said , "九lake?'
'They buried old Uad last nigh t. All the men got drunk , and
it' s a mercy the feud didn't 自nally break out.'
‘Feud?' he repeated in his deep voice.
Maybe he wasn't capable of focusing any more , but she was
driven to talk to him , to get through to him. 'The Oewis and

12

FourWays 的 Forgíveness

Kamanners. They're ql1 arreling over that arable island just
north of the village. And the two poor children, they want to
be partners , and their fathers threaten to kill them if they look
at each othe r. Wh at idiocy! Wh y don't they divide the island
and let the children pair and let their children share it? It'll
come to blood one of these days , 1 think.'
'To blood ,' the Chief said , repeating again like a halιwit，
and then slowly, in that great, deep voice , the voice she had
heard crying O l1 t in agony in the night across the marshes ,
'Those men. Those shopkeepers. Th ey have the souls of
owners. They won't kil l. Bl1 t they won't share. If it' s property,
they won't let go. Never.'
She saw again the lifted sword.
‘ Ah ,' she said with a sh l1 dde r.‘ So then the children must
wait . . . till the old people die . . .'
'Too late ,' he said. His eyes met hers for one instant, keen
and strange; then he pushed back his hair impatiently, growled
something by way of good-bye , and started on so abruptly that
she almost crouched aside to make way for him. Tha t's how a
chief walks , she thought wryly , as she went on. Big, wide ,
taking up' space , stamping the earth down. And this , this is how
an old woman walks , narrowly, narrowly.
There was a strange noise behind her - gunshots , she
thought, for city usages stay in the nerves - and she tumed
sharp round. Abberkam had stopped and was coughing explos lVe峙， tremendously , his big frame hunched around the spasms
that nearly wracked him 0旺 his fee t. Yoss knew that kind of
coughing. The Ekumen was supposed to have medicine for it,
but she'd left the city before any of it came. She went to
Abberkam and when the paroxysm was over and he stood
gasping, grey-faced , she said ,‘Tha t's berlot: are you getting over
it or are you getting it?'
He shook his head.
She waited.
While she waited she thought, what do 1 care if he's sick or

Betrayals

13

not? Does he care? He came here to die. 1 heard him howling
out on the marshes in the dark , last winte r. Howling in agony.
Eaten out with shame , like a man with cancer who's been all
eaten out by the cancer but can't die.
'It's all right,' he said , hoarse , angry , wanting her only to get
away from him; and she nodded and went on her way. Let him
die. How could he want to live knowing what he' d lost , his
power, his honor , and what he'd done? Lied , betrayed his
supporters , embezzled. The perfect politician. Big Chief Abberkam , hero of the Liberation , leader of the World Pa旬， who
had destroyed the World Party by his greed and folly.
She glanced back once. He was moving very slowly or
perhaps had-stopped , she was not sme. She went on , taking the
right-hand way where the causeway forked , going down onto
the bog-path that led to her little house.
Three hundred years ago these marshlands had been a vast,
rich agriculhual valley , one of the 自 rst to be irrigated and
cultivated by the Agriculhual Plantation Corporation when
they brought their slaves from Werel to the Yeowe Colony.
Too well irrigated , too well cultivated; fertilising chemicals and
salts of the soil had accumulated till nothing would grow , and
the Owners went elsewhere for their profi t. The banks of the
irrigation canals slumped here and there and the waters of the
river wandered free again , pooling and meandering , slowly
washing the lands clean. The reeds grew, miles and miles of
reeds bowing a li此le under the wind , under the cloud-shadows
and the wings of long-Iegged birds. Here and there on an island
of rockier soil a few fields and a slave-village remained , a few
sharecroppers left behind , useless people on useless land. The
freedom of desolation. And all through the marshes there were
lonely houses.
Growing old , the people of Werel and Yeowe might hun to
silence , as their religion recommended them to do: when their
children were grown , when they had done their work as
householder and citizen , when as their body weakened their

14

FourWays 的 Forgíveness

soul might make itself strong, they left their life behind and
came emptyhanded to lonely places. Even on the Plantations ,
the Bosses had let old slaves go out into the wilderness , go free.
Here in the North , freedmen from the cities had come out to
the marshlands and lived as recluses in the lonely houses. Now ,
since the Liberation , even women came.
Some of the houses were derelict, and any soulmaker might
claim them; most , like Yoss's thatched cabin , were owned by
villagers who maintained them and gave them to a recluse
rent-free as a religious duty, a means of enriching the sou l.
Yoss liked knowing that she was a source of spirihtal profit to
her landlord , a grasping man whose account with Providence
was probably otherwise all on the debit side. She liked to feel
useful. She took it for another sign of her incapacity to let the
world go , as the Lord Kamye bade her do. You are no Longer
usefuL , he had told her in a hundred ways , over and over , since
she was sixty; but she would not listen. She left the noisy world
and came out to the marshes , but she let the world go on
chattering and gossiping and singing and crying in her ears.
She would not hear the low voice of the Lord.
Eyid and Wada were gone when she got home; the bed was
made up very tight, and the foxdog Tikuli was sleeping on 祉，
curled up around his tai l. Gubu the spotted cat was prancing
around asking about dinne r. She picked him up and petted his
silken , speckled back while he nuzzled under her ear , making
his steady roo-roo-roo of pleasure and a旺ection; then she fed
him. Tikuli took no notice , which was odd. Tikuli was sleeping
too much. She sat on the bed and scratched the roots of his
sti缸.， red-furred ears. He woke and yawned and looked at her
with soft amber eyes , his red plume of tail stirring. 'Aren't you
hungry?' she asked him. 1 will eat to please you , Tikuli
answered , getting down off the bed rather sti fA y. ‘Oh , Tikuli ,
you're getting old ,' Yoss said , and the sword stirred in her heart.
Her daughter Safnan had given her Tikuli , a tiny red cub , a

Betrayals

15

scurry of paws and plume-tail - how long ago? Eight years. A
long time. A lifetime for a foxdog
More than a lifetime for Safnan. More than a lifetime for
her children , Yoss's grandchildren , Enkamma and Uye.
If 1 am alive , they are dead , Yoss thought, as she always
thought; if they are alive , 1 am dead. They went on the ship
that goes like light; they are translated into the ligh t. When
they return into life , when they step off the ship on the world
called Hain , it will be eighty years from the day they left, and 1
will be dead , long dead; 1 am dead. They left me and 1 am
dead. Let them be alive , Lord , sweet Lord , let them be alive , 1
will be dead. 1 came here to be dead. For them. 1 cannot, 1
cannot let them be dead for me.
Tikuli's cold nose tOllched her hand. She looked intently at
him. The amber of his eyes was dimmed , bluish. She stroked
his head , scratched the roots of his ears , silent.
He ate a few bites to please her , and climbed back up onto
the bed. She made her own dinner , SOllp and rewarmed soda
cakes, and ate it, not tasting it. She washed the three dishes she
had used , made up the fire , and sat by it trying to read her
book slowly, while Tikuli slept on the bed and Gubu lay on
the hearth gazing into the fire with round golden eyes, going
roo-roo-roo very softly. Once he sat lI P and made his battlecall ,
甘 oooo!' at some noise he heard out in the marshes , and
stalked abollt a bit; then he settled down again to staring and
roo-ing. Later , when the fire was out and the house .lltterly dark
in the starless darkness , he joined Yoss and Tikllli in the warm
bed , where earlier the young lovers had had their brief, sharp
10y.
She found she was thinking about Abberkam , the next couple
of days , as she worked in her li仕le vegetable garden , cleaning
it up for the winte r. Wh en the Chief first çame , the villagers
had been all abllzz with excitement abollt his living in a hOllse
that belonged to the headman of their village. Disgraced ,

16

FourWays 的 Forgiveness

dishonored , he was still a very famous man. An elected Chief
of the Heyend , one of the principal Tribes of Yeowe , he had
come to prominence during the last years of the War of
Liberation , leading a great movement for what he called Ra çial
Freedom. Even some of the villagers had embraced the main
principle of the World Party: No one was to live on Yeowe but
its own people. No Werelians , the hated ancestral colonisers,
the Bosses and Owners. The War had ended slavery; and in
the last few years the diplomats of the Ekumen had negotiated
an end to Werel's economic power over its former colonyplanet. The Bosses and Owners , even those whose families had
lived on Yeowe for centuries, had all withdrawn to Werel , the
Old World , next outward from the sun. They had run , and
their soldiers had been driven after them. They must never
rehun , said the World Party. Not as traders , not as visitors , they
would never again pollute the soil and sOlll of Yeowe. Nor
would any other foreigner , any other Powe r. Th e Al iens of the
Ekumen had helped Yeowe free itself; now they too must go.
Th ere was no place for them here.'This is our world. Th is is
the free world. Here we will make our souls in the image of
Ka mye the Swordsman,' Abberkam had said over and over, and
that image , the curved sword , was the symbol of the World
Party.
And blood had been shed. From the Uprising at Nadami on ,
thirty years of fighting , rebellions , retaliations , half her lifetime,
and even after Liberation , after all the Werelians were gone ,
the fighting went on. Al ways , always , the young men were
ready to rush out and kill whoever the old men told them to
kill , each other, women , old people , children; always there was
a war to be fought in the name of Peace , Freedom , Jllstice , the
Lord. Newly freed tribes fought over land , the city chiefs fought
for powe r. Al I Yoss had worked for all her life as an educator in
the capital had come to pieces not only during the War of
Liberation but after 祉，的 the city disintegrated in one ward-war
after anothe r.

Betrayals

17

In all fairness , she thought, despite his waving Kam阱's
sword , Abberkam , in leading the World Pa旬， had tried to
avoid war and had partly succeeded. His preference was for the
winning of power by policy and persuasion, and he was a
master of it. He had come very near success. Th e curved sword
was everywhere, the rallies cheering his speeches were
immense. ABBERKAM AND RACIAL FREEDOM! said huge
posters stretched across the city avenues. He was certain to win
the first free election ever held on Yeowe , to be Chief of the
World Counci l. And then , nothing much at fi帥， the rumors.
The defections. His son's suicide. His son's mother's accusations of debauchery and gross luxury. The proof that he had
embezzled .great sums of money given his party for relief of
districts left in poverty by the withdrawal of Werelian capital.
The revelation of the secret plan to assassinate the Envoy of
the Ekumen and put the blame on Abberkam's old friend and
supporter Demeye ... That was what brought him down. A
chief could indulge himself sexually, misuse power, grow rich
off his people and be admired for it, but a chief who betrayed
a companion was not forgiven. It was , Yoss thought, the code
of the slave.
Mobs of his own supporters turned against him , attacking
the old APCY Manager's Residency, which he had taken over.
Supporters of the Ekumen joined with forces still loyal to him
to defend him and restore order to the capital city. Mter days
of street warfare , hundreds of men killed fighting and thousands
more in riots around the continent, Abberkam surrendered.
Th e Ekumen supported a provisional government in declaring
amnesty. Their people walked him through the bloodstained ,
bombed-o ut streets in absolute silence. People watched , people
who had trusted him , people who had revered him , people
who had hated him , watched him walk past in silence , guarded
by the foreigners , the Al iens he had tried to drive from their
world.
She had read about it in the paper. She had been living in

18

Four Ways to Forgiveness

the marshes for over a year then. 'Serve him right,' she had
thought , and not much more. Wh ether the Ekumen was a true
ally or a new set of Owners in disguise , she didn't know, but
she liked to see any chief go down. Werelian Bosses, strutting
tribal headmen , or ranting demagogues , let them taste dir t.
She'd eaten enough of their dirt in her life.
When a few months later they told her in the village that
Abberkam was coming to the marshlands as a recluse , a
soulmaker, she had been surprised and for a moment ashamed
at having assumed his talk had all been empty rhetoric. Was
he a religious man , then? 一 Through all the luxury , the orgies ,
the th efts , the powermongering, the murders? No! Since he'd
lost his money and power , he'd stay in view by making a
spectacle of his poverty and piety. He was utterly shameless.
She was surprised at the bitterness of her indignation. The first
time she saw him she felt like spitting at the big , thick-toed ,
sandaled feet , which were all she saw of him; she refused to
look at his face.
But then in the winter she had heard the howling out on the
marshes , at night, in the freezing wind. Tikuli and Gubu had
pricked an ear but been unfrightened by the awful noise. That
led her after a minute to recognise it as a human voice - a
man shouting aloud , drunk? mad? - howling , beseeching, so
that she had got up to go to him , despite her terror; but he was
not calling out for human aid. 'Lord , my Lord , Kamye!' he
shouted , and looking out her door she saw him up on the
causeway, a shadow against the pale night clouds , striding and
tearing at his hair and crying like an animal , like a soul in
pam.
After that night she did not judge him. They were equals.
Wh en she next met him she looked him in the face and spoke,
forcing him to speak to he r.
That was not often; he lived in true seclusion. No one came
across the marshes to see him. People in the village often
enriched their souls by glVl ng her food , harvest surplus ,

Betrayals

19

leftovers , sometimes at the holy days a dish cooked for her; but
she saw no one take anything out to Abberkam's house. Maybe
they had offered and he was too proud to take. Maybe they
were afraid to offe r.
She dug up her root bed with the miserable short-handled
spade Em Oewi had given her , and tho l1 ght abo l1 t Abberkam
howling , and abo l1 t the way he had cO l1 ghed. Safnan had
nearly died of the berlot when she was fO l1T. Yoss had heard
that terrible cO l1 gh for weeks. Had Abberkam been going to the
village to get medicine , the other day? Had he got there , or
tl1 rned back?
She pl1 t on her shawl , for the wind had tl1 rned cold again ,
the al1 tl1 mn was getting on. She went up to the causeway and
took the right-hand tl1rn.
Abberkam's hO l1 se was of wood , riding a raft of tree trunks
sl1 nk in the peaty water of the marsh. Such hO l1 ses were very
old , going back two hundred years or more to when there had
been trees growing in the valley. It had been a farmho l1se and
was m l1 ch larger than her hut, a rambling , dark place, the roof
in ill repair , some windows boarded over , planks on , the porch
loose as she stepped l1 p on it. She said his name , then said it
again 1011der. The wind whined in the reeds. She knocked ,
waited , pushed the heavy door open. It was dark indoors. She
was in a kind of vestib l1le , She heard him talking in the next
room , 'Never down to the adit, in the intent , take it Ol1 t, take it
Ol1 t,' the deep , hoarse voice said , and then he coughed. She
opened the door; she had to let her eyes adj l1 st to the darkness
for a minute before she could see where she was , It was the old
front room of the hO l1 se The windows were sh l1 ttered , the fire
dead. There was a sideboard , a table , a cO l1 ch , b l1 t a bed stood
near the fireplace , The tangled covers had slid to the f1 oor , and
Abberkam was naked on the bed , writhing and raving in feve r.
'Oh , Lord!' Yoss said. That h l1 ge , black, sweat-oiled breast and
belly whorled with grey hair , those powerf111 arms and groping
hands , how was she going to get near him?
,

20

Four Ways to Forgiveness

She managed it, growing less timid and ca l1 tio l1 s as she
fO l1 nd him weak in his fever , and , when he was 111cid , obedient
to her requests. She got him covered l1 p , piled l1 p all the
blankets he had and a rug from the floor of an l1 n l1 sed room
on top; she b l1 ilt l1 p the fire as hot as she cO l1 ld make it; and
after a cOl1 ple of hours he began to sweat, sweat pouring out of
him till the sheets and mattress were soaked. 'You are immoderate ,' she railed at him in the depths of the night , shoving and
hauling at him , making him stagger over to the decrepit couch
and lie there wrapped in the rug so she cO l1ld get his bedding
dry at the fire. He shivered and coughed , and she brewed up
the herbals she had brought, and drank the scalding tea along
with him. He fell suddenly asleep and slept like death , not
wakened even by the cO l1 gh that wracked him. She fell as
sl1 ddenly asleep and woke to find herself lying on bare
hearthstones , the fire dying , the day white in the windows.
Abberkam lay like a mO l1 ntain range l1nder 出e rug , which
she saw now to be filthy; his breath wheezed but was deep and
regula r. She got up piece by piece , all ache and pain , made up
the fire and got warm , made tea , investigated the pantry. It was
stocked with essentials; evidently the Chief ordered in sl1 pplies
from Veo , the nearest town of any size. She made herself a
good breakfast, and when Abberkam ro l1 sed , got some more
herbal tea into him. The fever had broken. The danger now
was water in the lungs , she thought; they had warned her about
that with Safnan , and this was a man of sixty. If he stopped
cO l1 ghing , that would be a danger sign. She made him lie
propped up. 'Cough ,' she told him.
'Hurts ,' he growled.
‘Y011 have to ,' she said , and he cO l1 ghed , hak-hak.
'More!' she ordered , and he coughed till his body was shaken
with the spasms.
‘Cood ,' she said. 'Now sleep.' He slep t.
Tikuli , C l1 b l1 w0111d be starving! She fled home , fed her
pets , petted them , changed her underclothes , sat down in her

Betrayals

21

own chair by her own fireside for half an hom with Gubu
going roo-roo under her ea r. Then she went back across the
marshes to the Chie f' s hO l1 se.
She got his bed dried out by nightfall and moved him back
into it. She stayed that night , but left him in the morning ,
saying, 'I'll be back in the evening.' He was silent, still very
sick, indifferent to his own plight or hers.
Th e next day he was clearly better: the cO l1 gh was phlegmy
and rough , a good cough; she well remembered when Safnan
had finally begun coughing a good cough. He was fully awake
from time to time , and when she bro l1ght him the bo仕le she
had made serve as a bedpan he took it from her and huned
away from her to piss in it. Modesty , a good sign in a Chief,
she tho l1 gh t. She felt pleased with him and with hersel f. She
had been l1 sefl1l. Tm going to leave you tonight; don't let the
covers slip off. I'll be back in the morning,' she told him ,
pleased with herself, her decisiveness , her unanswerability.
But when she got home in the clear, cold evening, Tikuli
was cmled up in a corner of the room where he had never
slept before. He would not eat, and crept back to his corner
when she tried to move him , pet him , make him sleep on the
bed. Let me be , he said , looking away from her , huning his
eyes away, hlcking his dry , black, sharp nose into the curve of
his foreleg. Let me be , he said patiently, let me die , that is what
1 am doing now.
She slept, because she was very tired. G l1 b l1 stayed out in
the marshes all nigh t. In the morning Tikl1 li was jl1 st the same,
cllrled IIp on the floor in the place where he had never slept,
waítíng.
'1 have to go ,' she told him , Tll be back soon - very soon.
Wait for me , Tikl1li.'
He said nothing , gazing away from her with dim amber eyes.
It was not her he waited fo r.
She strode across the marshes , dry-e yed , angry , useless.
Abberkam was m l1 ch the same as he had been; she fed him

22

Four Ways to Forgiveness

some grain pap, looked to his needs , and said ,‘1 can't stay. My
kit is sick, 1 have to go back.'
‘ Kit,' the big man said in his rumble of voice.
‘A foxdog. My daughter gave him to me.' Wh y was she
explaining, excusing hersel f? She left; when she got home
Tikuli was where she had left him. She did some mending,
cooked up some food she thought Abberkam might eat, tried
to read the book about the worlds of the Ekumen , about the
world that had no war , where it was always winter, where
people were both men and women. In the middle of the
afternoon she thought she mllst go back to Abberkam , and was
jl1 st getting l1 p when Tikuli too stood l1 p. He walked very slowly
over to he r. She sat down again in her chair and sωoped 切
pick him up , but he put his sharp muzzle into her hand ,
sighed , and lay down with his head on his paws. He sighed
agam.
She sat and wept aloud for a while , not long; then she got
up and got the gardening spade and went outdoors. She made
the grave at the corner of the stone chimney, in a sunny nook.
When she went in and picked Tikuli up she thought with a
thrilllike terror,‘He is not dead!' He was dead , only he was not
cold yet; the thick red fur kept the body's warmth in. She
wrapped him in her blue scarf and took him in her arms ,
carried him to his grave , feeling that faint warmth still through
the cloth , and the light rigidity of the body, like a wooden
statl1e. She filled the grave and set a stone that had fallen from
the chimney on it. She could not say anything, but she had an
image in her mind like a prayer, of Tikuli running in the
sunlight somewhere.
She put out food on the porch for Gubu , who had kept out
of the house all day , and set off up the causeway. It was a silent,
overcast evening. The reeds stood grey and the pools had a
leaden gleam.
Abberkam was sitting up in bed , certainly better, perhaps
with a touch of fever but nothing serious; he was hungry, a

Betrayals

23

good sign. Wh en she brollght himhis tray he said , 'The kit, it's
all right?'
'No,' she said and huned away , able only after a minllte to
say,‘ Dead.'
‘In the Lord's hands ,' said the hoarse , deep voice , and she
saw Tikllli in the sllnlight again , in some presence , some kind
presence like the sl1 nligh t.
'Yes ,' she said. 'Thank yO l1.' Her lips ql1 ivered and her throat
closed l1 p. She kept seeing the design on her bl l1 e scarf, leaves
printed in a darker bl l1e. She made herself bl1sy. Presently she
came back to see to the 自re and sit down beside it. She felt
very tired.
‘Before the Lord Ka mye took l1 p the sword , he was a
herdsman,' Abberkam said. ‘And they called him Lord of the
Beasts , and Deer-Herd , because when he went into the forest
he catne among the deer , and lions also walked with him
among the deer, offering no harm. None were afraid.'
He spoke so q l1 ietly that it was a while before she realised he
was saying lines from the Arkamye.
She pl1 t another block of peat on the fire and sat down
agam.
'Tell me where yO l1 come from , Chief Abberkam ,' she said.
'Gebba Plantation.'
‘In the east?'
He nodded.
'What was it like?'
The fire smol1ldered , making its pl1 ngent smoke. Th e night
was intensely silent. Wh en she first came Ol1t here from the
city the silence had wakened her, night after night.
‘Wh at was it like ,' he said almost in a whisper. Like most
people of their race , the dark iris filled his eyes, bl1 t she saw
the white ßash as he glanced over at he r. 'Sixty years ago ,' he
said. 'We lived in the Plantation compo l1 nd. The canebrakes;
some of l1S worked there , Cl1t cane , worked in the mill. Most of
the women , the little children. Most men and the boys over

24

Four Ways to Forgíveness

nine or ten went down the mines. Some of the girls , too , they
wanted them small , to work the shafts a man couldn't get into.
1 was big. They sent me down the mines when 1 was eight
years old.'
‘叭1hat was it like?'
‘Oark ,' he said. Again she saw the flash of his eyes. '1 look
back and think how did we live? how did we stay living in that
place? The air down the mine was so thick with the dust that
it was black. Black ai r. Your lantern light didn't go five feet
into that ai r. There was water in most of the workings , up to a
man's knees. There was one shaft where a soft-c oal face had
caught 自 re and was burning so the whole system was fllll of
smoke. They went on working it, becallse the lodes ran behind
that coke. We wore masks , filters. They didn't do mllch good.
We breathed the smoke. 1 always wheeze some like 1 do now.
It' s not just the berlo t. It' s the old smoke. The men died of the
black lllng. Al I the men. Forty, forty-five years old , they died.
Th e Bosses gave your tribe money when a man died. A death
bonlls. Some men thOllght that made it worth while dyin包，
'How did you get out?'
'My mother ,' he said. 'She was a chief' s daughter from the
village. She taught me. She taught me religion and freedom.'
He has said that before, Yoss though t. It has become his
stock answer , his standard myth.
‘ How? Wh at did she sa戶，
A pause. 'She taught me the Holy Word ,' Abberkam said.
'And she said to me ,“YOll and your brother , you are the true
people , you are the Lord's people , his servants , his warriors , his
lions: only you. Lord Kamye came with llS from the Old World
and he is ours now, he lives among us." She named us
Abberkam , Tongue of the Lord , and Domerkam , Arm of the
Lord. To speak the truth and fight to be free.'
‘What became of your brother?' Yoss asked after a time.
‘ Killed at Nadami ,' Abberkam said , and again both were
silent for a while.

Betrayals

25

Nadami had been the first great outbreak of the Uprising
which finally brought the Liberation to Yeowe. At Nadami
plantation slaves and city freedpeople had first fought side by
side against the owners. If the slaves had been able to hold
together against the owners , the Corporations , they might have
won their freedom years sooner. But the liberation movement
had constantly splintered into tribal rivalries , chiefs vying for
power in the newly freed territories , bargaining with the Bosses
to consolidate their gains. Thirty years of war and destruction
before the vastly outnumbered Werelians were defeated , driven
o鼠，vorld， leaving the Yeowans free to turn upon one anothe r.
'your brother was lucky,' said Yoss.
Then she. looked across at the Chief, wondering how he
would take this challenge. His big, dark face had a softened
look in the fireligh t. His grey, coarse hair had escaped from 也e
loose braid she had made of it to keep it from his eyes, and
straggled around his face. He said slowly and softly,‘He was
my younger brother. He was Enar on the Field of the Five
Armies.'
Oh , so then you're the Lord Kamye himsel f? Yoss retorted
in her mind , moved , indignant, cynical. What an ego! 一 But，
to be sure, there was another implication. Enar had taken up
his sword 切 kill his Elder Brother on that ba吋 efield ， to keep
him from becoming lord of the World. An d Kamye had told
him that the sword he held was his own death; that there is no
lordship and no freedom in life , only in the letting go of life ,
of longing, of desire. Enar had laid down his sword and gone
into the wilderness , into the silence , saying only,‘Brother, 1 am
thou.' And Ka mye had taken up that sword to fight the Armies
of Desolation, knowing there is no victory.
So who was he , this man? this big fellow? this sick old man,
this little boy down in the mines in the dark , this bully, thief,
and liar who thought he could speak for the Lord?
'We're talking too much ,' Yoss said，也ough neither of them
had said a word for five minutes. She poured a cup of tea for

26

Four\月1ays

to Forgiveness

him and set the kettle off the fire , where she had kept it
simmering to keep the air moist. She took up her shawl. He
watched her with that same soft look in his face , an expression
almost of confusion.
‘It was freedom 1 wanted ,' he said. ‘Our freedom.'
His cons cÍence was none of her concern. ‘ Keep warm ,' she
said.
'you're going out now?'
‘1 can't get lost on the causeway.'
It was a strange walk , though , for she had no lantern, and
the night was very black. She thought, feeling her way along
the causeway, of that black air he had told her of down in the
mines , swa l1 0wing ligh t. She thought of Abberkam's black,
heavy body. She thought how se1 dom she had walked alone at
nigh t. When she was a child on Banni Plantation , the slaves
were locked in the compound at nigh t. Women stayed on the
women's side and never went alone. Before the War, when she
came to 出 e city as a freedwoman , shldying at the training
school , she' d had a taste of freedom; but in the bad years of the
War and even since the Liberation a woman couldn't go safely
in the streets at nigh t. Th ere were no police in the working
quarters , no streetlights; district warlords sent their gangs out
raiding; even in daylight you had to look out, try to stay in the
crowd, always be sure there was a street you could escape by.
She grew anxious that she would miss her turning, but her
eyes had grown used to the dark by the time she came to 祉，
and she could even make out the blot of her house down in
the formlessness of the reedbeds. The Aliens had poor night
vision , she had heard. They had li吐le eyes , little dots with
white al1 round them , like a scared calf. She didn't like their
eyes, though she liked the colors of their skin, mos t1y dark
brown or ruddy brown , warmer than her greyish-brown slave
skin or the blue-black hide Abberkam had got from the owner
who had raped his mother. Cyanid skins, the Aliens said

Betrayals

27

politely, and oClllar adaptation to the radiation spectrum of the
Werelian System slln.
Gllbll danced about her on the pathway down , silent,
tickling her legs with his tail. ‘Look out,' she scolded him , 'I' m
going to walk on you.' She was grateful to him , picked him up
as soon as they were indoors. No dignified and joyous greeting
from Tikuli , not this night, not eve r. Roo-roo-roo , Gllbu went
under her ear , listen to me , I' m here , life goes on , where's
dinner?
Th e Chief got a touch of pneumonia after all , and she went
into the village to call the clinic in Veo. They sent out a
practitioner, who said he was doing fine , just keep him sitting
up and coughing, the herbal teas were fine , just keep an eye
on him , tha t' s right, and went away , thanks very much. So she
spent her afternoons with him. Th e house without Tikuli
seemed very drab , the late autumn days seemed very cold, and
anyhow what else did she have to do? She liked the big, dark
raft-house. She wasn't going to clean house for the Chief or
any man who didn't do it for himself, but she poked about in
鈍， in rooms Abberkam evidenÙy hadn't used or even looked at.
She found one l1pstai俗， with long low windows all along the
west wall , that she liked. She swept it Ol1 t and cleaned the
windows with their small , greenish panes. Wh en he was asleep
she w0111d go up to that room and sit on a ragged wool rug , its
only furnishing. The fireplace had been sealed up with loose
bricks , but heat came up it from the peat fire burning below,
and with her back against the warm bricks and the sunlight
slanting in , she was warm. She felt a peacefulness there that
seemed to belong to the room , the shape of its air, the greenish ,
wavery glass of the windows. There she would sit in silence ,
unoccupied , content, as she had never sat in her own house.
The Chief was slow to get his strength back. Often he was
sullen , dour , the uncouth man she had first thought him , sl1nk

28

FourWays 的 Forgiveness

in a stupor of self-centered shame and rage. Other days he was
ready to talk; even to listen , sometimes.
'I've been reading a book about the worlds of the Ekumen ,'
Yoss said , waiting for their bean-cakes to be ready to hun and
fry on the other side. For the last several days she had made
and eaten dinner with him in the late afternoon , washed up ,
and gone home before dark.‘It's very interesting. There isn't
any question that we're descended from the people of Hain , all
of us. Us and the Aliens too. Even our animals have the same
ancestors.'
'So they say,' he grunted.
'It isn't a matter of who says it ,' she said. 'Anybody who will
look at the evidence sees it; it' s a genetic fac t. That you don't
like it doesn't alter it.'
'What is a “fac t" a million years 01缸， he said. ‘Wh at has it to
do with you , with me , with us? Th is is our world. We are
ourselves. We have nothing to do with them.'
‘We do now,' she said rather fli阱， flipping the bean-cakes.
'Not ifI had had my way ,' he said.
She laughed. ‘You don't give up , do yo肘，
'No ,' he said.
After they were eating, he in bed with his tray, she at a stool
on the hearth , she went on, with a sense of teasing a bull ,
daring the avalanche 胎 fall; for all he was still sick and weak,
there was that menace in him , his size, not of body only. 'Is
that what it was all about, really?' she asked. 'Th e World Party.
Having the planet for ourselves, no Al iens? Just 出at?'
'Yes ,' he said , the dark rumble.
‘明'hy? The Ekumen have so much to share with us. Th ey
broke the Corporations' hold over us. They're on our side.'
‘We were brought to this world as slaves,' he said,‘but it is
our world to find our own way in. Ka mye came with 肘， the
Herdsman , the Bondsman , Kamye of the Sword. Th is is his
world. Our earth. No one can give it to us. We don't need to
share other peoples' knowledge or follow their gods. This is

Betrayals

29

where we live , this earth. Th is is where we die to rejoin the
Lord.'
After a while she said ,‘1 have a daughter , and a grandson
and granddaughte r. They left this world four years ago. They're
on a ship that is going to Hain. All these years 1 live till 1 die
are like a few minutes , an hour to them. They'll be there in
eighty years - seventy-six years , now. On that other earth.
They'lllive and die there. Not here.'
'Were you willing for them to go?'
‘It was her choice.'
‘Notyours.'
‘1 don't live her life.'
'But you grieve ,' he said.
The silence between them was heavy.
'It is wrong , wrong , wrong!' he said , his voice strong and
loud. 'We had our own destiny , our own way to the Lord , and
they've taken it from l1 S - we're slaves again! The wise Al iens ,
the scientists with all their great knowledge and inventions , our
ancestors , they say they are 一“00 this!" they say , and we do it.
“ 00 that!" and we do it.“Take your children on the wonderf111
ship and fl.y to our wonderf111 worlds!" And the children are
taken , and they'll never come home. Never know their home.
Never know who they are. Never know whose hands might
have held them.'
He was orating; for all she knew it was a speech he had
made once or a h l1 ndred times , ranting and magnificent; there
were tears in his eyes. There were tears in her eyes also. She
w0111d not let him l1se her , play on her , have power over he r.
‘If 1 agreed with yO l1,' she said ,‘still , still , why did yOl1 cheat,
Abberkam? YO l1 lied to your own people , yO l1 stole!'
'Never ,' he said. ‘Everything 1 did , always , every breath 1
took , was for the World Party. Yes , 1 spent money, all the
money 1 c0111d get, what was it for except the ca l1se? Yes , 1
threatened the Envoy, 1 wanted to drive him and all the rest of
them off this world! Yes , 1 lied to them , because they want to

30

Four Ways to Forgiveness

control us , to own 肘， and 1 will do anything to save my people
from slavery - anything!'
He beat his great fists on the mound of his knees , and gasped
for breath , sobbing.
'And there is nothing 1 can do , 0 Kamye!' he cried , and hid
his face in his arms.
She sat silent, sick at heart.
After a long time he wiped his hands over his face , like a
child , wiping the coarse, stra自ling hair back, rubbing his eyes
and nose. He picked up the tray and set it on his knees , picked
up the fork , cut a piece of bean-cake , put it in his mouth ,
chewed , swallowed. If he can , 1 can , Yoss thought, and did the
same. They finished their dinne r. She got up and came to take
his tray. 'I' m sorry,' she said.
‘It was gone then ,' he said very quietly. He looked up at her
direc t1 y, seeing her, as she felt he seldom did.
She st~od ， not understanding , waiting.
'It was gone then. Years before. Wh at 1 believed at Nadami.
That all we needed was to drive them out and we would be
free. We lost our way as the war went on and on. 1 knew it was
a lie. Wh at did it matter if 1 lied more?'
She understood only that he was deeply upset and probably
somewhat mad , and that she had been wrong to goad him.
They were both old , both defeated , they had both lost their
child. Why did she want to hurt him? She put her hand on his
hand for a moment, in silence , before she picked up his tray.
As she washed up the dishes in the scullery , he called her ,
'Come here , please!' He had never done so before , and she
hurried into the room.
'Wh o were you?' he asked
She stood staring.
'Before you came here ,' he said impatiently.
‘1 went from the plantation to education school ,' she said. '1
lived in the city. 1 taught physics. 1 administered the teaching
of science in the schools. 1 brought up my daughter.'

Betrayals

31

‘What is your name?'
'Yoss. Seddewi Tribe , from Banni.'
He nodded , and after a moment more she went back to the
scullery. He didn't even know my name , she though t.
Every day she made him get up , walk a little, sit in a chair; he
was obedient, but it tired him. The next afternoon she made
him walk about a good while , and when he got back to bed he
closed his eyes at once. She slipped up the rickety stairs to the
west-window room and sat there a long time in perfect peace.
She had him sit up in the chair while she made their dinner.
She talked to cheer him up , for he never complained at her
demands , but he looked gloomy and bleak , and she blamed
herself for upsetting him yesterday. Were they not both here to
leave all that behind them , all their mistakes and failures as
well as their loves and victories? She told him about Wada and
Eyid, spinning out the story of the star-crossed lovers , who
were , in fact, in bed in her house that afternoon. ‘1 didn't use
to have anywhere to go when th~y came ,' she said. 'It could be
rather inconvenient, cold days like today. I'd have to hang
around the shops in the village. This is better, 1 must say. 1 like
this house.'
He only gnmted , but she felt he was listening intently,
almost that he was trying to understand , like a foreigner who
did not know the language.
'You don't care about the house , do yo肘， she said , and
laughed, serving up their soup. 'You're honest, at leas t. Here 1
am pretending to be holy , to be making my soul , and 1 get
fond of things , attached to them , 1 love things.' She sat down
by the fire to eat her soup. 'There's a beautiful room upstairs ,'
she said,‘the front corner room , looking wes t. Something good
happened in that room , lovers lived there once , maybe. 1 like
to look out at the marshes from there.'
When she made ready to go he asked , 'Will they be gone?'
'The fawns? Oh yes. Long since. Back to their hateful

32

Four Ways to Forgiveness

families. 1 sllppose if they cOllld live together , they'd soon be
jllSt as hatefll l. They're very ignoran t. How can they help it?
The village is narrow-minded , they're so poor. BlI t they cling
to their love for each other , as if they knew it . . . it was their
truth. . .'
Ho
叫ld fast to the noble thing: Abberkam said. She knew the
qllotatíon.
明'ollld yOll like me to read to yo肘， she asked. '1 have the
Arkam)裙， 1 could bring it.'
He shook his head , with a slldden , broad smile. ‘No need:
he said. ‘1 know it.'
'Al l of it?'
He nodded.
'1 meant to learn it - part of it anyway - when 1 came here:
she said, awed. 'B lI t 1 never did. Th ere never seems to be time.
Did you learn it here?'
'Long ago. In the jail , in Gebba City: he said. 'Plenty of
time there . . . Th ese days , 1 lie here and say it to myself.' His
smile lingered as he looked up at her. ‘It gives me company in
your absence.'
She stood wordless.
'Your presence is sweet to me: he said.
She wrapped herself in her shawl and hurried ollt with
scarcely a word of good-bye.
She walked home in a crowd of confused , conAicted feelings.
What a monster the man was! He had been Airting with her:
there was no doubt about it. Coming on to her , was more like
it. Lying in bed like a great felled OX , with his wheezing and
his grey hair! Th at soft, deep voice , that smile, he knew the
uses of that smile , he knew how to keep it rare. He knew how
to get round a woman , he' d got round a thousand if the stories
were true , round them and into them and out again , here's a
litÙe semen to remember your Chief 旬， and bye-bye , baby.
Lord!
So , why had she taken it into her head to tell him about

Betrayals

33

Eyid and Wada being in her bed? Stupid woman , she told
herself, striding into the mean east wind that scoured the
greying reeds. Shlpid, Shlpid, old , old woman.
Gubu came to meet her , dancing and batting with soft paws
at her legs and hands , waving his short, end-knotted , blackspotted tail. She had left the door l1 nlatched for him , and he
could push it open. It was aja r. Feathers of some kind of small
bird were strewn all over the room and there was a li仕le blood
and a bit of entrail on the hearthrug. 'Monster,' she told him.
'Murder outside!' He danced his battle dance and cried Hoo!
Hoo! He slept all night curled up in the small of her back,
obligingly getting up , stepping over her, and curling up on the
other side each time she turned over.
She turned over frequently , imagmmg or dreaming the
weight and heat of a massive body , the weight of hands on her
breasts, the tug of1 ips at her nipples , sucking life.
She shortened her visits to Abberkam. He was able to get l1 p,
see to his needs , get his own breakfast; she kept his peatbox by
the chimney filled and his larder supplied , and she now
brought him dinner but did not stay to eat it with him. He was
mostly grave and silent, and she watched her tong l1 e. They
were wary with each othe r. She missed her hours upstairs in
the western room; but that was done with , a kind of dream , a
sweetness gone.
Eyid came to Yoss's house alone one afternoon , sullen-faced.
'1 guess 1 won't come back out here ,' she said.
‘明!hat's wrong?'
The girl shrugged.
'Are they watching yo肘，
'No. 1 don't know. 1 might, you know. 1 might get shlffed.'
She l1sed the old slave word for pregnant.
可ou used the con甘aceptives， didn't yo肘， She had bought
them for the pair in Veo , a good supply.

34

Four Ways to Forgiveness

Eyid nodded vaguely. ‘1 guess it's wrong: she said , pursing
her mouth.
‘Making love? Using contraceptives?'
‘1 guess it's wrong: the girl repeated, with a quick, vengeful
glance.
'All right: Yoss said.
Eyid turned away.
‘Good-bye , Eyid.'
Without speaking, Eyid went off by the bog-path.
'Hold fast to the noble thing: Yoss thought, bitterly.
She went round the house to Tikuli's grave , but it was too
cold to stand outside for long, a still , aching, midwinter cold.
She went in and shut the door. The room seemed small and
dark and low. Th e dull peat fire smoked and smouldered. It
made no noise burning. Th ere was no noise outside the house.
The wind was down , the ice-bound reeds were still.
1 want some wood , 1 want a wood fire , Yoss though t. A flame
leaping and crackling, a story-telling fi間， like we used to have
in the grandmothers' house on the plantation.
The next day she went off one of the bog-paths to a ruined
house half a mile away and pulled some loose boards off the
fallen-in porch. She had a roaring blaze in her fireplace that
nigh t. She took to going to the ruined house once or more
dailý, and built up a sizeable woodpile next to the smcked peat
in the nook on the other side of the chimney from her bed
nook. She was no longer going to Abberkam's house; he was
recovered , and she wanted a goal to walk to. She had no way
to cut the longer boards, and so shoved them into the fireplace
a bit at a time; that way one would last all the evening. She sat
by the bright fire and tried to learn the First Book of the
Arkamye. Gubu lay on the hearthstone sometimes watching
the flames and whispering roo , roo , sometimes asleep. He
hated so to go Ollt into the icy reeds that she made him a little
dirt-box in the scllllery, and he used it very neaÙY.
The deep cold continued, the worst winter she had known

Betrayals

35

on the marshes. Fierce drafts led her to cracks in the wood
walls she had not known about; she had no rags to stuff them
with and used mud and wadded reeds. If she let the fire go out,
the li ttI e house grew icy within an hom. Th e peat 自間， banked ,
got her through the nights. In the daytime often she put on a
piece of wood for the flare , the brightness, the company of it.
She had to go into the village. She had put off going for
days , hoping that the cold might relent, and had nm out of
practically everything. It was colder than eve r. The peat blocks
now on the 自re were earthy and burned poorly, smou1dering,
so she put a piece of wood in with them to keep the fire lively
and the house warm. She wrapped every jacket and shawl she
had around her and set off with her sack. Gubu blinked at her
from the hearth. ‘Lazy lout,' she told him. ‘Wise beast.'
The cold was frightening. If 1 slipped on the ice and broke a
leg, no one might come by for days , she though t. I'd 1ie here
and be frozen dead in a few homs. Well , well , well , I'm in the
Lord's hands , and dead in a few years one way or the other.
0叫y， dear Lord , let me get to the 叫
v illage and get wa
叮盯
rm
~he got 出
the
叮re
巳， and 叩
spen
叫t a good whi
討叫
i刊1e 泣
a t the sweet-吋
-shop stove
catching up on gossip , and at the news vendor's woodstove ,
reading old newspapers about a new war in the eastern
province. Eyid's aunts and Wada's father , mother, and aunts all
asked her how the Chief was. Th ey a1so all to1d her to go by
her 1and1ord's house , Kebi had something for he r. He had a
packet of cheap nasty tea for he r. Perfectly willing to 1et him
enrich his soul , she thanked him for the tea. He asked her
about Abberkam. The Chief had been ill? He was better now?
I:I e pryed; she replied indifferentIy. It' s easy to 1ive in silence ,
she thought; what 1 cOll1d not do is live with these voices.
She was loath to 1eave the warm room , bllt her bag was
heavier than she 1iked to car哼， and the icy spots on the road
wou1d be hard to see as the light failed. She took her leave and
set off across the village again and up onto the causeway. It was
later than she had though t. Th e sun was quite 10w, hiding

FourWays 的 Forgíveness

36

behind one bar of cloud in an otherwise stark sky, as if grudging
even a half hour's warmth and brightness. She wanted to get
home to her fire , and stepped right along.
Keeping her eyes on the way ahead for fear of ice , at first she
only heard the voice. She knew it , and she thought, Abberkam
has gone mad again! For he was running towards her , shouting.
She stopped , afraid of him , but it was her name he was
sho l1 ting. 'Yoss! Yoss! It's all right!' he shouted , coming up right
on her , a h l1 ge wild man , all dirty , muddy , ice and mud in his
grey hair , his hands black , his clothes black, and she could see
the whites all round his eyes.
'Get back!' she said ,‘get away, get away from me!'
'!t's all right ,' he said ,‘ b l1 t the house , but the house 一'
嗎吼叫 hOl1se?'

‘Your hO l1 se , it b l1 rned. 1 saw it , 1 was coming to the village ,
1 saw the smoke down in the marsh 一，
He went on , but Yoss stood paralysed , unbearing. She had
shut the door , let the latch fall. She never locked it, but she
had let the latch fall , and Gubu would not be able to get ou t.
He was in the house. Locked in: the bright, desperate eyes: the
little voice crying 一
She started forward. Abberkam blocked her way.
'Let me get by ,' she said. '1 have to get b子， She set down her
bag and began to run.
Her arm was caught, she was stopped as if by a sea wave ,
swung right round. The huge body and voice were all around
he r. 'It's all right, the kit is all right, it' s in my house ,' he was
saying. 'Listen , listen to me , Yoss! The house burned. The kit
is all right.'
'Wh at happened?' she said , shouting, furious. 'Let me go! 1
don't understand! Wh at happened?'
'Please , please be quiet,' he begged her , releasing he r.‘ We'll
go by there. You'll see it. There isn~t much to see.'
Very shakily, she walked along with him while he told her

Betrayals

37

what had happened. 'But how did it start?' she said ,‘how could
it?'
'A spark; you left the fire burning? Of course , of course you
did , it's cold. But there were stones out of the chimney, 1 could
see tha t. Sparks , if there was any wood on the fire - maybe a
Hoorboard caught 一 the thatch , maybe. Then it would all go ,
in this dry weather , everything dried out, no rain. Oh my Lord ,
my sweet Lord , 1 thought you were in there. 1 thought you
were in the house. 1 saw the fi間， 1 was up on the causeway 一
then 1 was down at the door of the house , 1 don't know how,
did 1 Hy , 1 don't know 一 1 pushed , it was latched , 1 pushed it in ,
and 1 saw the whole back wall and ceiling burning , blazing.
Th ere was so .much smoke, 1 couldn't tell if you were there , 1
went in , the little animal was hiding in a corner - 1 thought
how you cried when the other one died , 1 tried to catch 祉， and
it went out the door like a Hash , and 1 saw no one was there ,
and made for the door , and the rooffell 瓜， He laughed , wild ,
triumphan t. 'Hit me on the head , see?' He stooped , but she
still was not tall enough to see the top of his head. ‘1 saw your
bucket and tried to throw water on the front wall , to save
something, then 1 saw that was crazy, it was all on fire , nothing
left. And 1 went up the path , and the little animal , your pet,
was waiting there , all shaking. It let me pick it up , and 1 didn't
know what to do with it, so 1 ran back to my house , and left it
there. 1 shut the door. It's safe there. Then 1 thought you must
be in the vi1l age , so 1 came back to find you.'
Th ey had come to the turnoff. She went to the side of the
causeway and looked down. A smear of smoke , a huddle of
black. Bl ack sticks. Ice. She shook all over and felt so sick she
had to crouch down , swallowing cold saliva. The sky and the
reeds went from left to right, spinning, in her eyes; she could
not stop them spinning.
'Come , come on now, it' s all righ t. Come on with me.' She
was aware of the voice , the hands and arms , a large warmth
supporting he r. She walked along with her eyes shu t. Mter a

38

Four Ways to Forgíveness

while she could open them and look down at the road ,
carefully.
'Oh , my bag - 1 left it - It's all 1 have ,' she said suddenly
with a kind of laugh , huning around and nearly fa lI ing over
because the turn started the spinning again.
‘1 have it here. Come on , it' s just a short way now.' He
carried the bag oddly, in the crook of his arm. The other arm
was around her , helping her stand up and wal k. They came to
his house , the dark raft-house. It faced a tremendous orangeand-yellow sky , with pink streaks going up the sky from where
the sun had set; the sun's hair , they used to calI that, when she
was a child. They turned from the glory, entering the dark
house.
'Gubu?' she said.
It took a while to find him. He was cowering under the
couch. She had to haul him out , he would not come to he r.
His fur was fu lI of dust and came out in her hands as she
stroked it. There was a little foam on his mouth , and he
shivered and was silent in her arms. She stroked and s甘oked
the silvery, speckled back, the spotted sides , the silken white
belly fur. He c1 0sed his eyes finally; but the instant she moved
a little , he leapt, and ran back under the couch.
She sat and said , Tm sorry , I'm sorry , Gubu , I'm sorry.'
Hearing her speak , the Chief came back into the room. He
had been in the scullery. He held his wet hands in front of him
and she wondered why he didn't dry them. ‘Is he al1 right?' he
asked.
'I t'l1 take a while ,' she said. ‘The fire. And a strange house.
They're . . . cats are territoria1. Don't like strange places.'
She could not arrange her thoughts or words , they came in
pieces , unattached.
'That is a cat, then?'
'A spotted cat, yes.'
'Those pet animals , they belonged to the Bosses , they were
in the Bosses' houses ,' he said. ‘We never had any around.'

BetrayaLs

39

She thought it was an accllsation. ‘They came from 叭lerel
with the Bosses: she said , 'yes. So did we.' After the sharp
words were out she thought that maybe what he had said was
an apology for ignorance.
He still stood there holding out his hands stiffly. Tm sorry:
he said. '1 need some kind of bandage , 1 think.'
She focused slowly on his hands.
'You burned them: she said.
‘Not much. 1 don't know when.'
'Let me see.' He came nearer and turned the big hands palm
up: a fierce red blistered bar across the bluish inner skin of the
fingers of one , and a raw bloody wound in the base of the
thumb of the other.
'1 didn't notice till 1 was washing: he said. 'It didn't hur t.'
'Let me see your head: she said , remembering; and he knelt
and presented her a matted shaggy sooty object with a red-andblack burn right across the top of it. 'Oh , Lord: she said.
His big nose and eyes appeared under the grey tangle , close
to her , looking up at her , anxious. '1 know the roof fell onto
me: he said , and she began to laugh.
‘It would take more than a roof falling onto you!' she said.
'Have you got anything - any clean cloths - 1 know 1 left some
clean dish towels in the scullery closet - Any disinfectant?'
She talked as she cleaned the head wound. '1 don't know
anything about burns except try to keep them clean and leave
them open and dry. We should call the clinic in Veo. 1 can go
into the village , tomorrow.'
‘1 thollght yOll were a doctor or a nurse: he said.
Tm a school administrator!'
'you looked after me.'
'1 knew what you had. 1 don't know anything about burns.
I'll go into the village and cal l. Not tonight, though.'
‘Not tonight: he agreed. He flexed his hands , wincing. '1 was
going to make lI S dinner: he said. ‘1 didn't know there was

40

Four Ways to Forgíveness

anything wrong with my hands. 1 don't know when it
happened.'
‘叭司len you rescued Gubu ,' Yoss said in a matter-o f-fact
voice , and then began crying. 'Show me what you were going
to eat, 1'11 put it on ,' she said through tears.
Tm sorry about your things ,' he said.
‘Nothing mattered. I'm wearing almost all my clothes,' she
said, weeping. 'Th ere wasn't anything. Hardly any food there
even. Only the Arkamye. And my book about the worlds.' She
thought of the pages blackening and curling as the fire read
them. 'A friend sent me that from the city, she never approved
of me coming here , pretending to drink water and be silent.
She was right , too , 1 should go back , 1 should never have come.
What a liar 1 am , what a fool! Stealing wood! Stealing wood so
1 could have a nice fire! So 1 could be warm and cheerful! So
1 set the house on fire , so everything's gone , ruined , Kebi's
house , my poor little cat, your hands , it's my fault. 1 forgot
about sparks from wood fires , the chimney was built for peat
fires , 1 forgot. 1 forget everything, my mind betrays me , my
memory lies , 1 lie. 1 dishonor my Lord , pretending to turn to
him when 1 can't hun to him , when 1 can't let go the world.
So 1 burn it! So the sword cuts your hands.' She took his hands
in hers and bent her head over them. 'Tears are disinfectant,'
she said. 'Oh I'm sorry, 1 am sorry!'
His big, burned hands rested in hers. He leaned forward and
kissed her hair, caressing it with his lips and cheek.‘1 will say
you the Arkamye ,' he said. 'Be still now. We need to eat
something. You feel very cold. 1 think you have some shock,
maybe. You sit there. 1 can put a pot on to heat, anyhow.'
She obeyed. He was right, she felt very cold. She huddled
closer to the fire. ‘Gubu?' she whispered. 'Gubu , it's all right.
Come on , come on , little one.' But nothing moved under the
couch.
Abberkam stood by her, offering her something: a glass: it
was wine , red wine.

Betrayals

41

'You have wine?' she said, star t1 ed.
‘Mostly 1 drink water and am silent,' he said. 'Sometimes 1

drink wine and talk. Take it.'
She took it humbly. '1 wasn't shocked ,' she said.
‘Nothing shocks a city woman ,' he said gravely. 'Now 1 need
yOll to open l1 p this jar.'
‘How did yO l1 get the wine open?' she asked as she lI nscrewed
the lid of a jar of fish stew.
'It was already open ,' he said , deep-voiced , imperturbable.
They sat across the hearth from each other to eat, helping
themselves from the pot hllng on the firehook. She held bits of
fish down low so they c0111d be seen from l1 nder the cO l1 ch and
whispered to C l1 b l1, b l1 t he would not come ou t.
‘Wh en he's very hllngry, he wil1,' she said. She was tired of
the teary ql1 aver in her voice , the knot in her throat, the sense
of shame. Thank you for the food ,' she said. '1 feel better.'
She got up and washed the pot and the spoons; she had 個ld
him not to get his hands wet, and he did not offer to help her,
but sat on by the fire , motionless , like a great dark 111mp of
stone.
'1' 11 go lI pstairs ,' she said when she was done. ‘Maybe 1 can
get hold of G l1 bll and take him with me. Let me have a blanket
or two.'
He nodded. They're l1 p there. 1 lighted the fire ,' he said.
She did not know what he meant; she had knelt to peer under
the couch. She knew as she did so that she was grotesque , an
old woman bllndled IIp in shawls with her rear end in the air ,
whispering, 'Gllbll , Gllbll!' to a piece of furniture. But there
was a little scrabbling , and then Gubu came straight into her
hands. He clung to her shoulder with his nose hidden under
her ea r. She sat up on her heels and looked at Abberkam ,
radian t. 'Here he is!' she said. She got to her feet with some
difficul紗， and said ,‘Good night.'
‘Good night, Yoss ,' he said. She dared not try to carry the oil
lamp , and made her way up the stairs in the dark , holding

42

Four Ways to Forgiveness

G lI bll close with both hands ti11 she was in the west room and
had shllt the doo r. Then she stood staring. Abberkam had
lI nsealed the fireplace , and some time this evening he had
lighted the peat laid ready in it; the ruddy glow Rickered in the
long , low windows black with night , and the scent of it was
swee t. A bedstead that had been in another llnllsed room now
stood in this one , made up , with mattress and blankets and a
new white wool rug thrown over it. A jug and basin stood on
the shelf by the chimney. The old rug she had used to sit on
had been beaten and scrubbed , and lay clean and threadbare
on the hearth.
Gubu pushed at her arms; she set him down , and he ran
straight under the bed. He would be al1 right there. She poured
a liUle water from the jug into the basin and set it on the
hearth in case he was thirsty. He could use the ashes for his
box. Everything we need is here , she thought, stilllooking with
a sense of bewilderment at the shadowy room , the soft light
that struck the windows from within.
She went out, closing the door behind her, and went
downstairs. Abberkam sat sti11 by the fire. His eyes Rashed at
he r. She did not know what to say.
可ou liked that room ,' he said.
She nodded.
'You said maybe it was a lovers' room once. 1 thought maybe
it was a lovers' room to be.'
After a while she said ,‘Maybe.'
‘Not tonight,' he said , with a low rumble: a laugh , she
realised. She had seen him smile once , now she had heard
him laugh.
'No. Not tonight,' she said stiffiy.
'1 need my hands ,' he said , '1 need everything , for that, for
you.' She said nothing, watching him.
‘Sit down , Yoss , please ,' he said. She sat down in the hearthseat facing him.
‘叭1hen 1 was ill 1 thought about these things ,' he said , always

Betrayals

43

a touch of the orator in his voice. '1 betrayed my cause , 1 lied
and stole in its name , because 1 could not admit 1 had lost faith
in it. 1 feared the Aliens because 1 feared their gods. So many
gods! 1 feared that they would diminish my Lord. Oiminish
him!' He was silent for a minl1 te , and drew breath; she could
hear the deep rasp in his chest.‘ 1 betrayed my son's mother
many times , many times. Her, other women , mysel f. 1 did not
hold to the one noble thing.' He opened up his hands , wincing
a little , looking at the burns across them. '1 think you did,' he
said.
After a while she said ,‘1 only stayed with Safnan's father a
few years. 1 had some other men. What does it matter , no咐，
'Tha t' s not what 1 mean,' he said. '1 mean that you did not
betray your men , your child , yoursel f. Al I right, all tha t's pas t.
You say, what does it matter now, nothing matters. But you
give me this chance even now, this beautiful chance , to me , to
hold you , hold you fast.'
She said nothing.
‘1 came here in shame,' he said , 'and you honored me.'
嗎Thy not? Wh o am 1 to j l1 dge yo肘，
“‘ Brother, 1 am thou.'"
She looked at him in terror, one glance, then looked into
the fire. Th e peat burned low and warm , sending l1 p one faint
curl of smoke. She thought of the warmth , the darkness of his
body.
‘Would there be any peace between us?' she said at las t.
‘ 00 you need peace?'
After a while she smiled a little.
‘1 will do my best,' he said. 'Stay in this hO l1 se a while.'
She nodded.

ri

pb

ven e03 DaVJ
Pδ

FO

Solly had been a space brat, a Mobile's child , living on this
ship and that, this world and that; she'd traveled five hllndred
light-years by the time she was ten. At twenty-five she had been
through a revolution on Alter凹， learned aIJl on Terra and
farthinking from an old hilfer on Rokanan , breezed through
the Schools on Hain , and survived an assignment as Observer
in murderous , dying Kheakh , skipping another half millennium at near-lightspeed in the process. She was yOllng, but
she'd been around.
She got bored with the Embassy people in Voe Deo telling
her to watch out for this , remember that; she was a Mobile
herself now, after all. Werel had its quirks - what world didn't?
She'd done her homework , she knew when to curtsy and when
not to belch , and vice versa. It was a relief to get on her own at
last, in this gorgeous li吐le city, on this gorgeous li仕le continent,
the first and only Envoy of the Ekumen to the Divine Kingdom
ofGatay.
She was high for days on the altitude , the tiny , bril1 iant sun
pouring vertical light into the noisy streets , the peaks soaring
up incredibly behind every building, the dark blue sky where
great near stars burned all day , the dazzling nights under six or
seven lo11oping bits of moon , the tall black people with their
black eyes , narrow heads , long , narrow hands and feet , gorgeous
people , her people! She loved them al 1. Even if she saw a little
too much of them.

46

FourWays 的 Forgiveness

The last time she had had completely to herself was a few
hours in the passenger cabin of the airskimmer sent by Gatay
to bring her across the ocean from Voe Deo. On the airstrip
she was met by a delegation of priests and officials from the
King and the Counc i1, magnificent in scarlet and brown and
turquoise , and swept off to the Palace , where there was a lot of
curtsying and no belching, of course , for hours - an introduction to his little shrunken old majesty , introductions to High
Muckamucks and Lorcl Hooziwhats , speeches , a banquet - all
completely predictable , no problems at all , not even the
impenetrable giant fried Aower on her plate at the banquet.
But with her , from that first moment on the airstrip and at
every moment thereafter , discreetly behind or beside or very
near her, were two men: her Guide and her Guard.
The Guide , whose name was San Ubattat, was provided by
her hosts in Gatay; of course he was reporting on her to the
government, but he was a most obliging spy, endlessly smoothing the way for her, showing her with a bare hint what was
expected or what would be a gaffe , and an excellent linguist,
ready with a translation when she needed one. San was all
righ t. But the Guard was something else.
He had been attached to her by the Ekumen's hosts on this
world , the dominant powe:' on Werel , the big nation of Voe
Deo. She had promptly protested to the Embassy back in Voe
Deo that she didn't need or want a bodyguard. Nobody in
Gatay was out to get her and even if they were , she preferred
to look after hersel f. The Embassy sighed. Sorry, they said.
You're stuck with him. Voe Deo has a military presence in
Gat呵， which after all is a client state , economica l1 y dependen t.
It's in Voe Deo's interest to protect the legitimate government
of Gatay against the native terrorist factions , and you get
protected as one of their interests. We can't argue with tha t.
She knew beuer than to argue with the Embassy, but she
could not resign herself to the Majo r. His military title , rega ,
she translated by the archaic word 'Major,' from a skit she'd

Forgiveness Day

47

seen on Terra. That Major had been a stuffed lI niform , covered
with medals and insignia. It puffed and strutted and commanded , and finally blew up into bits of shlffing. If only this
Major would blow up! Not that he strutted , exactly , or even
commanded , directly. He was stonily polite , woodenly silent,
stiff and cold as rigor mortis. She soon gave up any effort to
talk to him; whatever she said , he replied Yessllm or Nomllm
with the prompt Shlpidity of a man who does not and will not
actually listen , an officer officially incapable of hllmanity. And
he was with her in every public sihIa tion , day and night , on the
street, shopping , meeting with businessmen and officials , sightseeing , at court , in the balloon ascent above the mOllntains with her everywhere , everywhere bllt bed.
Even in bed she wasn't qllite as alone as she wOllld often
have liked; for the Guide and the Guard went home at nigl哎，
but in the anteroom of her bedroom slept the Maid - a gift
from His Majesty , her own private asse t.
She remembered her incredulity when she first learned that
word , years ago , in a text about slavery. ‘ On 叭lerel ， members
of the dominant caste are called owners; members of the
serving class are called assets. Only owners are referred to as
men or women; assets are called bondsmen , bondswomen.'
So here she was , the owner of an asse t. You don't tl1 rn down
a king's gift. Her asset's name was Rewe. Rewe was probably a
spy too , but it was hard to believe. She was a dignified ,
handsome woman some years older than Solly and abollt the
same intensity of skin color , though Solly was pinkish brown
and Rewe was bluish brown. The palms of her hands were a
delicate azure. Rewe's manners were exquisite and she had
tact, ashIteness , an infallible sense of when she was wanted and
when no t. Solly of course treated her as an equal , stating right
Ol1 t at the beginning that she believed no h l1 man being had a
right to dominate , much less own , another , that she would give
Rewe no orders , and that she hoped they might become
friends. Rewe accepted this , unforhmately, as a new set of

48

Four Ways to Forgiveness

orders. She smiled and said yes. She was in日nitely yielding.
Wh atever Solly said or did sank into that acceptance and was
lost, leaving Rewe unchanged: an attentive , obliging, gentle
physical presence , just out of reach. She smiled , and said yes ,
and was untouchable.
And Solly began to think, after the first fizz of the first days
in Gat呵， that she needed Rewe , really needed her as a woman
to talk with. There was no way to meet owner women , who
lived hidden away in their bezas , women's quarters ,‘at home ,'
they called it. All bondswomen but Rewe were somebody else's
property, not hers to talk to. All she ever met was men. And
eunuchs.
That had been another thing hard to believe , that a man
would voluntarily trade his virility for a little social standing;
but she met such men all the time in King Hota t's cour t. Born
assets , they earned partial independence by becoming eunuchs ,
and as such often rose to positions of considerable power and
trust among their owners. The eunuch Tayandan , majordomo
of the palace , ruled the King , who didn't rule , but figureheaded
for the Counci l. The Council was made up of various kinds of
lord but only one kind of priest, Tualites. Only assets worshiped
Kam戶， and the original religion of Gatay had been suppressed
when the monarchy became Tualite a cenhuy or so ago. If
there was one thing she really disliked about Werel , aside from
slavery and gender-d ominance , it was the religions. The songs
about Lady Tual were beautiful , and the stahles of her and the
great temples in Voe Deo were wonderful , and the Arkamye
seemed to be a good story though"long-winded; but the deadly
self-righteousness , the intolerance , the stupidity of the priests,
the hideous doctrines that justified every cruelty in the name
of the faith! As a matter of fact , Solly said to herself, was there
anything she did like about Werel?
And answered herself instantly: 1 love it, 1 love it. 1 love this
weird little bright sun and all the broken bits of moons and the
mountains going up like ice walls and the people - the people

Forgiveness Day

49

with their black eyes witho l1 t whites like animals' eyes , eyes
like dark glass , like dark water , mysterio l1s - 1 want to love
them , 1 want to know them , 1 want to reach them!
Bl1 t she had to admit that the pissants at the Embassy had
been right abo l1 t one thing: being a woman was tO l1 gh on
Werel. She fit nowhere. She went abo l1 t alone , she had a
pl1 blic position , and so was a contradiction in terms: proper
women stayed at home , invisible. Only bondswomen went Ol1 t
in the streets , or met strangers , or worked at any p l1 blic job.
She behaved like an asset, not like an owne r. Yet she was
something very grand , an envoy of the Ekl1 men , and Catay
very m l1 ch wanted to join the Ekl1 men and not to offend its
envoys. So the 。而 cials and courtiers and b l1 sinessmen she
talked to on the b l1 siness of the Ek l1 men did the best they
cO l1 ld: they treated her as if she were a man.
The pretense was never complete and often broke right
down. The poor old King groped her indl1 strio l1 sly, l1 nder the
vagl1 e impression that she was one of his bedwarmers. When
she contradicted Lord Gatuyo in a disc l1 ssion , he stared with
the blank disbelief of a man who has been talked back to by
his shoe. He had been thinking of her as a woman. Bl1 t in
general the disgenderment worked , allowing her to work with
them; and she began to fit herself into the game , enlisting
Rewe's help in making clothes that resembled what male
owners wore in Cat呵， avoiding anything that to them wO l1 ld
be specifically feminine. Rewe was a ql1 ick , intelligent seamstress. The bright, heavy , close-fitted tro l1 sers were practical
and becoming, the embroidered jackets were splendidly warm.
She liked wearing them. Bl1 t she felt l1 nsexed by these men
who cO l1 ld not accept her for what she was. She needed to talk
to a woman.
She tried to meet some of the hidden owner women thro l1 gh
the owner men , and met a wall of politeness witho l1 t a door ,
witho l1 t a peephole. Wh at a wonderf111 idea; we will certainly
arrange a visit when the weather is better! 1 sho l1 ld be

言。

Four 札1ays

to Forgiveness

overwhelmed with the honor if the Envoy were to entertain
Lady Mayoyo and my daughters , but my foolish , provincial
girls are so unforgivably timid - I' m sure you understand. Oh ,
surely, surely, a tour of the inner gardens - but not at present,
when the vines are not in Aower! 叭'e must wait until the vines
are in Aower!
There was nobody to talk to , nobody , until she met Batikam
the Maki l.
It was an event: a touring troupe from Voe Deo. There
wasn't much going on in Gatay's little mountain capital by way
of entertainment, except for temple dancers - all men , of
course - and the soppy Auff that passed as drama on the
Werelian network. Solly had doggedly entered some of these
wet pastels , hoping for a glimpse into the life 'at home ,' but
she couldn't stomach the swooning maidens who died of love
while the stiιnecked jackass heroes , who all looked like the
Major , died nobly in battle , and Tual the Mercifulleaned out
of the clouds smiling upon their deaths with her eyes slightly
crossed and the whites showing, a sign of divinity. Solly had
noticed that Werelian men never entered the network for
drama. Now she knew why. But the receptions at the palace
and the parties in her honor given by various lords and
businessmen were pretty dull Shlff: all men , always , because
they wouldn't have the slave girls in while the Envoy was there;
and she couldn't Airt even with the nicest men , couldn't
remind them that they were men , since that would remind
them that she was a woman not behaving like a lady. The fizz
had definitely gone Aat by the time the makil troupe came.
She asked San , a reliable etiquette advisor , if it would be all
right for her to attend the performance. He hemmed and
hawed and finally , with more than usually oily delicacy , gave
her to understand that it would be all right so long as she went
dressed as a man. ‘明'omen， you know, don't go in public. Bl1 t
sometimes , they want so much to see the entertainers , yO l1
know? Lady Amatay used to go with Lord Amatay , dressed in

Forgiveness Day

51

his clothes , every year; everybody knew, nobody said aÍlything
- you know. For yOl1, sl1 ch a great person, it would be all righ t.
Nobody will say anything. Quite, quite all righ t. Of course , 1
come with yOl1, the rega comes with you. Like friends , ha? You
know, three good men friends going to the entertainment, ha?
H泣，

Ha , ha , she said obediently. Wh at fun! 一 But it was worth it,
she tho l1 ght, to see the makils.
They were never on the network. Young girls at home were
not to be exposed to their performances , some of which , San
gravely informed her , were unseemly. They played only in
theaters. Clowns, dancers , prostitutes, actors , mllsicians , the
makils formed a kind of sl1 bclass , the only assets not personally
owned. A talented slave boy bOl1ght by the Entertainment
Corporation from his owner was thenceforth the property of
the Corporation, which trained and looked after him the rest
ofhis life.
Th ey walked to the theater , six or seven streets away. She
had forgotten that the makils were all transvestites , indeed she
did not remember it when she first saw them , a troop of tall
slender dancers sweeping out onto the stage with the precision
and power and grace of great birds wheeling, ßocking, soaring.
She watched unthinking, enthralled by their bea l1 ty, l1 ntil
sl1 ddenly the music changed and the clowns came in , black as
night, black as owners , wearing fantastic trailing skirts, with
fantastic jutting jeweled breasts, singing in tiny, swoony voices ,
‘Qh do not rape me please kind Sir, no no , not now!' They're
men , they're men! Solly realised then , already laughing helplessly. By the time Batikam 自nished his star turn , a marvelolls
dramatic monologue , she was a fan. ‘1 want to meet him ,' she
said to San at a pause between acts. 'The actor - Batikam.'
San got the bland expression that signified he was thinking
how it could be arranged and how to make a little money out
of it. But the Major was on guard , as eve r. Stiff as a stick, he

52

Four Ways to Forgiveness

barely huned his head to glance at San. And San's expression
began to alte r.
If her proposal was Ol1 t of line , San would have signaled or
said so. The Stuffed Major was simply controlling her, trying
to keep her as tied down as one of 'his' women. It was time to
challenge him. She turned to him and stared straight at him.
'Rega Teyeo ,' she said ,‘1 ql1 ite comprehend that you're under
orders to keep me in orde r. But if you give orders to San or to
me , they must be spoken aloud , and they must be justified. 1
will not be managed by your winks or your whims.'
There was a considerable pause , a truly delicious and
rewarding pause. It was difficult to see if the Major's expression
changed; the dim theater light showed no detail in his blueblack face. But there was something frozen about his stillness
that told her she'd stopped him. At last he said , 'I' m charged to
protect you , Envoy.'
‘Am 1 endangered by the makils? Is there impropriety in an
envoy of the Ekumen congratulating a great artist ofWerel?'
Again the frozen silence. 'No ,' he said.
'Then 1 reql1 est you to accompany me when 1 go backstage
after the performance to speak to Batikam.'
One stiff nod. One sti缸， stu時， defeated nod. Score one!
Solly thought, and sat back cheerfully to watch the lightpainte悶， the erotic dances , and the curiously touching little drama
with which the evening ended. It was in archaic poetry , hard
to l1 nderstand , but the actors were so beautiful , their voices so
tender that she fO l1 nd tears in her eyes and hardly knew why.
‘A pity the makils always draw on the Arkamye,' said San ,
with smug, pious disapproval. He was not a very high-class
owner , in fact he owned no assets; but he was an owner, and a
bigoted Tualite , and liked to remind himself of it. 'Scenes from
the Incamations of Tual would be more befitting such an
audience.'
‘I' m sure you agree , Rega ,' she said , enjoying her own irony.
'Not at all ,' he said , with such toneless politeness that at first

Forgíveness Day

"

she did not realise what he had said; and then forgot the minor
puzzle in the bustle of finding their way and gaining admittance to thebackstage and to the performers' dressing room.
Wh en they realised who she was , the managers tried to clear
all the other performers out, leaving her alone with Batikam
(and San and the Major , of course); but she said no , no , no ,
these wonderful artists must not be disturbed , just let me talk a
moment with Batikam. She stood there in the bustle of doffed
costumes, half-naked people , smeared makeup , laughter , dissolving tension after the show , any backstage on any world ,
talking with the clever, intense man in elaborate archaic
woman's coshlme. They hit it off at once. 'Can you come to
my house?' she asked. ‘With pleasure ,' Batikam said, and his
eyes did not ßick to San's or the Major's face: the first
bondsman she had yet met who did not glance to her Guard
or her Guide for permission to say or do anything , anything at
al l. She glanced at them only to see if they were shocked. San
looked collusive , the Major looked rigid. '1' 11 come in a little
while ,' Batikam said. ‘1 must change.'
They exchanged smiles , and she left. The fizz was back in
the ai r. The huge close stars hung clustered like grapes of fire.
A moon hlmbled over the icy peaks , another jigged like a
lopsided lantern above the curlicue pinnacles of the palace.
She s廿ode along the dark street, enjoying the freedom of the
male robe she wore and its warmth , making San trot to keep
up; the Major , long-legged , kept pace with he r. A high , trilling
voice ca11ed ,‘ Envoy!' and she huned with a smile , then swung
round , seeing the Major grappling momentarily with someone
in the shadow of a portico. He broke free , caught up to her
without a word , seized her arm in an iron grip , and dra自ed
her into a nm. 'Let go!' she said, struggling; she did not want
to use an aiji break on him , but nothing less was going to get
her free.
He pu11ed her nearly off-balance with a sudden dodge into
an a11ey; she ran with him , letting him keep hold on her arm.

54

Four Ways 的 Forgiveness

They came l1 nexpectedly out into her street and to her gate ,
through it, into the hO l1 se , which he unlocked with a word how did he do that? 一‘What is all this?' she demanded ,
breaking away easily, holding her arm where his grip had
bruised it.
She saw , outraged , the last flicker of an exhilarated smile on
his face. Breathing hard , he asked ,‘Are you hurt?'
‘ Hurt? Wh ere you yanked me , yes - what do you think you
were doing?'
‘Keeping the fellow away.'
'Wh at fellow?'
He said nothing.
'Th e one who called Ol1 t? Maybe he wanted to talk to me!'
After a moment the Major said , 'Possibly. He was in the
shadow. 1 tho l1 ght he might be armed. 1 must go Ol1t and look
for San Ubatta t. Please keep the door locked until 1 come
back.' He was out the door as he gave the order; it never
occurred to him that she wO l1 ld not obey, and she did obey,
raging. Did he think she cO l1 ldn't look after herself? that she
needed him interfering in her life , kicking slaves around ,
'protecting' her? Maybe it was time he saw what an aiji fall
looked like. He was strong and ql1 ick , bl1 t had no real training.
This kind of amateur interference was intolerable, really
intolerable; she must protest to the Embassy again
As soon as she let him back in with a nervous , shamefaced
San in tow, she said , 'You opened my door with a password. 1
was not informed that you had right of entrance day and night.'
He was back to his military blankness. ‘Nomum ,' he said.
'You are not to do so again. You are not to seize hold of me
ever again. 1 must tell you that if you do , 1 will injure you. If
something alarms you , tell me what it is and 1 will respond as 1
see fi t. Now will you please go.'
'With pleasure , mum ,' he said , wheeled , and marched 011 t.
‘Oh , Lady 一 Oh ， Envoy ,' San said , 'that was a dangerous
person , extremely dangerous people , 1 am so sorry , disgraceful ,'

Forgíveness Day

55

and he babbled on. She finally got him to say who he thought
it was , a religious dissident, one of the Old Believers who held
to the original religion of Gatay and wanted to cast out or kill
all foreigners and unbelievers. ‘A bondsman?' she asked with
interest, and he was shocked - 'Oh , no , no , a real person , a
man - but most misguided , a fanatic , a heathen fanatic!
Knifemen , they call themselves. But a man , Lady - Envoy,
certainly a man!'
The thought that she might think that an asset might touch
her upset him as much as the attempted assault. If such it had
been.
As she considered it, she began to wonder if, since she had
put the Major in his place at the theater, he had found an
excuse to put her in her place by ‘protecting' he r.叭lell ， if he
tried it again , he'd find himself upside down against the
opposite wal l.
‘ Rewe!' she called, and the bondswoman appeared instantly
as always. ‘One of the actors is coming. Would you like to
make us a li吐le tea , something like thatγRewe smiled , said ,
'Yes ,' and vanished. There was a knock at the doo r. The Major
opened it - he must be standing guard outside - and Batikam
came m.
It had not occurred to her that the makil would still be in
women's clothing, but it was how he dressed offstage too , not
so magnificently , but with elegance , in the delicate ，自owmg
materials and dark , subtle hues that the swoony ladies in the
dramas wore. It gave considerable piquancy, she felt , to her
own male costume. Batikam was not as handsome as the
Major , who was a shmning-looking man till he opened his
mouth; but the makil was magnetic , you had to look at him.
He was a dark greyish brown , not the blue-black that the
owners were so vain of (though there were plenty of black
assets too , Solly had noticed: of course , when every bondswoman was her owner's sexual servant.) Intense , vivid intelligence and sympathy shone in his face through the maki l's

56

Four Ways to Forgíveness

stardust black makeup , as he looked around with a slow, lovely
laugh at her , at San , and at the Major standing at the doo r. He
laughed like a woman , a warm ripple , not the ha , ha of a man.
He held out his hands to Sol峙， and she came forward and took
them. 'Thank you for coming, Batikam!' she said , and he said ,
'Thank you for asking me , Al ien Envoy!'
'San,' she said ,‘I think this is your cue?'
Only indecision about what he ought to do could have
slowed San down till she had to speak. He still hesitated a
moment, then smiled with unction and said , 'Yes , so sorry, a
very good night to you , Envoy! Noon hour at the Office of
Mines , tomorrow, I believe?' Backing away , he backed right
into the Major , who stood Iike a post in the doorway. She
looked at the Major, ready to order him out without ceremony,
how dare he shove back in! - and saw the expression on his
face. For once his blank mask had cracked , and what was
revealed was contempt. Incredulous , sickened contempt. As if
he was obliged to watch somone eat a turd.
‘Get out,' she said. She turned her back on both of them.
'Come on , Batikam; the only privacy I have is in here ,' she
said , and led the makil to her bedroom.
He was born where his fathers before him were born , in the
old , cold house in the foothills above Noeha. His mother did
not cry out as she bore him , since she was a soldier's wife , and
a soldier's mother , now. He was named for his great-uncle,
killed on du可 in the Sosa. He grew up in the stark discipline
of a poor household of pure veot lineage. His father , when he
was on leave , taught him the arts a soldier must know; when
his father was on duty the old As set-Sergeant Habbakam took
over the lessons , which began at five in the morning , summer
or winter , with worship , shortsword practice, and a crosscountry run. His mother and grandmother taught him the
other arts a man must know, beginning with good manners

Forgíveness Day

57

before he was two , and after his second birthday going on to
history, poe甘y， and sitting stil1 without talking.
The child's day was filled with lessons and fenced with
disciplines; but a child's day is long. There was room and time
for freedom , the freedom of the farmyard and the open hills.
There was the companionship of pets , foxdogs , running dogs ,
spotted cats , hunting cats , and the farm cattle and the greathorses; not much companionship otherwise. The family's
assets , other than Habbakam and the two housewomen , were
sharecroppers, working the stony foothill land that they and
their owners had lived on foreve r. Their children were lightskinned, shy , already stooped to their lifelong work, ignorant of
anything beyond their fields and hills. Sometimes they swam
with Teyeo , summers , in the pools of the rive r. Sometimes he
rounded up a couple of them to play soldiers with him. They
stood awkward , uncouth , smirking when he shouted ‘Charge!'
and rushed at the invisible enemy. 'Follow me!' he cried
shrilly , and they lumbered after him ，自ring their tree-branch
guns at random , pow , pow. Mostly he went alone , riding his
good mare Tasi or afoot with a hunting cat pacing by his side.
A few times a year visitors came to the estate , relatives or
fellow officers of Teye。這 father， bringing their children and
their housepeople. Teyeo silently and politely showed the child
guests about , introduced them to the animals , took them on
rides. Silently and polite峙， he and his cousin Gemat came to
hate each other; at age fourteen they fought for an hour in a
glade behind the house , punctiliously following the rules of
wrestling, relentlessly hurting each other, getting bloodier and
wearier and more desperate , until by unspoken consent they
called it off and returned in silence to the house , where
everyone was gathering for dinne r. Everyone looked at them
and said nothing. They washed up hurriedly , hurried to table.
Gemat's nose leaked blood all through the meal; Teyeo's jaw
was so sore he could not open it to eat. No one commented.
Silently and politely, when they were both fifteen , Teyeo

58

FourWays 的 Forgiveness

and Rega Toebawe's daughter fell in love. On the last day of
her visit they escaped by unspoken collusion and rode out side
by side , rode for hours , too shy to tal k. He had given her Tasi
to ride. They dismounted to water and rest the horses in a wild
valley of the hills. They sat near each other, not very near, by
the side of the li位le quiet-running stream. '1 love you ,' Teyeo
said. ‘1 love you ,' Emdu said , bending her shining black face
down. They did not touch or look at each other. Th ey rode
back over the hills , joyous , silen t.
When he was sixteen Teyeo was sent to the Officers'
Academy in the capital of his province. There he continued to
learn and practice the arts of war and the arts of peace. His
province was the most rural in Voe Deo; its ways were
conservative , and his training was in some ways anachronistic.
He was of course taught the technologies of modern warfare ,
becoming a first-rate pod pilot and an expert in telereconnaissance; but he was not taught the modern ways of thinking that
accompanied the technologies in other schools.. He learned
the poetrY and history of Voe Deo , not the history and politics
of the Ekumen. The Al ien presence on Werel remained
remote , theoretical to him. His reality was the old reality of the
veot class , whose men held themselves apart from all men not
soldiers and in brotherhood with all soldiers , whether owners ,
assets , or enemies. As for women , Teyeo considered his rights
over them absolute , binding him absolutely to responsible
chivalry to women of his own class and protective, merciful
treatment of bondswomen. He believed all foreigners to be
basically hostile , untrustworthy heathens. He honored the Lady
Tu祉， but worshiped the Lord Kamye. He expected no justice,
looked for no reward , and valued above all competence ,
courage , and selιrespect. In some respects he was utterly
unsuited to the world he was to enter , in others well prepared
for it, since he was to spend seven years on Yeowe fighting a
war in which there was no justice , no reward , and never even
an illusion of ultimate victory.

Forgiveness Day

59

Ra nk among veot officers was hereditary. Teyeo entered
active service as a rega , the highest of the three veot ranks. No
degree of ineptihJde or distinction could lower or raise his
status or his pay. Material ambition was no use to a veo t. But
honor and responsibility were to be earned, and he earned
them quickly. He loved service , loved the life , knew he was
good at 鈍， intelligent1 y obedient, effective in command; he had
come out of the Academy with the highest recommendations ,
and being posted to the capital , drew notice as a promising
officer as well as a likable young man. At twenty-four he was
absolutely 祉， his body would do anything he asked of it. His
austere upbringing had given him little taste for indulgence
but an intense appreciation of pleasure , so the luxuries and
entertainments of the capi包1 were a discovery of delight to
him. He was reserved and rather shy, but companionable and
cheerful. A handsome young man , in with a set of other young
men very like him , for a year he knew what it is to live a
completely privileged life with complete enjoyment of it. Th e
bril1 iant intensity of that enjoyment stood against the dark
background of the war in Yeowe , the slave revolution on the
colony planet, which had gone on all his lifetime , and was now
intensi如時﹒ Without that background , he could not have been
so happy. A whole life of games and diversÍons had no interest
for him; and when his orders came, posted as a pilot and
division commander to Yeowe , his happiness was pretty near1 y
complete.
He went home for his thirty-day leave. Having received his
parents' approbation , he rode over the hills to Rega Toebawe's
estate and asked for his daughter's hand in marriage. The rega
and his wife told their daughter that they approved his offer
and asked her, for they were not strict parents , if she would like
to marry Teyeo. 'Yes,' she said. As a grown , unmarried woman ,
she lived in seclusion in the women's side of the house , but
she and Teyeo were allowed to meet and even to walk together,
the chaperone remaining at some distance. Teyeo told her it

6。

F our Ways to F orgiveness

was a three-year posting; would she marry in haste now, or wait
three years and have a proper wedding? ‘Now,' she said,
bending down her narrow, shining face. Teyeo gave a laugh of
delight, and she laughed at him. They were married nine days
later - it couldn't be sooner, there had to be some fuss and
ceremony, even if it was a soldier's wedding - and for seventeen
days Teyeo and Emdu made love , walked together, made love,
rode together , made love , came to know each other, came 個
love each other, quarreled , made up , made love , slept in each
other's arms. Then he left for the war on another world , and
she moved to the women's side ofher husband's house.
His three-year posting was extended year by year , as his value
as an 0伍cer was recognised and as the war on Yeowe changed
from scattered containing actions to an increasingly desperate
retrea t. In his seventh year of service an order for compassionate
leave was sent out to Yeowe Headquarters for Rega Teyeo,
whose wife was dying of complications of berlot fever. At that
point, there was no headquarters on Yeowe; the Army was
retreating from three directions towards the old colonial capital;
Teye。這 division was fighting a rear-guard defense in the sea
marshes; communications had collapsed.
Command on Werel continued to find it inconceivable that
a mass of ignorant slaves with the crudest kind of weapons
could be defeating the Army ofVoe Deo , a disciplined , trained
body of soldiers with an infallible communications network,
skimmers , pods , every armament and device perrnitted by the
Ekumenical Convention Agreement. A strong faction in Voe
Deo blamed the setbacks on this submissive adherence to Al ien
rules. Th e hell with Ekumenical Conventions. Bomb the
damned dusties back to the mud they were made of. Use the
biobomb, what was it for , anyway? Get our men off the foul
planet and wipe it clean. Start fresh. If we don't win the war on
Yeowe , the next revolution's going to be right here on Werel ,
in our own cities, in our own homes! Th e jittery government
held on against this pressure. Werel was on probation, and Voe

Forgiveness Day

61

Deo wanted to lead the planet to Ekumenical stahls. Defeats
were minimised , losses were not made up , skimmers , pods ,
weapons , men were not replaced. By the end ofTeyeo's seventh
year , the Army on Yeowe had been essentially written 0旺 byits
government. Early in the eighth year, when the Ekumen was
at last permitted to send its Envoys to Yeowe , Voe Deo and the
other countries that had supplied auxiliary troops finally began
to bring their soldiers home.
It was not until he got back to Werel that T eyeo learned his
wife was dead.
He went home to Noeha. He and his father greeted each
other with a silent embrace , but his mother wept as she
embraced him. He knelt to her in apology for having brought
her more grief than she could bear.
He lay that night in the cold room in the silent house ,
listening to his heart beat like a slow drum. He was not
unhappy, the relief of being at peace and the sweetness of
being home were too great for that; but it was a desolate calm ,
and somewhere in it was anger. Not used to anger , he was not
sure what he fel t. It was as if a faint , sullen red ßare colored
every image in his mind , as he lay trying to think through the
seven years on Yeowe , first as a pilot, then the ground war,
then the long retreat, the killing and the being killed. Why had
they been left there to be hunted down and slaughtered? Why
had the government not sent them reinforcements? The
questions had not been worth asking then , they were not worth
asking now. They had only one answer: We do what they ask
us to do , and we don't complain. 1 fought every step of the w呵，
he thought without pride. The new knowledge sliced keen as a
knife through all other knowledge - And while 1 was fighting ,
she was dying. Al l a waste , there on Yeowe. All a waste , here
on Werel. He sat up in the dark , the cold , silent, sweet dark of
night in the hills. ‘Lord Kamye ,' he said aloud , 'help me. My
mind betrays me.'
During the long leave home he sat often with his mothe r.

62

Four Ways to Forgiveness

She wanted to talk about Emdu , and at first he had to force
himself to listen. It would be easy to forget the girl he had
known for seventeen days seven years ago , if only his mother
would let him forge t. Gradually he learned to take what she
wanted to give him , the knowledge of who his wife had been.
His mother wanted to share all she could with him of the joy
she had had in Emdu , her beloved child and friend. Even his
father , retired now, a quenched , silent man , was able to say,
'She was the light of the house.' They were thanking him for
he r. They were telling him that it had not all been a waste.
But what lay ahead of them? Old age , the empty house.
They did not complain , of course , and seemed content in their
severe , placid round of daily work; but for them the continuity
of the past with the fuhue was broken.
‘ 1 should remarry,' Teyeo said to his mothe r.‘ Is there anyone
you've noticed . . . ?'
It was raining, a grey light through the wet windows , a soft
thrumming on the eaves. His mother's face was indistinct as
she bent to her mending.
'No,' she said. 'Not really.' She looked up at him , and after a
pause asked ,
‘1 don't know.'
'Th ere's no war now,' she said , in her soft, even voice.
‘No,' Teyeo said. 'There's no war.'
'Will there be . . . ever? do you think?'
He stood up , walked down the room and back, sat down
again on the cushioned platform near her; they both sat
straight-backed, still except for the slight motion of her hands
as she sewed; his hands lay lightly one in the other, as he had
been taught when he was two.
'1 don't know,' he said. 'It's strange. It's as if there hadn't
been a wa r. As if we' d never been on Yeowe 一 the Colony, the
Uprising, all of it. Th ey don't talk about it. It didn't happen.
We don't fight wars. This is a new age. They say that often on
the ne t. The age of peace , brotherhood across the stars. So , are

Forgíveness Day

63

we brothers with Yeowe , now? Are we brothers with Gatay and
Bambur and the Forty States? Are we brothers with our assets?
1 can't make sense of it. 1 don't know what they mean. 1 don't
know where 1 fit in.' His voice too was quíet and even.
‘Not here , 1 think ,' she said. ‘Not yet.'
Mtera while he saíd ,‘1 thought . . . children .
。f course. When the time comes.' She smiled at him. l'ou
never could sit sti1l for half an hour . . . Waít. Wait and see.'
She was ríght, of course; and yet what he saw in the net and
in town tried his patience and his pride. It seemed that to be a
soldier now was a disgrace. Government reports , the news and
the analyses , constantly referred to the Army and particularly
the veot classas fossils , costly and useless , Voe Deo's principal
obstacle to full admission to the Ekumen. His own uselessness
was made clear to him when his request for a posting was met
by an indefinite extension of his leave on half pay. At thirtytwo , they appeared to be telling him , he was superannuated .
Again he suggested to his mother that he should accept the
sítuatíon , settle down , and look for a wife. ‘Talk to your father ,'
she said. He did so; his father said , 'Of course your help is
welcome , but 1 can run the farm well enough for a while yet.
Your mother thinks you should go to the capital , to Command.
They can't ignore you if you're there. Mter al l. Mter seven
years' combat - your record 一，
Teyeo knew what that was worth , now. But he was certainly
not needed here , and probably irritated his father with his ideas
of changing this or that way things were done. They were right:
he should go to the capital and find out for himself what part
he could play in the new world of peace.
His first half-year there was grim. He knew almost no one at
Command or in the barracks; his generation was dead , or
invalided out, or home on half pay. The younger 0伍 cers ， who
had not been on Yeowe , seemed to him a cold , buttoned-up
lot, always talking money and politics. Little businessmen , he
privately thought them. He knew they were afraid of him - of

64

Four Ways to Forgiveness

his record , of his reputation. Wh ether he wanted to or not he
reminded them that there had been a war that 叭1erel had
fought and lost, a civil war , their own race fighting against
itself, class against class. They wanted to dismiss it as a
meaningless quarrel on another world , nothing to do with
them
Teyeo walked the streets of the capital , watched the thousands of bondsmen and bondswomen hurrying about their
owners' business , and wondered what they were waiting for.
'The Ekumen does not interfere with the social , culhual , or
economic arrangements and affairs of any people ,' the Embassy
and the government spokesmen repeated. ‘Full membership
for any nation or people that wishes it is contingent only on
absence , or renunciation , of certain specific methods and
devices of warfare ,' and there followed the list of terrible
weapons , most of them mere names to Teyeo , but a few of
them inventions of his own country: the biobomb , as they
called it, and the neuronics.
He personally agreed with the Ekumen's judgment on such
devices , and respected their patience in waiting for Voe Deo
and the rest of Werel to prove not only compliance with the
ban , but acceptance of the principle. But he very deeply
resented their condescension. They sat in judgment on everything Werelian , viewing from above. The less they said about
the division of classes , the clearer their disapproval was. 'Slavery
is of very rare occurrence in Ekumenical worlds ,' said their
books , 'and disappears completely with full participation in the
Ekumenical polity.' Was that what the Al ien Embassy was
really waiting for?
‘ By our Lady!' said one of the young officers - many of them
were Tualites ，的 well as businessmen - 'the Aliens are going
to admit the dusties before they admit us!' He was sputtering
with indignant rage , like a red-faced old rega faced with an
insolent bond soldie r. 'Yeowe - a damned planet of savages ,
tribesmen , regressed into barbarism - preferred over us!'

Forgiveness Day

65

'They fought well; Teyeo observed , knowing he should not
say it as he said 祉， bl.1 t not liking to hear the men and women
he had fought against called dusties. As sets , rebels , enemies ,
yes.
Th e young man stared at him and after a moment said , '1
suppose you love 'em , eh? The dusties?'
'1 killed as many as 1 could; Teyeo replied politely, and then
changed the conversation. The young man , though nominally
Teyeo's superior at Command , was an oga , the lowest rank of
veot, and to snub him further would be ill-bred.
They were stllfi兮， he was touchy; the old days of cheerful
good fellowship were a faint , incredible memory. The bureau
chiefs at Corrimand listened to his reqllest to be put back on
active service and sent him endlessly on to another departmen t.
He could not live in barracks , but had to find an apartment,
like a civilian. His half pay did not permit him indulgence in
the expensive pleasures of the city. While waiting for appoinι
ments to see this or that 0伍cial ， he spent his days in the library
net of the Officers' Academy. He knew his education had been
incomplete and was out of date. If his country was going to
join the Ekumen , in order to be useful he must know more
about the Alien ways of thinking and the new technologies.
Not sure what he needed to know , he floundered about in the
network , bewildered by the endless information available ,
increasingly aware that he was no intellectual and no scholar
and would never understand Alien minds , but do自edly driving
himself on out of his depth.
A man from the Embassy was offering an introductory course
in Ekumenical history in the public ne t. Teyeo joined it, and
sat through eight or ten lecture-and-discussion periods, straightbacked and still , only his hands moving slightly as he took full
and methodical notes. The lecturer , a Hainishman who translated his extremely long Hainish name as Old Music , watched
Teyeo , tried to draw him out in discussion , and at last asked

66

Four Ways to Forgíveness

him to stay in after session. '1 should like to meet you , Rega ,'
he said , when the others had dropped ou t.
They met at a cat丘 They met again. Teyeo did not Iike the
Al ien's manners , which he found e鼠的ive; he did not trust his
quick , clever mind; he felt 01d Music was using him , shldying
him as a specimen of The Veot, The SoIdier, probably The
Barbarian. The Al ien , secure in his superiority, was indifferent
to Teyeo's coldness , ignored his distrust, insisted on helping
him with information and guidance , and sham eI essly repeated
qllestions Teyeo had avoided answering. One of these was ,
、九1hy are yOll sitting arollnd here on half pa戶，
‘It's not by my own choice, M r. 01d Music ,' Teyeo finally
answered , the third time it was asked. He was very angry at the
man's implldence , and so spoke with particlllar mildness. He
kept his eyes away from OId Music's eyes , bluish , with the
whites showing like a scared horse. He could not get used to
Al iens' eyes.
'They won't put you back on active service?'
Teyeo assented po1iteI y. Could the man , however alien ,
really be oblivious to the fact that his questions were grossly
humiliating?
'Wollld you be willing to serve in the Embassy Guard?'
That qllestion left Teyeo speechless for a moment; then he
committed the extreme rudeness of answering a qllestion with
a qllestion. ‘Why do yOll as肘，
'I' d like very mllch to have a man of your capacity in that
corps ,' said 01d Music , adding with his appalling candor,‘ Most
of them are spies or blockheads. It would be wonderflll to have
a man 1 knew was neithe r. It's not just sentry duty , you know. 1
imagine you'd be asked by your government to give information; tha t' s to be expected. And we wOllld llse yOll , once yOll
had experience and if yOll were wi11 ing, as a liaison office r.
Here or in other cOllntries. We wOllld not, however, ask you to
give information to us. Am 1 clear, Teyeo? 1 want no miSllnderstanding between llS as to what 1 am and am not asking of yOll.'

Forgiveness Day

67

'You would be able . . . ?' Teyeo asked cautiously.
Old Music laughed and said , 'Yes. 1 have a string to pull in
your Command. A favor owed. Will you think it over?'
Teyeo was silent a minute. He had been nearly a year now
in the capital and his requests for posting had met only
bureaucratic evasion and , recently, hints that they were considered insubordinate. Tll accept now, if 1 may,' he said , with
a cold deference.
The Hainishman looked at him , his smile changing to a
thoughtful , steady gaze. 'Thank you ,' he said. 可Ou should hear
from Command in a few days.'
So Teyeo put his uniform back on , moved back to the City
Barracks , and served for another seven years on alien ground.
The Ekumenical Embassy was , by diplomatic agreement, a
part not of Werel but of the Ekumen - a piece of the planet
that no longer belonged to it. The Guardsmen furnished by
Voe Deo were protective and decorative , a highly visible
presence on the Embassy grounds in their white-and-gold dress
uniform. They were also visibly armed , since protest against
the Al ien presence still broke out erratically in violence.
Rega Teyeo , at first assigned to command a troop of these
guards , soon was transferred to a different duty , that of
accompanying members of the Embassy staff about the city
and on journeys. He served as a bodyguard , in undress uniform.
The Embassy much preferred not to use their own people and
weapons , but to request and trust Voe Deo to protect them.
Often he was also called upon to be a guide and interpreter,
and sometimes a companion. He did not like it when visitors
from somewhere in space wanted to be chummy and confiding,
asked him about himself, invited him to come drinking with
them. With perfectly concealed distaste , with perfect civil 旬，
he refused such 0缸ers. He did his job and kept his distance.
He knew that that was precisely what the Embassy valued him
fo r. Their confidence in him gave him a cold satisfaction.
His own government had never approached him to give

68

Four Ways to Forgíveness

information , though he certainly learned things that would
have interested them. Voe Dean intelligence did not recruit
their agents among veots. He knew who the agents in the
Embassy Guard were; some of them tried to get information
from him , but he had no intention of spying for spies.
Old Music , whom he now surmised to be the head of the
Embassy's intelligence system , called him in on his return from
a winter leave at home. The Hainishman had learned not to
make emotional demands on Teyeo , but could not hide a note
of affection in his voice greeting him. 'Hullo , Rega! 1 hope
your family's well? Good. I've got a particularly tricky job for
you. Kingdom of Gatay. You were there with Kemehan two
years ago , weren't you? Well , now they want us to send an
Envoy. They say they want to join. Of course the old King's a
puppet of your government; but there's a lot else going on
there. A s甘ong religious separatist movemen t. A Patriotic
Cause , kick out all the foreigners , Voe Deans and Aliens alike.
But the King and Council requested an Envoy , and all we've
got to send them is a new arrival. She may give you some
problems till she learns the ropes. 1 judge her a bit headstrong.
Excellent material , but young , very young. And she's only been
here a few weeks. 1 requested you , because she needs your
experience. Be patient with her , Rega. 1 think you'll find her
likable.'
He did no t. In seven years he had got accustomed to the
Al iens' eyes and their various smells and colors and manners.
Protected by his flawless courtesy and his stoical code , he
endured or ignored their strange or shocking or troubling
behavior, their ignorance and their different knowledge. Serving and protecting the foreigners entrusted to him , he kept
himself aloof from them , neither touched nor touching. His
charges learned to count on him and not to presume on him.
Women were often quicker to see and respond to his Keep Out
signs than men; he had an easy , almost friendly relationship
with an old Terran Observer whom he had accompanied on

Forgiveness Day

69

several long investigatory tours. 'You are as peaceful 切 be with
as a cat, Rega ,' she told him once , and he valued 血e
compliment. But the Envoy to Gatay was another matter.
She was physically splendid, with clear red-brown skin like
that of a baby, glossy swinging hair, a free walk - too free: she
flaunted her ripe, slender body at men who had no access to 祉，
thrusting it at him, at everyone, insistent, shameless. She expressed her opinion on everything with coarse self-confidence.
She could not hear a hint and refused to take an orde r. She
was an a昆ressive ， spoiled child with the sexuality of an adult,
given the responsibility of a diplomat in a dangerously uns旭ble
country. Teyeo knew as soon as he met her that this was an
impossible a~signment. He could not trust her or himsel f. Her
sexual immodesty aroused him as it disgusted him; she was a
whore whom he must treat as a princess. Forced to endure and
unable to ignore her, he hated her.
He was more familiar with anger than he had used to be ,
but not used to hating. It troubled him extremely. He had
never in his life asked for a reposting, but on the morning after
slie had taken the makil into her room , he sent a stiff little
appeal to the Embassy. Old Music responded to him with a
sealed voice-message through the diplomatic link: ‘Love of god
and country is like fi. re , a wonderful friend , a terrible enemy;
only children play with fire. 1 don't like the situation. There's
nobody here 1 can replace either of you with. Will you hang
on a while longer?'
He did not know how to refuse. A veot did not refuse duty.
He was ashamed at having even thought of doing so , and hated
her again for causing him that shame.
Th e fi. rst sentence of the message was enigmatic, not in Old
Music's usual style but flowe句， indirect, like a coded warning.
Teyeo of course knew none of the intelligence codes either of
his coun旬 or of the Ekumen. Old Music would have to use
hints and indirection with him. ‘Love of god and country'
could well mean the Old Believers and the Patriots, the two

70

Four 札1ays 的 Forgiveness

subversive groups in Gat呵， both of them fanatically opposed
to foreign influence; the Envoy could be the child playing with
fire. Was she being approached by one group or the other? He
had seen no evidence of 祉， unless the man in the shadows that
night had been not a knifeman but a messenge r. She was
under his eyes all day, her house watched all night by soldiers
under his command. Surely the makil , Batikam , was not acting
for either of those groups. He might well be a member of the
Hame , the asset liberation underground of Voe Deo , but as
such would not endanger the Envoy , since the Hame saw the
Ekumen as their ticket to Yeowe and to freedom.
Teyeo puzzled over the words , replaying them over and over,
knowing his own stl1 pidity faced with this kind of subtlety, the
ins and Ol1 ts of the political labyrinth. At last he eI:ased the
message and yawned , for it was late; bathed , lay down , turned
off the light, said under his breath , 'Lord Kamye , let me hold
with courage to the one noble thing!' and slept like a stone.

Th e makil came to her hOl1 se every night after the theater
Teyeo tried to tell himself there was nothing wrong in it. He
himself had spent nights with the makils , back in the palmy
days before the wa r. Expert, artistic sex was part of their
b l1 siness. He knew by hearsay that rich city women often hired
them to come supply a h l1 sband's deficiencies. Bl1 t even sl1 ch
women did so secretly, discreetly , not in this vulgar , shameless
way , l1 tterly careless of decency，自outing the moral code ，的 if
she had some kind of right to do whatever she wanted wherever
and whenever she wanted it. Of course Batikam colluded
eagerly with her , playing on her infatl1ation , mocking the
Gataya郎， mocking Teyeo - and mocking her, tho l1 gh she
didn't know it. Wh at a chance for an asset to make fools of all
the owners at once!
Watching Batikam, T eyeo felt sure he was a member of the
Hame. His mockery was very sl1 btle; he was not trying to
disgrace the Envoy. Indeed his discretion was far greater than

Forgiveness Day

71

hers. He was trying to keep her from disgracing hersel f. The
makil rehlrned Teyeo's cold courtesy in kind , but once or twice
their eyes met and some brief, involuntary. l1 nderstanding
passed between them , fraternal , ironic.
There was to be a public festival , an observation of the
Tualite Feast ofForgiveness , to which the Envoy was pressingly
invited by the King and CO l1 ncil. She was put on show at many
such events. Teyeo tho l1 ght nothing abo l1 t it except how to
provide security in an excited holiday crowd , until San told
him that the festival day was the highest holy day of the old
religion of Gatay, and that the Old Believers fiercely resented
the imposition of the foreign rites over their own. The little
man seemedgenl1 inely worried. Teyeo worried too when next
day San was suddenly replaced by an elderly man who spoke
little but Gatayan and was quite l1 nable to explain what had
become of San Ubatta t. 'Other d l1 ties , other d l1 ties call ,' he
said in very bad Voe Dean , smiling and bobbing , 'very great
relishes time , aha? Relishes duties call.'
During the days that preceded the festival tension rose in
the city; gra伍tiappeared， symbols of the old religion smeared
across walls; a T l1 alite temple was desecrated , after which the
Royal G l1 ard was m l1 ch in evidence in the streets. Teyeo went
to the palace and req l1 ested , on his own a l1thori紗， that the
Envoy not be asked to appear in pl1 blic during a ceremony that
was 'likely to be tro l1 bled by inappropriate demonstrations.' He
was called in and treated by a Court 0伍 cial with a mixhue of
dismissive insolence and conniving nods and winks , which left
him really l1 neasy. He left four men on d l1 ty at the Envoy's
hO l1 se that nigh t. Rehuning to his ql1 arters , a little barracks
down the street which had been handed over to the Embassy
G l1 ard , he fO l1 nd the window of his room open and a scrap of
writing, in his own langl1 age , on his table: Fest F is set up for

assasnation.
He was at 出 e Envoy's hO l1 se promptly the next morning and
asked her asset to tell her he m l1 st speak to he r. She came Ol1 t

72

FourWays 的 Forgiveness

of her bedroom pul1i ng a white wrap around her naked body.
Batikam fo11owed her, half-d ressed , sleepy, and amused. Teyeo
gave him the eye-signal go , which he received with a serene ,
patronising smile, murmuring to the woman , '1'11 go have some
breakfas t. Rewe? have you got something to feed me?' He
fo11owed the bondswoman out of the room. Teyeo faced the
Envoy and held out the scrap of paper.
‘1 received this last night, ma'am ,' he said. '1 must ask you
not to attend the festival tomorrow.'
She considered the paper, read the writing, and yawned.
明1h o's it from?'
'1 don't know, ma'am.'
‘Wh a t's it mean? Assassination? They can't spell, can they?'
Mter a moment, he said , 'Th ere are a number of other
indications - enough that 1 must ask you - '
‘Not to attend the festival of Forgiveness, yes. 1 heard you.'
She went to a window seat and sat down , her robe fa11ing wide
to reveal her legs; her bare , brown feet were short and supple,
the soles pink, the toes sma11 and orderly. Teyeo looked 自xedly
at the air beside her head. She tv.吋dled the bit of paper. 'If
you think it's dangerous , Rega , bring a guardsman or two with
you ,' she said, with the faintest tone of scorn. '1 really have to
be there. Th e King requested 祉， you know. And I' m to light
the big fire , or something. One of the few things women are
a110wed to do in public here ... 1 can't back out of it.' She
held out the paper, and after a moment he came close enough
to take it. She looked up at him smiling; when she defeated
him she always smiled at him. ‘Wh o do you think would want
to blow me away , anyhow? The Pa甘iots?'
'Or the Old Believers, ma'am. Tomorrow is one of their
holidays.'
‘And your Tualites have taken it away from them? Well , they
can't exactly blame the Ekumen , can they?'
‘1 think it possible that the government might permit violence in order to excuse retaliation , ma'am.'

Forgiveness Day

73

She started to answer carelessly, realised what he had said ,
and frowned. 'You think the Counci l' s setting me up? What
evidence have you?'
Mter a pause he said , 'Very little , ma'am. San Ubattat 一，
'San's been ill. Th e old fellow they sent isn't much use , but
he's scarcely dangerous! Is that all?' He said nothing , and she
went on , 'Until you have real evidence , Rega , don't interfere
with my obligations. Your militaristic paranoia isn't acceptable
when it spreads to the people I'm dealing with here. Control
祉， please! I'll expect an extra guardsman or two tomorrow; and
tha t' s enough.'
‘Yes , ma'am ,' he said , and went out. His head sang with
ange r. It occurred to him now that her new guide had told him
San Ubattat had been kept away by religious duties , not by
illness. He did not hlrn back. Wh at was the use? ‘ Stay on for
an hom or so , will you , Seyem?' he said to the guard at her
gate , and strode off down the street, trying to walk away from
her , from her soft brown thighs and the pink soles of her feet
and her Shlpid , insolent, whorish voice giving him orders. He
tried to let the bright icy sunlit air, the stepped streets snapping
with banners for the festival , the glitter of the great mountains
and the clamor of the markets fill him , dazzle and dis甘act him;
but he walked seeing his own shadow fall in front of him like a
knife across the stones , knowing the futility of his life.

‘The veot looked worried ,' Batikam said in his velvet voice , and
she laughed , spearing a preserved fruit from the dish and
popping it, dripping, into his mouth.
'I' m ready for breakfast now , Rewe ,' she called , and sat down
across from Batikam. 'I' m starving! He was having one of his
phallocratic fits. He hasn't saved me from anything lately. It' s
his only function , after all. So he has to invent occasions. 1
wish , 1 wish he was out of my hai r. It' s so nice not to have poor
little old San crawling around like some kind of pubic infesìation. If only 1 could get rid of the Major now!'

74

FourW勾心的 Forgiveness

'He's a man of honor,' the makil said; his tone did not seem
ironical.
‘How can an owner of slaves be an honorable man?'
Batikam watched her from his long, dark eyes. She could
not read Werelian eyes , beautiful as they were，日lling their lids
with darkness.
'Male hierarchy members always yatter about their precious
honor,' she said. 'And “ their" women's honor, of course.'
'Honor is a great privilege ,' Batikam said. ‘1 envy it. 1 envy
him.'
‘Oh , the hell with all that phony dignity, it' s just pissing 切
mark your territory. Al I you need envy him , Batikam , is his
freedom.'
He smiled. 'You're the only person I've ever known who was
neither owned nor owne r. That is freedom. That is freedom. 1
wonder if you know it?'
‘Of course 1 do ,' she said. He smiled, and went on eating his
breakfast, but there had been something in his voice she had
not heard before. Moved and a little troubled , she said after a
while , 'You're going away soon.'
'Mind reader. Yes. In ten days , the troupe goes on to tour
出e Forty States.'
‘Oh, Batikam , I'll miss you! You're the only man, the only
person here 1 can 包Ik to -Iet alone the sex-'
‘Did we ever?'
'Not often ,' she said, laughing, but her voice shook a li ttI e.
He held out his hand; she came to him and sat on his lap , the
robe dropping open. ‘Little pretty Envoy breasts ,' he said,
lipping and stroking,‘little soft Envoy belly . . .' Rewe came in
with a tray and softly set it down. ‘Eat your breakfast, little
Envoy ,' Batikam said , and she disengaged herself and returned
to her chair, grinning.
‘Because you're free you can be honest,' he said, fastidiously
peeling a pini frui t.‘ Don't be too hard on those of us who
aren't and can't.' He cut a slice and fed it to her across the

Forgiveness Day

75

table. 'It has been a taste of freedom to know you ,' he said. ‘A
hint, a shadow . . .'
'In a few years at most, Batikam , you wiU be free. This whole
idiotic struchne of masters and slaves will co11apse completely
when Werel comes into the Ekumen.'
'If it does.'
‘Of course it will.'
He shrugged. 'My home is Yeowe ,' he said.
She stared , confused. 可ou come from Yeowe?'
‘I' ve never been there ,' he said. '1' 11 probably never go there.
叭Th.at use have they got for makils? But it is my home. Those
are my people. That is my freedom. When will you see . . .' His
fist was clenched; he opened it with a soft gesture of letting
something go. He smiled and rehIrned to his breakfas t.‘I' ve got
to get back to the theater ,' he said. 'We're rehearsing an act for
the Day of Forgiveness.'
She wasted all day at court. She had made persistent attempts
to obtain permission to visit the mines and the huge governmentrun farms on the far side of the mountains , from which Gatay's
wea1th ßowed. She had been as persistently foiled - by the
protocol and bureaucracy of the government , she had thought
at first , their unwillingness to let a diplomat do anything but
run round to meaningless events; but some businessmen had
let something slip about conditions in the mines and on the
farms that made her think they might be hiding a more brutal
kind of slavery than any visible in the capital. Today she got
nowhere , waiting for appointments that had not been made.
The old fellow who was standing in for San misunderstood
most of what she said in Voe Dean , and when she tried to
speak Gatayan he misunderstood it a11 , through Shlpidity or
inten t. The Major was blessedly absent most of the morning ,
replaced by one of his soldiers , but h Irned up at court , stiff and
silent and seιjawed， and attended her until she gave up and
went home for an early bath.
Batikam came late that nigh t. In the middle of one of the

76

Four Ways to Forgíveness

elaborate fantasy games and role reversals she had learned from
him and fOllnd so exciting , his caresses grew slower and slower ,
soft, dragging across her like feathers , so that she shivered with
llnappeased desire and , pressing her body against his , realised
that he had gone to sleep. ‘Wake IIp ,' she said , lallghing and
yet chilled , and shook him a li仕le. The dark eyes opened ,
bewildered , full of fea r.
Tm sorry ,' she said at once ,‘ go back to sleep, YOll're tired.
No , no , it' s all right, it' s late.' But he went on with what she
now , whatever his skill and tenderness , had to see was his job.
In the morning at breakfast she said , 'Can you see me as an
equal , Batikam?'
He looked tired , older than he usually did. He did not smile.
Mter a while he said ，明fhat do you want me to say?'
'That you do.'
‘1 do ,' he said quietly.
'you don't trust me ,' she said , bitte r.
After a while he said ,‘This is Forgiveness Day. The Lady
Tual came to the men of As dok , who had set their hunting cats
upon her followers. She came among them riding on a great
hunting cat with a fÏ ery tongue , and they fell down in terror,
but she blessed them , forgiving them.' His voice and hands
enacted the story as he told it.‘ Forgive me ,' he said.
'You don't need any forgiveness!'
‘Oh , we all do. I t' s why we Kamyites borrow the Lady Tual
now and then. Wh en we need he r. So , today you'll be the Lady
Tual , at the rites?'
‘All 1 have to do is light a fire , they said ,' she said anxiously,
and he lallghed. Wh en he left she told him she wOllld come to
the theater to see him , tonight, after the festiva l.
The horse-race course , the only flat area of any size anywhere
near the city, was thronged , vendors calling, banners waving;
the Royal motorcars drove straight into the crowd , which parted
like water and closed behind. Some rickety-looking bleachers
had been erected for lords and owners , with a curtained section

Forgíveness Day

77

for ladies. She saw a motorcar drive up to the bleachers; a
figure swathed in red cloth was bundled Ollt of it and hurried
between the curtains , vanishing. Were there peepholes for
them to watch the ceremony through? There were women in
the crowds , but bondswomen only, assets. She realised that she ,
too , would be kept hidden until her moment of the ceremony
arrived: a red tent awaited her , alongside the bleachers, not far
from the roped enclosure where priests were chanting. She was
rushed out of the car and into the tent by obsequious and
determined courtiers.
B~mdswomen in the tent offered her tea , sweets , mirrors ,
makeup , and hair oìl , and helped her put on the complex
swathing offine red-and-yellow cloth , her costume for her brief
enactment of Lady T lI al. Nobody had told her very clearly
what she was to do , and to her qllestions the women said , 'The
priests will show you , Lady , yO l1 jllst go with them. You just
light the fire. They have it all ready.' She had the impression
that 出ey knew no more than she did; they were pretty girls ,
court assets , excited at being part of the show, indifferent to the
religion. She knew the symbolism of the fire she was to ligh t:
into it faults and transgressions could be cast and b l1 rnt l1 p ,
forgotten. It was a nice idea.
Th e priests were whooping it up Ol1 t there; she peeked Ol1 t there were indeed peepholes in the tent fabric - and saw the
crowd had thickened. Nobody except in the bleachers and
right against the enclosure ropes could possibly see anything,
but everybody was waving red-and-yellow banners , munching
fried food , and making a day of 祉， while the priests kept l1 p
their deep chanting. In the far right of the little , blurred field
of vision throllgh the peephole was a familiar arm: the Major's ,
of course. They had not let him get into the motorcar with he r.
He m l1st have been furio l1 s. He had got here , tho l1 gh , and
stationed himself on guard. 'Lady, Lady ,' the court girls were
saying,‘here come the priests now,' and they bl1 zzed around
her making sure her headdress was on straight and the

78

Four Ways to Forgiveness

damnable , hobbling skirts fell in the right folds. They were still
plucking and patting as she stepped out of the tent, dazzled by
the daylight , smiling and 廿ying to hold herself very straight
and dignified as a Goddess ought to do. She really didn't want
to fuck up their ceremony.
Two men in priestly regalia were waiting for her right
outside the tent doo r. They stepped forward immediately,
taking her by the elbows and saying, 'This way, this way , Lady.'
Evidently she really wouldn't have to figure out what to do. No
doubt they considered women incapable of 祉， but in the
circumstances it was a relie f. The priests hurried her along
faster than she could comfortably walk in the tight-d rawn skirt.
They were behind the bleachers now; wasn't the enclosure in
the other direction? A car was coming straight at them ,
scattering the few people who were in its way. Somebody was
shouting; the priests suddenly began yanking her , trying to run;
one of them yelled and let go her arm , felled by a flying
darkness that had hit him with a jolt - she was in the middle
of a melee , unable to break the iron hold on her arm , her legs
imprisoned in the skirt, and there was a noise , an enormous
noise , that hit her head and bent it down , she couldn't see or
hear , blinded , struggling, shoved face first into some dark place
with her face pressed into a stifling, scratchy darkness and her
arms held locked behind he r.
A car, moving. A long time. Men , talking low. They talked
in Gatayan. It was very hard to breathe. She did not struggle: it
was no use. They had taped her arms and legs , bagged her
head. Mter a long time she was hauled out like a corpse and
carried quickly, indoors , down stairs , set down on a bed or
couch , not roughly though with the same desperate haste. She
lay still. The men talked , still almost in whispers. It made no
sense to he r. Her head was sti1l hearing that enormous noise ,
had it been real? had she been struck? She felt deaf, as if inside
a wall of cotton. The cloth of the bag kept getting stuck on her
mouth , sucked against her nostrils as she tried to breathe.

Forgíveness Day

79

It was pl l1 cked off; a man stooping over her huned her so he
cO l1 ld l1 ntape her arms , then her legs , murmuring as he did so ,
‘ Oon't to be scared , Lady , we don't to hurt you ,' in Voe Dean.
He backed away from her q l1 ickly. There were four or five of
them; it was hard to see , there was very little ligh t. 'To wait
here ,' another sa肘， 'everything all righ t. Just to keep happy.'
She was trying to sit up , and it made her dizzy. When her head
stopped spinning , they were all gone. As if by magic. Just to
keep happy.
A small very high room. Dark brick walls , earthy ai r. The
light was from a little biolume plaq l1 e ShlCk on the ceiling, a
weak , shadowless glow. Probably quite sufficient for Werelian
eyes. Just to keep happy. 1 have been kidnapped. How abo l1 t
tha t. She inventoried: the thick mattress she was on; a blanket;
a door; a small pitcher and a cup; a drainhole , was it, over in
the corner? She swung her legs off the mattress and her feet
struck something lying on the floor at the foot of it - she coiled
l1 p , peered at the dark mass , the body lying there. A man. The
uniform , the skin so black she could not see the feahues , but
she knew him. Even here , even here , the Major was with he r.
She stood l1 p l1 nsteadily and went to investigate the drainhole , which was simply that, a cement-lined hole in the floor ,
smelling slightly chemical , slightly fO l1l. Her head hurt, and
she sat down on the bed again to massage her arms and ankles ,
easing the tension and pain and getting herself back into
herself by tO l1 ching and confirming herself, rhythmically,
methodically. 1 have been kidnapped. How abo l1 t tha t. Just to
keep happy. Wh at abo l1 t him?
Suddenly knowing that he was dead , she sh l1 ddered and
held still.
Mter a while she leaned over slowly trying to see his face ,
listening. Again she had the sense of being dea f. She heard no
breath. She reached Ol1 t, sick and shaking , and put the back of
her hand against his face. It was cool , cold. But warmth
breathed across her fingers , once , again. She cro l1 ched on the

8。

FOUT Ways to FOTgiveness

mattress and studied him. He lay absolutely still , but when she
put her hand on his chest she felt the slow heartbea t.
‘Teyeo ,' she said in a whispe r. Her voice would not go above
a whispe r.
She put her hand on his chest again. She wanted to feel that
slow, steady beat, the faint warmth; it was reassuring. Just to
keep happy.
叭That else had they said? Just to wai t. Yes. That seemed to
be the program. Maybe she could sleep. Maybe she could
sleep and when she woke up the ransom would have come. Or
whatever it was they wanted.
She woke up with the thought that she still had her watch , and
after sleepily studying the tiny silver readout for a while decided
she had slept three hours; it was still the day of the Festival , too
soon for ransom probably, and she wouldn't be able to go to
the theater to see the makils tonigh t. Her eyes had grown
accustomed to the low light and when she looked she could
see , now , that there was dried blood all over one side of the
man's head. Exploring, she found a hot lump like a fist above
his temple , and her fingers came away smeared. He had got
himself crowned. That must have been him , launching himself
at the priest, the fake priest, all she could remember was a
flying shadow and a hard thump and an ooof! like an a! Jl
attack , and then there had been the huge noise that confused
everything. She clicked her tong l1 e , tapped the wall , to check
her hearing. It seemed to be all right; the wall of cotton had
disappeared. Maybe she had been crowned herself? She felt
her head , but found no lumps. The man must have a
concussion , if he was still out after three hours. How bad?
吭吭 en would the men come back?
She got l1 p and nearly fell over, entangled in the damned
Goddess skirts. If only she was in her own clothes , not this
fancy dress , three pieces of flimsy stl1 ff you had to have servants
to put on yO l1! She got out of the skirt piece , and used the scarf

FoTgiveness Day

81

piece to make a kind of tied skirt that came to her knees. It
wasn't warm in this basement or whatever it was; it was dank
and rather cold. She walked up and down , four steps turn , four
steps hlrn , four steps hlrn , and did some warm-ups. They had
dumped the man onto the floo r. How cold was it? Was shock
part of concussion? People in shock needed to be kept warm.
She dithered a long time , puzzled at her own indecision , at
not knowing what to do. Should she try to heave him up onto
the mattress? 叭fas it better not to move him? Wh ere the hell
were the men? Was he going to die?
She stooped over him and said sharply , 'Rega! Teyeo!' and
after a moment he caught his breath.
‘Wake up!' She remembered now, she thought she remembered , that it was important not to let concussed people lapse
into a coma. Except he already had.
He caught his breath again , and his face changed , came out
of the rigid immobility, softened; his eyes opened and closed ,
blinked , unfocused. 'Oh Kamye ,' he said very softly.
She couldn't believe how glad she was to see him. Just to
keep happy. He evidently had a blinding headache , and
admitted that he was seeing double. She helped him haul
himself up onto the mattress and covered him with the blanke t.
He asked no questions , and lay mute , lapsing back to sleep
soon. Once he was settled she went back to her exercises , and
did an hour of them. She looked at her watch. It was two hours
later , the same day , the Festival day. It wasn't evening ye t.
Wh en were the men going to come?
They came early in the morning , after the endless night that
was the same as the afternoon and the morning. The metal
door was unlocked and thrown clanging open , and one of them
came in with a tray while two of them stood with raised , aimed
guns in the doorway. There was nowhere to put the tray but
the floor , so he shoved it at Solly, said ,‘ Sorry, Lady!' and
backed out; the door clanged shut , the bolts banged home. She
stood holding the tray. 'Wait!' she said.

82

Four Ways to Forgíveness

The man had waked IIp and was looking groggily arollnd.
Mter finding him in this place with her she had somehow lost
his nickname , did not think of him as the Major , yet shied
away from his name. 'Here's breakfast, 1 glless ,' she said , and
sat down on the edge of the mattress. Acloth was thrown over
the wicker tray; llnder it was a pile of Gatayan grainrolls shlffed
with meat and greens , several pieces of fruit , and a capped
water carafe of thin , fancily beaded metal alloy. 'Breakfa哎，
lllnch , and dinner , maybe ,' she said. 'Shi t. Oh well. It looks
good. Can yOll eat? Can yOll sit IIp?'
He worked himself IIp to sit with his back against the wall ,
and then Shllt his eyes.
'Yoll're still seeing dOllble?'
He made a small noise of assen t.
'Are yOll thirsty?'
Small noise of assen t.
'Here.' She passed him the Cllp. By holding it in both hands
he got it to his mOllth , and drank the water slowly, a swallow at
a time. She meanwhile devoured three grainrolls one after the
other, then forced herself to stop , and ate a pini frui t. 'Collld
yOll eat some fruit?' she asked him , feeling gllilty. He did not
answe r. She thollght of Batikam feeding her the slice of pini at
breakfast, when , yesterday, a hllndred years ago.
The food in her stomach made her feel sick. She took the
Cllp from the man's relaxed hand - he was asleep again - and
poured herself water , and drank it slowly, a swallow at a time.
Wh en she felt better she went to the door and explored its
hinges , lock , and surface. She felt and peered arollnd the brick
walls , the poured Concrete ßoor, seeking she knew not wh~t，
something to escape with , something ... She should do
exercises. She forced herself to do some , bllt the qlleasiness
retllrned , and a lethargy with it. She went back to the mattress
and sat down. Mter a while she fOllnd she was crying. Mter a
while she fOllnd she had been asleep. She needed to piss. She
sqllatted over the hole and listened to her urine fall into it.

Forgiveness Day

83

There was nothing to clean herself with. She came back to the
bed and sat down on 祉， stretching Ollt her legs , holding her
ankles in her hands. It was lltterly silent.
She tllrned to look at the man; he was watching he r. It made
her star t. He looked away at once. He still lay halιpropped IIp
against the wall , uncomfortably, bllt relaxed.
‘Are yOll thirsty?' she asked.
‘Thank you ,' he said. Here where nothing was familiar and
time was broken off from the past, his soft, light voice was
welcome in its familiarity. She poured him a cllpflll and gave
it to him. He managed it much more steadily, sitting up to
drink. 'Thank you ,' he whispered again , giving her back the cup.
‘ How's yoür head?'
He put up his hand to the swelling, winced , and sat bac k.
‘One of them had a stick,' she said , seeing it in a flash in the
jumble of her memories - 'a priest' s staff. You jumped the
other one.'
'They took my glln ,' he said. ‘Festival.' He kept his eyes closed.
‘1 got tangled in those damn clothes. 1 couldn't help yOll at
all. Listen. Was there a noise , an explosion?'
'Yes. Diversion , maybe.'
‘Wh o do you think these boys are?'
‘Revolutionaries. Or . . .'
可Oll said yOll thought the Gatayan government was in on it.'
‘1 don't know ,' he murmured
‘You were right, 1 was wrong , I' m sorry ,' she said with a sense
of virhle at remembering to make amends.
He moved his hand very sligh t1 y in an it-doesn't-matter
geshue.
‘Are yOll still seeing double?'
He did not answer; he was phasing out again.
She was standing, trying to remember Selish breathing
exercises , when the door crashed and clanged , and the same
three men were there , two with gllns , all young , black-skinned ,
short-haired , very nervous. The lead one stooped to set a tray

84

Four 吼lays

to Forgíveness

down on the 800r, and without the least premeditation Solly
stepped on his hand and brought her weight down on it. 'you
wait!' she said. She was staring straight into the faces and gun
muzzles of the other two. 'Just wait a moment, listen! He has a
head injury, we need a doctor, we need more water, 1 can't
even clean his wound , there's no toilet paper, who the hell are
you people anyway?'
The one she had stomped was shouting, 'Get off! Lady to
get off my hand!' but the others heard her. She lifted her foot
and got out of his way as he came up fa鈍， backing into his
buddies with the guns. 'AlI right, Lady, we are sorry to have
trouble ,' he said, tears in his eyes, cradling his hand. 'We are
Patriots. You send messish to this Pretender, like our messish.
Nobody is to hurt. Al I right?' He kept backing up , and one of
the gunmen swung the door to. Crash, rattle.
She drew a deep breath and tllrned. Teyeo was watching
he r. 'That was dangerous ,' he said , smiling very slightly.
'1 know it was ,' she said, breathing hard. 'It was stupid. 1
can't get hold of myself. 1 feellike pieces of me. But they shove
stuff in and run , damn it! We have to have some water!' She
was in tears , the way she always was for a moment after violence
or a qllarrel. 'Let's see , what have they brought this time.' She
lifted the 甘ay IIp onto the mattress; like the other, in a
ridiculous semblance of service in a hotel or a house with
slaves , it was covered with a cloth. 'All the comforts,' she
murmured. Under the cloth was a heap of sweet pastri白， a
little plastic hand minor, a comb, a tiny pot of something that
smelled like decayed 80wers, and a box of what she identified
after a while as Gatayan tampons.
‘It's things for the lady,' she said , 'God damn them , the
stupid Goddamn pricks! A mirror!' She 8ung the thing across
the room. ‘Of course 1 can't last a day without looking in the
mirror! God damn them!' She 811ng everything else bllt the
pastries after the mirror, knowing as she did so that she would
pick up the tampons and keep them under the mattress and ,

Forgiveness Day

85

oh , God forbid , use them if she had to , if they had to stay here ,
how long would it be? ten days or more - 'Oh , God ,' she said
again. She got up and picked everything up , put the mirror
and the li投le pot , the empty water jug and the fruit skins from
the last meal , onto one of the trays and set it beside the doo r.
‘Garbage ,' she said in Voe Dean. Her outburst, she realised ,
had been in another language; Alterran , probably. ‘Have you
any idea ,' she said, sitting down on the mattress again,‘how
hard you people make it to be a woman? You could turn a
woman against being one!'
'1 think they meant well ,' Teyeo said. She realised that there
was not the faintest shade of mockery , even of amusement in
his voice. If he was enjoying her shame , he was ashamed to
show her that he was. '1 think they're amateurs ,' he said.
Mter a while she said,‘That could be bad.'
‘It might.' He had sat up and was gingerly feeling the knot
on his head. His coarse , heavy hair was blood-caked all around
it.‘ Kidnapping ,' he said. ‘ Ransom demands. Not assassins.
Th ey didn't have guns. Couldn't have got in with guns. 1 had
to give up mine.'
'You mean these aren't the ones you were warned about?'
‘1 don't know.' His explorations caused him a shiver of pain ,
and he desisted. ‘Are we very short of water?'
She brought him another cupful. 'Too short for washing. A
stupid Goddamn mirror when what we need is water!'
He thanked her and drank and sat back , nursing the last
swallows in the cup. ‘They didn't plan to take me ,' he said.
She thought about it and nodded. 'Mraid you' d identify them?'
'If they had a place for me , they wouldn't put me in with a
lady.' He spoke without irony. 'They had this ready for you. It
must be somewhere in the ci悴，
She nodded. 'The car ride was half an hom or less. My head
was in a bag, though.'
'They've sent a message to the Palace. They got no reply , or
an unsatisfactory one. They want a message from you.'

86

Four Ways to Forgíveness

'To convince the government they really have me? Wh y do
they need convincing?'
They were both silent.
Tm sorry,' he said ,‘1 can't think.' He lay back. Feeling tired ,
low, edgy after her adrenaline rush , she lay down alongside
him. She had rolled up the Goddess's skirt to make a pillow;
he had none. Th e blanket lay across their legs.
'Pillow,' she said. ‘More blankets. Soap. Wh at else?'
‘ Key,' he murmured.
They lay side by side in the silence and the faint unvarying
ligh t.
Next morning about eight , according to Solly's watch , the
Patriots came into the room , four of them. Two stood on guard
at the door with their guns ready; the other two stood
uncomfortably in what ßoor space was left, looking down at
their captives , both of whom sat cross-Iegged on the mattress.
The new spokesman spoke better Voe Dean than the others
He said they were very sorry to cause the lady discomfort and
would do what they could to make it comfortable for her , and
she m l1 st be patient and write a message by hand to the
Pretender King, explaining that she wO l1ld be set free
l1 nharmed as soon as the King commanded the CO l1 ncil to
rescind their treaty with Voe Deo.
‘He won't,' she said. 'They won't let him.'
'Please do not disc l1 ss ,' the man said with frantic harshness.
'This is writing materials. This is the message.' He set the
papers and a s甘10 down on the mattress , nervo l1sly, as if afraid
to get close to he r.
She was aware of how Teyeo effaced himself, sitting without
a motion , his head lowered , his eyes lowered; the men ignored
him.
'If 1 write this for you , 1 want water, a lot of water , and soap
and blankets and toilet paper and pillows and a dodor , and 1

Forgíveness Day

87

want somebody to come when 1 knock on that door , and 1 want
some decent clothes. Warm clothes. Men's clothes.'
‘No doctor!' the man said. 明1rite it! Please! Now!' He was
jumpy , twitchy , she dared push him no furthe r. She read their
statement, copied it out in her large , childish scrawl - she
seldom handwrote anything - and handed both to the spokesman. He glanced over it and without a word hurried the other
men ou t. Clash went the doo r.
‘Should 1 have refusedγ
‘1 don't think so ,' Teyeo said. He stood up and stretched , but
sat down again looking dizzy. ‘You bargain well ,' he said.
'We'll see what we ge t. Oh , God. Wh at is going 0肘，
'Maybe ,' he said slowly,‘ Gatay is unwilling to yield to these
demands. Bl1 t when Voe Deo - and your Ekumen - get word
of 祉， they'll pl1 t pressure on Gatay.'
‘1 wish they' d get moving. 1 sl1 ppose Gatay is horribly
embarrassed , saving face by trying to conceal the whole thing
- is that likely? How long can they keep it l1 p? Wh at about
your people? Won't they be h l1 nting for yO l1?'
'No doubt ,' he said , in his polite way.
It was curio l1 s how his stiff manner , his manners , which had
always sh l1 nted her aside , Cl1 t her out , here had quite another
effect: his restraint and formality reassured her that she was still
part of the world outside this room , from which they came and
to which they w0111d rehun , a world where people lived long
lives.
What did long life matler? she asked herself, and didn't
know. It was nothing she had ever thought abo l1 t before. But
these yO l1 ng Patriots lived in a world of short lives. Demands ,
violence , immediacy, and death , for what? for a bigotry, a
hatred , a rush of powe r.
、九1henever they leave ,' she said in a low voice ,‘1 get really
frightened.'
Teyeo cleared his throat and said , 'So do 1.'

*

88

FourWays 的 Forgiveness

Exercises.
'Take hold - no , take hold, I' m not made of glass! - Now 一'
‘Ha!' he said , with his flashing grin of excitement, as she
showed him the break, and he in turn repeated it, breaking
from her.
'All right, now you'd be waiting - here' - thump - 'see?'
‘Ai!'
'l' m sorry - I' m sorry, Teyeo - 1 didn't think abollt your head
- Are you all right? I' m really sorry-'
‘Oh, Kamye: he said, sitting up and holding his black,
narrow head between his hands. He drew several deep breaths.
She knelt penitent and anxious.
'That's: he said , and breathed some more , 'that's not, not
fair play.'
‘ No of course it's not, it' s aiji - all's fair in love and war, they
say that on Terra - Really, I' m sorry, I' m terribly sorry, that was
so Shlpid of me.!'
He laughed , a kind of broken and desperate laugh , shook his
head , shook it again. 'Show me: he said. '1 don't know what
you did.'
Exercises.
'Wh at do you do with your mind?'
‘Nothing.'
‘YO l1 just let it wander?'
‘No. Am 1 and my mind different beings?'
'So . . . you don't focus on something? You just wander with
it?'
'No.'
'So you don't let it wander.'
‘Who?' he said, rather testily.
A pause.
‘Do you think about 一，
'No,' he said. 'Be still.'
A very long pause , maybe a qllarter hour.

Forgiveness Day

89

'Teyeo , 1 can' t. 1 itch. My mind itches. How long have you
been doing this?'
A pause , a reluctant answer: 'Since 1 was two.'
He broke his utterly relaxed motionless pose , bent his head
to stretch his neck and shoulder muscles. She watched him.
‘1 keep thinking about long life , about living long: she said.
'1 don't mean just being alive a long time , hell , I've been alive
about eleven h l1 ndred years , what does that mean , nothing. 1
mean ... Something about thinking of life as long makes a
difference. Like having kids does. Even thinking åbout having
kids. It's like it changes some balance. It's funny 1 keep thinking
abo l1t that now, when my chances for a long life have kind of
taken a steep fall . . .'
He said nothing. He was able to say nothing in a way that
allowed her to go on talking. He was one of the least talkative
men she had ever known. Most men were so wordy. She was
fairly wordy herself. He was quie t. She wished she knew how
to be quie t.
‘It's just practice , isn't it?' she asked. ‘Just sitting there.'
He nodded.
'Years and years and years of practice ... Oh , God.
Maybe.. .'
‘No , no: he said, taking her thought immediately.
‘Bl1t why dori't they do something? What are they waiting
for? It's been nine days!'
From the beginning, by unplanned , l1 nspoken agreement, the
room had been divided in two: the line ran down the middle
of the mattress and across to the facing wall. The door was on
her side , the left; the shit-hole was on his side , the righ t. Any
invasion of the other's space was requested by some almost
invisible C l1 e and permitted the same way. When one of them
used the shit-hole the other unobtrusively faced away. When
they had eno l1gh water to take cat-baths, which was seldom ,
the same arrangement held. The line down the middle of the

90

FourWays 的 Forgiveness

mattress was absolute. Th eir voices crossed 祉， and the sounds
and smeIIs of their bodies. Sometimes she fe It his warmth;
Werelian body temperahue was somewhat higher than hers ,
and in the dank , stilI air she felt that faint radiance as he slept.
But they never crossed the line , not by a finger , not in the
deepest sleep.
SoIIy thought about this , finding it, in some moments , quite
funny. At other moments it seemed stupid and perverse.
Couldn't they both use some human comfort? The only time
she had touched him was the first day , when she had helped
him get onto the mattress , and then when they had enough
water she had cleaned his scalp wound and little by little
washed the clotted , stinking blood out of his hair, using the
comb , which had after aII been a good thing to have , and
pieces of the Goddess's skirt, an invaluable source of washcloths
and bandages. Then once his head healed , they practiced aiji
daily; but aiji had an impersonal , rihlal purity to its clasps and
grips that was a long way from creature comfort. The rest of
the time his bodily presence was clearly, invariably uninvasive
and untouchable.
He was only maintaining , under incredibly difficult circumstances, the rigid restraint he had always shown. Not just he ,
but Rewe , too; aII of them , aII of them but Batikam; and yet
was Batikam's instant yielding to her whim and desire the true
contact she had thought it? She thought of the fear in his eyes ,
that last nigh t. Not restraint, but constraint.
It was the mentality of a slave society: slaves and masters
caught in the same trap of radical distrust and self-protection.
'Teyeo,' she said ,‘1 don't understand slavery. Let me say
what 1 mean,' though he had shown no sign of interruption or
protest, merely civil attention. ‘1 mean , 1 do understand how a
social instihJtion comes about and how an individual is simply
part of it 一I'm not saying why don't you agree with me in
seeing it as wicked and unprofitable , I'm not asking you to
defend it or renounce it. I'm trying to understand what it feels

Forgíveness Day

91

like to believe that two-thirds of the human beings in your
world are aChlally , rightfully your property. Five-sixths , in fact ,
incl l1 ding women of your caste.'
Mter a while he sa肘， 'My family owns about twenty-five
assets.'
‘ Don't ql1 ibble.'
He accepted the reproo f.
'It seems to me that you Cl1 t off h l1 man contact. You don't
tO l1 ch slaves and slaves don't tO l1 ch you , in the way human
beings ought to touch , in mutuality. You have to keep yourselves separate , always working to maintain that boundary.
Because it isn't a nahual boundary 一 it's totally artificial , manmade. 1 can'Uell owners and assets apart physically. Can yot日，
'Mostly.'
‘By c111hlral , behavioral clues - right?'
After thinking a while , he nodded.
'y011 are the same species , race , people , exactly the same in
every way, with a slight selection towards colo r. If you brought
up an asset child as an owner it w0111d be an owner in every
respect, and vice versa. So you spend your lives keeping up this
tremendous division that doesn't exist. Wh at 1 don't understand
is how you can fail to see how appallingly wasteful it is. 1 don't
mean economical1y!'
‘In the war: he said , and then there was a very long pause;
though Sol1y had a lot more to say, she waited , curious. ‘1 was
on Yeowe: he said ,‘you know, in the civil war.'
Tha t's where yO l1 got a l1 those scars and dents , she tho l1 ght;
for however scrup1110usly she averted her eyes , it was impossible
not to be familiar with his spare, onyx body by now , and she
knew that in aiji he had to favor his left arm , which had a
considerable chunk out of it jl1st above the bicep.
'The slaves of the Colonies revolted , yO l1 know, some of
them at fir哎， then al1 of them. Nearly all. So we Army men
there were all owners. We couldn't send asset soldiers, they
might defect. We were all veots and volunteers. Owners

92

Four Ways to Forgiveness

fighting assets. 1 was fighting my equals. 1 learned that pretty
soon. Later on 1 learned 1 was fighting my superiors. They
defeated us.'
'But that 一， SoIIy said , and stopped; she did not know what
to say.
'Th ey defeated us from beginning to end ,' he said. 'Partly
because my government didn't understand that they could.
That they fought better and harder and more inteIl igently and
more bravely than we did.'
‘Because they were fighting for their freedom!'
‘Maybe so,' he said in his polite way.
'So.. .'
‘1 wanted to teII you that 1 respect the people 1 fought.'
'1 know so little about war, about fighting ,' she said, with a
mixhue of contrition and irritation. 'Nothing, rea Ily. 1 was on
Kheakh , but that wasn't war , it was racial suicide, mass
slaughter of a biosphere. 1 guess there's a difference . . . That
was when the Ekumen finaIIy decided on the Arms Convention , you know. Because of Orint and then Kheakh destroying
themselves. The Terrans had been pushing for the Convention
for ages. Having nearly committed suicide themselves a while
back. l' m halιTerran. My ancestors rushed around their planet
slaughtering each othe r. For m ilI ennia. They were masters and
slaves , too , some of them , a lot of them . . . But 1 don't know if
the Arms Convention was a good idea. If it's right. Wh o are we
to teII anybody what to do and not to do? The idea of the
Ekumen was to offer a way. To open it. Not to bar it to
anybody.'
He listened intently, but said nothing until after some while.
'We learn to . .. close ranks. Al ways. You're right, 1 think , it
wastes . . . energy, the spirit. You are open.'
His words cost him so much , she thought , not like hers that
just came dancing out of the air and went back into it. He
spoke froin his marrow. It made what he said a solemn
compliment, which she accepted gratefuIly, for as the days

Forgiveness Day

93

went on she realised occasionally how much confidence she
had lost and kept losing: self二confidence ， confidence that they
would be ransomed , rescued , that they would get out of this
room , that they would get out of it alive.
‘Was the war very brutal?'
‘Yes ,' he said. '1 can't . . . I've never been able to -胎 see it 一
Only something comes like a flash 一， He held his hands up as
if to shield his eyes. Then he glanced at her , wary. His
apparently cast-iron sel五respect was , she knew now , vulnerable
in many places.
'Things from Kheakh that 1 didn't even know 1 saw, they
come that way ,' she said. ‘At night.' And after a while,‘How
long were yoù there?'
‘A little over seven years.'
She winced. 'Were you lucky?'
It was a queer question , not coming out the way she meant,
but he took it at value. 'Yes ,' he said. 'Always. The men 1 went
there with were killed. Most of them in the first few years. We
lost three hundred thousand men on Yeowe. They never talk
about it. Twφthirds of the veot men in Voe Deo were killed. If
it was lucky to live , 1 was lucky.' He looked down at his clasped
hands , locked into himself.
After a while she said softly,‘1 hope you still are.'
He said nothing.

‘How long has it been?' he asked , and she said , clearing her
出ro泣，

after an automatic glance at her watch,‘ Sixty hours.'
Their captors had not come yesterday at what had become a
regular time , about eight in the morning. Nor had they come
this morning.
With nothing left to eat and now no water left , they had
grown increasingly silent and iner t. It was hours since either
had said anything. He had put off asking the time as long as he
could prevent himsel f.

94

Four Ways to Forgíveness

'This is horrible ,' she said , 'this is so horrible. 1 keep
thinking. . .'
‘They won't abandon you ,' he said. 'They feel a
responsibility.'
'Because I' m a woman?'
'Partly.'
‘Shit.'
He remembered that in the other life her coarseness had
offended him.
'Th ey've been taken , sho t. Nobody bothered to find out
where they were keeping us ,' she said.
Having thought the same thing several hundred times , he
had nothing to say.
'It's just such a horrible place to die ,' she said. ‘It's sordid. 1
stink. I've stunk for twenty days. Now 1 have diarrhea because
I' m scared. But 1 can't shit anything. I'm thirsty and 1 can't
drink.'
‘Solly,' he said sharply. It was the first time he had spoken
her name. 'Be still. Hold fa鈍，
She stared at him.
'Hold fast to what?'
He did not answer at once and she said, 'You won't let me
touch you!'
'Not to me 一，
'Th en to what? There isn't anything!' He thought she was
going to cry, but she stood up , took the empty 甘呵， and beat it
against the door till it smashed into fragments of wicker and
dus t. 'Come! God damn you! Come , you bastards!' she
shouted. 'Let us out of here!'
After 出at she sat down again on the mattress. 'Well,' she
said.
'Listen,' he said.
They had heard it before: no city sounds came down to this
cellar, wherever it was , but this was something bigger, explosions, they both though t.

Forgíveness Day

95

The door ra位led.
They were both afoot when it opened: not with the usual
clash and clang , but slowly. A man waited outside; two men
came in. One , armed , they had never seen; the other, the
tough-faced young man they called the spokesman, looked as
if he had been running or fighting , dusty , worn-out , a little
dazed. He closed the doo r. He had some papers in his hand.
The four of them stared at one another in silence for a minute.
'Water,' Solly said. 'You bastards!'
'Lady ,' the spokesman said , Tm sorry.' He was not listening
to he r. His eyes were not on he r. He was looking at Teyeo , for
the first time. 'There is a lot of fighting ,' he said.
'Wh o's fighting?' Teyeo asked , hearing himself drop into the
even tone of authority , and the young man respond to it as
automatically: 'Voe Deo. They sent troops. After the funeral ,
they said they would send troops unless we surrendered. They
came yesterday. They go through the city killing. They know
all the Old Believer centers. Some of ours.' He had a bewildered , accusing note in his voice
‘明1hat funeral?' Solly said.
Wh en he did not answer , Teyeo repeated it: 'Wh at funeral?'
'The lady's funeral , yours. Here - 1 brought net prints - A
state funera l. They said you died in the explosion.'
‘明1hat Goddamned explosio肘， Solly said in her hoarse ,
parched voice , and this time he answered her: 'At the Festival
The Old Believers. The fire , Tual's fire , there were explosives
in it. Only it went off too soon. We knew their plan. We
rescued you from that, Lady ,' he sa 肘， suddenly huning to her
with that same accusatory tone.
‘Rescued me , you asshole!' she shouted , and Teyeo's dry lips
split in a startled laugh , which he repressed at once.
'Give me those ,' he said , and the young man handed him
the papers.
‘Get us water!' Solly said.
‘Stay here , please. We need to talk ,' Teyeo said , instinctively

96

Four Ways to Forgiveness

holding on to his ascendancy. He sat down on the mattress
with the net prints. Within a few minutes he and Solly had
scanned the reports of the shocking disruption of the Festival
of Forgiveness , the lamentable death of the Envoy of the
Ekumen in a terrorist act executed by the cu 1t of Old Believers ,
the brief mention of the death of a Voe Dean Embassy guard
in the explosion , which had killed over seventy priests and
onlookers , the long descriptions of the state funeral , reports of
unrest, terrorism , reprisals , then reports of the Palace gratefully
accepting offers of assistance from Voe Deo in cleaning out
the cancer of terrorism .
‘So ,' he said finally. 可ou never heard from the Palace. Wh y
did you keep us alive?'
Solly looked as if she thought the question lacked tact, but
the spokesman answered with equal bluntness ,‘We thought
your country would ransom you.'
'They will ,' Teyeo said. 'Only you have to keep your
government from knowing we're alive. If you 一，
‘Wait,' Solly said, touching his hand. ‘ Hold on. 1 want to
think about this shlff. You' d better not leave the Ekumen out
of the discussion. But getting in touch with them is the tricky
bit.'
‘If there are Voe Dean troops here , all 1 need is to get a
message to anyone in my command , or the Embassy Guards.'
Her hand was still on his , with a warning pressure. She
shook the other one at the spokesman, finger outstretched:
‘You kidnapped an Envoy of the Ekumen , you asshole! Now
you have to do the thinking you didn't do ahead of time. And 1
do too , because 1 don't want to get blown away by your
Goddamned little government for huning up alive and embarrassing them. Wh ere are you hiding , anyhow? Is there any
chance of us getting out of this room , at least?'
The man , with that edgy , frantic look , shook his head. 'We
are all down here now ,' he said. ‘Most of the time. You stay
here safe.'

Forgiveness Day

97

‘Yes , you'd better keep your passports safe!' Solly said. 'Bring
us some water , damn it! Let us talk a while. Come back in an
hour.'
Th e young man leaned towards her suddenly , his face
contorted. 'What the hell kind of lady you are ,' he said. 'You
foreign filthy stinking cun t.'
Teyeo was on his feet , bllt her grip on his hand had
tightened: after a moment of silence , the spokesman and the
other man hlrned to the door , rattled the lock , and were let
ou t.
‘Ouf,' she said , looking dazed
'Don't,' he said ，‘don't 一， He did not know how to say it.
‘They don't understand ,' he said. ‘It' s better ifI talk.'
‘Of course. Women don't give orders. Women don't talk.
Shitheads! 1 thought you said they felt so responsible for
me!'
'They do ,' he said. 'But they're young men. Fanatics. Very
frightened.' And you talk to them as if they were assets , he
thought, but did not say.
'Well so am 1 frightened!' she said , with a little spurt of tears.
She wiped her eyes and sat down again among the papers
‘God ,' she said. ‘We've been dead for twenty days. Buried for
fifteen. Who do you think they burie缸，
Her grip was powerful; his wrist and hand hur t. He massaged
the place gently , watching he r.
‘Thank you ,' he said. '1 would have hit him.'
‘Oh , 1 know. Goddamn chivalry. And the one with the gun
would have blown your head off. Listen , Teyeo. Are you sure
all you have to do is get word to somebody in the Army or the
Guard?'
'Yes , of course.'
'You're sure your country isn't playing the same game as
Gata戶，

He stared at he r. As he understood her , slowly the anger he had
stifled and denied , all these interminable days of imprisonment

98

Four Ways to Forgiveness

with her, rose in him , a fiery Aood of resentment, hatred , and
contemp t.
He was unable to speak, afraid he would speak to her as the
yOllng Patriot had done.
He went arollnd to his side of the room and sat on his side
of the mattress , somewhat tl1 rned from he r. He sat cross-legged,
one hand lying lightly in the othe r.
She said some other things. He did not listen or reply.
After a while she said , 'We're sl1 pposed to be talking, Teyeo.
We've only got an hom. 1 think those kids might do what we
tell them , if we tell them something pla l1 sible - something
tha t' ll work.'
He would not answe r. He bit his lip and held still.
'Teyeo , what did 1 say? 1 said something wrong. 1 don't know
what it was. I' m sorry.'
'They w0111d 一， He struggled to control his lips and voice.
'They would not betray l1 S.'
Wh o? The Patriots?'
He did not answe r.
'Voe Deo , you mean? Wouldn't betray us?'
In the pa l1 se that followed her gentle , incred111011s question ,
he knew that she was right; that it was all coll l1sion among the
powers of the world; 出at his loyalty to his cOl1 ntry and service
was wasted , as futile as the rest of his life. She went on talking,
palliating, saying he might very well be righ t. He p l1t his head
into his hands , longing for tears , dry as stone.
She crossed the line. He felt her hand on his shoulder.
'Teyeo , 1 am very sorry ,' she said. ‘1 didn't mean to insult
you! 1 honor you. You've been all my hope and help.'
'It doesn't matter ,' he said. 'If 1 - If we had some water.'
She leapt IIp and battered on the door with her fists and a
sandal.
‘Bastards, bastards ,' she shollted.
Teyeo got up and walked , three steps and turn , three steps
and turn , and halted on his side of the room. 'If you're right,'

Forgiveness Day

99

he said , speaking slowly and formally ,‘we and our captors are
in danger not only from Gatay but from my own people, who
may ... who have been furthering these anti-Government
factions, in order to make an excuse to bring troops here .. .
to pacify Gatay. Th at's why they know where 怕自 ncl the
factionalists. We are . . . we're lucky our group were . . . were
genume.
She watched him with a tenderness that he found irrelevan t.
'Wh at we don't know ,' he said ,‘ is what side the Ekumen
will take. That is . . . There really is only one side.'
'No, there's ours , too. The underdogs. If the Embassy sees
Voe Deo pulling a takeover of Gat呵， they won't interfere , but
they won't approve. Especially if it involves as much repression
as it seems to.'
。Th e violence is only against the anti-Ekumen factions.'
'Th ey still won't approve. And if they find out I'm alive ,
甘ley're going to be quite pissed at the people who claimed 1
went up in a bonfire. Our problem is how to get word to them.
1 was the only person representing the Ekumen in Gatay.
Who'd be a safe channel?'
‘'Any of my men. But . . .'
'Th ey'll have been sent back; why keep Embassy Guards
here when the Envoy's dead and buried? 1 suppose we could
try. As k the boys to 旬， that is.' Presently she said wistfully,‘I
don't suppose they'd just let us go - in disguise? It would be
the safest for them.'
'There is an ocean,' Teyeo said.
She beat her head. ‘Oh, why don't 血ey bring some water
. . .' Her voice was like paper sliding on paper. He was ashamed
of his anger, his grief, himsel f. He wanted to tell her that she
had been a help and hope to him too , that he honored her,
that she was brave beyond belief; but none of the words would
come. He felt empty; worn-ou t. He felt old. If only they would
bring water!
Water was given them at last; some food , not much and

100

FourWays 的 Forgiveness

not fresh. Clearly their captors were in hiding and under
duress. The spokesman - he gave them his war-name , Kergat ,
Gatayan for Liberty - told them that whole neighborhoods had
been cleared out, set afi間， that Voe Dean troops were in
control of most of the city including the Palace , and that
almost none of this was being reported in the net.可M1en this
is over Voe Deo will own my country ,' he said with disbelieving
fury.
'r、Jot for long,' Teyeo said.
'Who can defeat them?' the young man said.
‘Yeowe. The idea ofYeowe.'
Both Kergat and Solly stared at him.
'Revolution ,' he said. 'How long before Werel becomes New
Yeowe?'
'The assets?' Kergat said , as if Teyeo had suggested a revolt
of cattle or of flies. ‘They'll never organise.'
‘Look out when they do ,' Teyeo said mildly.
‘You don't have any assets in your group?' Solly asked Kergat,
amazed. He did not bother to answe r. He had classed her as an
asset, Teyeo saw. He understood why; he had done so himself,
in the other life , when such distinctions made sense.
'Your bondswoman , Rewe ,' he asked Solly - 'was she a
friend?'
‘Yes ,' Solly said , then , 'No. 1 wanted her to be.'
'The makil?'
After a pause she said ,‘1 think so.'
'ls he still here?'
She shook her head. ‘The troupe was going on with their
tour , a few days after the Festival.'
'Travel has been restricted since the Festival ,' Kergat said.
'Only government and troops.'
‘He's Voe Dean. If he's still here , they'll probably send him
and his troupe home. Try and contact him , Kergat.'
‘A makilγthe young man said , with that same disìaste and
incredulity. 'One of your Voe Dean homosexual clowns?'

Forgíveness Day

101

Teyeo shot a glance at Sol1y: Patience, patience.
'Bisexual actors ,' Solly said , disregarding him , but fortunately
Kergat was determined to disregard he r.
‘A clever man ,' Teyeo said ,
us. You and us. It could be worth it. If 1眩's still here. We must
make haste.'
‘Why would he help us? He is Voe Oean.'
'An asset , not a citizen ,' Teyeo said. 'And a member of
Hame , the asset undergrollnd , which works against the government of Voe Deo. The Ekumen admits the legitimacy of
Hame. He'll report to the Embassy that a Patriot gro l1 p has
rescued the Envoy and is holding her safe , in hiding, in
extreme dange r. The Ekumen , 1 think , will act promptly and
decisively. Correct, Envoy?'
Suddenly reinstated , Solly gave a short, dignified nod. ‘ Bl1 t
discreetly ,' she said. 'They'l1 avoid violence , if they can use
political coercion.'
The young man was trying to get it a11 into his mind and
work it through. Sympathetic to his weariness , distrust, and
confllsion , Teyeo sat quietly waiting. He noticed that Solly was
sitting equa11y qllietly, one hand lying in the othe r. She was
thin and dirty and her unwashed , greasy hair was in a lank
braid. She was brave , like a brave mare , a11 nerve. She would
break her heart before she qui t.
Kergat asked qllestions; Teyeo answered them , reasoning
and reassuring. Occasionally Sol1 y spoke , and Kergat was now
listening to her again , uneasily , not wanting to , not after what
he had called he r. At last he left, not saying what he intended
to do; but he had Batikam's name and an identifying message
from Teyeo to the Embassy: ‘ Halιpay veots learn to sing old
songs quickly.'
‘What on earth!' Sol1 y said when Kergat was gone.
‘Oid you know a man named Old Music , in the Embassy?'
‘Ah! Is he a friend of yours?'
'He has been kind.'

102

Four Ways to Forgíveness

‘He's been here on Werel from the start. A First Observer.
Ra ther a powerful man - Yes , and “ quickly," all right . . . My
mind really isn't working at all. 1 wish 1 could lie down beside
a little stream , in a meadow, you know, and drink. Al l day.
Every time 1 wanted to , just stretch my neck out and slup , slup ,
slup . .. Running water . .. In the sunshine ... Oh God , oh
God , sunshine. Teyeo, this is very difficul t. Th is is harder than
eve r. Thinking i:hat there maybe is really a way out of here.
Only not knowing. Trying not to hope and not to not hope.
Oh , 1 am so tired of sitting here!'
'Wh at time is it?'
‘ Half past twenty. Nigh t. Oark ou t. Oh God , darkness! Just
to be in the darkness . . . Is there any way we could cover up
that damned biolume? Partly? To pretend we had night, so we
could pretend we had day?'
'If you stood on my shoulders , you could reach it. But how
could we fasten a clothγ
They pondered, staring at the plaque.
'1 don't know. Oid you notice there's a little patch of it that
looks like it's dying? Maybe we don't have 切 worry about
making darkness. If we stay here long enough. Oh, God!'
‘Well ,' he said after a while , curiously selιconscious， 'I'Rl
tired.' He stood up, stretched , glanced for permission to enter
her territory, got a drink of water , rehuned to his territory, took
off his jacket and shoes , by which time her back was turned ,
took off his trousers , lay down , pulled up the blanket, and said
in his mind , 'Lord Kamye , let me hold fast to the one noble
thing.' But he did not sleep.
He heard her slight movements; she pis:;ed, poured a little
water, tdok off her sandals, lay down.
A long time passed.
'Teyeo.'
‘Yes.'
‘00 you think . . .出at it would be a mistake . . . under the
circumstances . . . to make love?'

Forgiveness Day

10 3

A pa l1 se.
‘Not l1 nder the circ l1 mstances ,' he said , almost inaudibly.
‘Bl1 t - in the other life-'
A pause.
'Short life verS l1 S long life ,' she murmured.
'Yes.'
A pa l1 se.
'No ,' he said, and tl1 rned to her ‘No , tha t' s wrong.' They
reached Ol1 t to each othe r. They clasped each other , cleaved
together , in blind haste , greed , need , crying out together the
name of God in their different langl1 ages and then like animals
in the wordless voice. They huddled together , spent , sticky,
sweaty , exha l1 sted , rev lVl ng, rejoined , reborn in the body's
tenderness , in the endless exploration , the ancient discovery ,
the long Aight to the new world.
He woke slowly , in ease and 111xl1 ry. They were entangled ,
his face was against her arm and breast; she was stroking his
hair , sometimes his neck and sho111de r. He lay for a long time
aware only of that lazy rhythm and the cool of her skin against
his face , l1 nder his hand , against his leg.
'Now 1 know ,' she said , her half whisper deep in her chest ,
near his ear,‘that 1 don't know yO l1. Now 1 need to know
you.' She bent forward to tO l1 ch his face with her lips and
chee k.
、九1hat do you want to know?'
'Everything. Tell me who Teyeo is. . .'
‘1 don't know ,' he said. ‘A man who holds yO l1 dear.'
'Oh , God ,' she said , hiding her face for a moment in the
rough , smelly blanket.
'Wh o is Go缸， he asked sleepily. They spoke Voe Dean , b l1 t
she l1sl1 ally swore in Terran or Alterran; in this case it had been
Al terran , Seyt , so he asked ,‘Who is Seyt?'
'Oh - T l1 al - Kamye - what have you. 1 just say it. It' s just
bad language. Do yO l1 believe in one of them? I' m sorry! 1 feel
like sl1 ch an oaf with yO l1, Teyeo. Blundering into your soul ,

104

Four Ways to Forgiveness

invading you - We are invaders , no matter how pacifist and
priggish we are - '
‘ Must 1 love the whole Ekumen?' he asked , beginning to
stroke her breasts , feeling her tremor of desire and his own.
‘Yes' , she sa肘 ， 'yes , yes.'

It was curious , Teyeo thought, how little sex changed anything.
Everything was the same , a little easier, less embarrassment
and inhibition; and there was a certain and lovely source of
pleasure for them , when they had enough water and food to
have enough vitality to make love. But the only thing that was
truly different was something he had no word fo r. Sex , comfort,
tenderness , love , trust , no word was the right word , the whole
word. It was utterly intimate , hidden in the muhlality of their
bodies , and it changed nothing in their circumstances , nothing
in the world , even the tiny wretched world of their imprisonment. They were still trapped. They were getting very tired and
were hungry most of the time. They were increasingly afraid of
their increasingly desperate captors.
‘1 will be a lady ,' Solly said. 'A good girl. Tell me how,
Teyeo.'
'1 don't want you to give in ,' he said , so fiercely , with tears in
his eyes , that she went to him and held him in her arms.
'Hold fast ,' he said.
'1 will,' she said. But when Kergat or the others came in she
was sedate and modest , letting the men talk , keeping her eyes
down. He could not bear to see her so , and knew she was right
to do so.
The doorlock ra tt1 ed , the door clashed , bringing him up out
of a wretched , thirsty sleep. It was night or very early morning.
He and Solly had been sleeping close entangled for the warmth
and comfort of it; and seeing Kerga t' s face now he was deeply
afraid. This was what he had feared , to show , to prove her
sexual vulnerability. She was still only halιawake ， clinging to
him.

Forgiveness Day

10

5

Another man had come in. Kergat said nothing. It took
Teyeo some time to recognise the second man as Batikam.
Wh en he did , his mind remained q l1 ite blank. He managed
to say the maki l' s name. Nothing else.
'Batikam?' Solly croaked. 'Oh , my God!'
'This is an interesting moment,' Batikam said in his warm
actor's voice. He was not transvestite , Teyeo saw , bl1 t wore
Gatayan men's clothing. '1 meant to rescue yO l1, not to
embarrass you , Envoy , Rega. Shall we get on with it?'
Teyeo had scrambled up and was pulling on his filthy
trousers. Solly had slept in the ragged pants their captors had
given her. They both had kept on their shirts for warmth.
‘Did you contact the Embassy, Batikamγshe was asking, her
voice shaking, as she pulled on her sandals.
‘Oh , yes. I've been there and come back , indeed. Sorry it
took so long. 1 don't think 1 quite realised your situation
here.'
‘Kergat has done his best for us ,' Teyeo said at once, stiffiy.
'1 can see tha t. At considerable risk. 1 think the risk from
now on is low. Th at is . . .' He looked straight at Teyeo. ‘Rega ,
how do you feel about pu位ing yourself in the hands of Ham計，
he said. ‘Any problems with that?'
'Don't, Batikam ,' Solly said. 'T rust him!'
Teyeo tied his shoe , straightened up , and said ，‘明'e are all in
the hands of the Lord Kamye.'
Batikam laughed , the beautiful fulllaugh they remembered.
'In the Lord's hands , then ,' he said , and led them out of the
room.
In the Arkamye it is said, 'To live simply is most complicated.'
Solly requested to stay on Werel , and after a recuperative
leave at the seashore was sent as Observer to South Voe Deo.
Teyeo went straight home , being informed that his father was
very ill. Mter his father's death1 he asked for indefinite leave
from the Embassy Guard , and stayed on the farm with his

106

Four Ways

的 Forgiveness

O1 other until her death two years late r. He and Solly , a
continent apart, O1 et only occasionally during those years.
When his O1 other died , Teyeo freed his fa01ily's assets byact
of irrevocable O1anu01ission , deeded over their farms to the01 ,
sold his now al O1 ost valueless property at auction , and went to
the capital. He knew Solly was te01porarily staying at the
Embassy. Old Music told hi01 where to find her. He found her
in a s01all office of the palatial building. She looked older, very
elegant. She looked at him with a stricken and yet wary face.
She did not come forward to greet or touch him. She said,
'Teyeo, I've been asked ωbe the first Ambassador of the
Ekumen to Yeowe.'
He stood still.
‘Just now - 1 just came fro01 talking on the ansible with

Hain 一，

She put her face in her hands. ‘Oh , my God!' she said.
He said , 'My congraullations, truly, Solly.'
She suddenly ran at hi01 , threw her ar01s around him , and
cried ,‘Oh, Teyeo , and your mother died , 1 never thought, 1'01
so so的， 1 never, 1 never do - 1 thought we could - Wh at are
you going to do? Are you going to stay there?'
‘1 sold it: he said. He was enduring rather than reuuning
her embrace. ‘1 thought 1 might reuun to the service.'
'you sold your fann? But 1 never saw it!'
‘1 never saw where you were born,' he said.
Th ere was a pause. She stood away fro01 him , and they
looked at each othe r.
'You would come?' she said.
'1 would: he said.
Several years after Yeowe entered the Ekumen, Mobile Solly
Agat Terwa was sent as an Eku01enical liaison to Terra; later
she went fro01 there to Hain , where she served with great
distinction as a Stabile. In all her travels and posts she was
accompanied by her husband , a Werelian ar01y officer, a very

Forgíveness Day

10

7

handsome man , as reserved as she was outgoing. People who
knew them knew their passionate pride and trust in each other.
Solly was perhaps the happier person , rewarded and fulfilled
in her work; but Teyeo had no regrets. He had lost his world ,
but he had held fast to the one noble thing.

A Man of the People
He sat beside his father by the great irrigation tank. Firecolored wings soared and dipped throllgh the twilight ai r.
Trembling circles enlarged , interlocked , faded on the still
surface of the water. 'What makes the water go that wa戶， he
asked, softly becallse it was mysteriolls , and his father answered
softly,‘It's where the araha tOllch it when they drink.' So he
llnderstood that in the center of each circle was a desire , a
thirs t. Then it was time to go home , and he ran before his
father , pretending he was an araha flying , back throllgh the
dllSk into the steep , bright-windowed town.
His name was Mattinyehedarheddyuragamurllskets Havzhiva. Th e word havzhíva means 'ringed pebble,' a small stone
with a qlla也 inclllsion nmning throtψit that shows as a
s甘ipe rOllnd it. Th e people of Stse are particlllar abollt stones
and names. Boys of the S峙， the Other Sky, and the Static
Interference lineages are traditionally given the names of stones
or desirable manly qllalities sllch as courage, patience, and
grace. The Yehedarhed family were traditionalists , strong on
family and lineage. ‘If yOll know who your people are , yOll
know who yOll are ,' said Havzhiva's father , Granite. A kind ,
qlliet man who took his paternal responsibility seriollsly, he
spoke often in sayings.
Granite was Havzhiva's mother's brother, of course; that is
what a father was. The man who had helped his mother
conceive Havzhiva lived on a farm; he stopped in sometimes

110

FourWays 的 Forgive l1 ess

to say hello when he was in town. Havzhiva's mother was the
Heir of the Sun. Sometimes Havzhiva envied his cousin Aloe ,
whose father was only six years older than she was and played
with her like a big brother. Sometimes he envied children
whose mothers were unimportan t. His mother was always
fasting or dancing or traveling, had no husband , and rarely
slept at home. It was exciting to be with her, but di伍cul t. He
had to be important when he was with her. lt was always a
relief to be home with nobody there but his father and his
undemanding grandmother and her sister the Winter Dancekeeper and her husband and whichever Other Sky relatives
from farms and other pueblos were visiting at the momen t.
There were only two Other Sky households in Stse , and the
Yehedarheds were more hospitable than the Doyefarads , so all
the relatives came and stayed with them. They would have
been hard put to afford it if the visitors hadn't brought all sorts
of farm stu缸~ and if Tovo hadn't been Heir of the Sun. She got
paid richly for teaching and for performing the rituals and
handling the protocol at other pueblos. She gave all she earned
to her family , who spent it all on their relatives and on
ceremonies , festivities , celebrations , and funerals.
'Wealth can't stop,' Granite said to Havzhiva. 'It has to keep
going. Like the blood circulating. You keep it, it gets stopped that's a heart attack. You die.'
'Will Hezhe-old-man die?' the boy asked. Old Hezhe never
spent anything on a ritual or a relative; and Havzhiva was an
observant child.
'Yes ,' his father answered. ‘His araha is already dead.'
Araha is enjoyment; honor; the particular quality of one's
gender , manhood or womanhood; generosity; the savor of good
food or wine.
It is also the name of the plumed , fire-colored , quick-ßying
mammal 出at Havzhiva used to see come to drink at the
irrigation ponds , tiny flames darting above the darkening water
in the evening.

A Man of the Peo戶le

111

Stse is an almost-island , separated from the mainland of the
great south continent by marshes and tidal bogs , where millions
of wading birds gather to mate and nes t. Ruins of an enormous
bridge are visible on the landward side , and another halιsunk
fragment of ruin is the basis of the town's boat pier and
breakwate r. Vast works of other ages encumber all Hain , and
are no more and no less venerable or interesting to the Hainish
than the rest of the landscape. A child standing on the pier to
watch his mother sail off to the mainland might wonder why
people had bothered to bllild a bridge when there were boats
and flyers to ride. They mllst have liked to walk , he though t.
l'd rather sail in a boa t. Or fly.
Bllt the silver flyers flew over Stse , not landing , going from
somewhere else to somewhere else , where historians lived.
Plenty of boats came in and out of Stse harbor, but the people
of his lineage did not sail them. They lived in the Pueblo of
Stse and did the things that their people and their lineage did.
They learned what people needed to learn , and lived their
knowledge.
'People have to learn to be human ,' his father said. ‘Look at
Shell's baby. It keeps saying
'Teach me巳" in the language of Stse , is 'aowa.'
'Sometimes the baby says “ ngaaaaa ,'" Havzhiva observed.
Granite nodded. 'She can't speak human words very well
yet,' he said.
Havzhiva hung around the baby that winter , teaching her to
say human words. She was one of his Etsahin relatives , his
second cousin once removed , visiting with her mother and her
father and his wife. The family watched Havzhiva with approval
as he patiently said ‘baba' and ‘gogo' to the fat , placid , staring
baby. Th ough he had no sister and thus could not be a father ,
if he went on studying education with .such seriousness , he
would probably have the honor of being the adopted father of
a baby whose mother had no brother.
He also studied at school and in the temple , studied dancing ,

112

FourWays 的 Forgiveness

and studied the local version of soccer. He was a serious
student. He was good at soccer but not as good as his best
friend , a Buried Cable girl named Iyan Iyan (a traditional
name for Buried Cable girls , a seabird name). Until they were
twelve , boys and girls were educated together and alike. Iyan
Iyan was the best soccer player on the children's team. They
always had to put her on the other side at halftime so that the
score would even out and they could go home for dinner
without anybody having lost or won badly. Part of her advantage
was that she had got her height very early, but most of it was
pure skil1.
'Are you going to work at the temple?' she asked Havzhiva as
they sat on the porch roof of her house watching the first day
of the Enactment of the Unusual Gods , which took place every
eleven years. No unusual things were happening yet, and the
amplifiers weren't working well , so the music in the plaza
sounded faint and full of static. Th e two children kicked their
heels and talked quietly. 'No , 1 think 1'11 learn weaving from
my father ,' the boy said.
‘Lucky you. Wh y do only stupid boys get to use looms?' It
was a rhetorical question , and Havzhiva paid it no attention.
Women were not weavers. Men did not make bricks. Other
Sky people did not operate boats but did repair electronic
devices. Buried Cable people did not castrate animals but did
maintain generators. There were things one could do and
things one could not do; one did those things for people and
people did those things for one. Coming up on puberty, Iyan
Iyan and Havzhiva were making a 自rst choice of their first
profession. Iyan Iyan had already chosen to apprentice in
house-building and repair, although 血e adult soccer team
would probably claim a good deal of her time.
A globular silver person wi出 spidery legs came down 出e
street in long bounds , emitting a shower of sparks each time it
landed. Six people in red with tall white masks ran after 祉，
shouting and throwing speckled beans at it. Havzhiva and Iyan

A Man of the Peo戶le

113

Iyan joined in the shouting and craned from the roof to see it
go bounding round the corner towards the plaza. They both
knew that this Unusual God was Chert, a young man of the
Sky lineage , a goalkeeper for the adult soccer team; they both
also knew that it was a manifestation of deity. A god called
Zarstsa or Ball-Lighting was using Chert to come into town for
the ceremony, and had just bounded down the street pursued
by shouts of fear and praise and showers of fertility. Amused
and entertained by the spectacle , they judged with some
acuteness the quality of the god's coshlme , the jumping, and
the fireworks , and were awed by the strangeness and power of
the event. They did not say anything for a long time after the
god had passed, but sat dreamily in the foggy sunlight on the
roof. They were children who lived among the daily gods. Now
they had seen one of the unusual gods. They were content.
Another one would come along, before long. Time is nothing
to the gods.
At fifteen , Havzhiva and Iyan Iyan became gods togethe r.
Stse people between twelve and fifteen were vigilan t1 y
watched; there would be a great deal of grief and deep , lasting
shame if a child of the house , the family , the lineage , the
people , should change being premahuely and without
ceremony. Virginity was a sacred stahls , not to be carelessly
abandoned; sexual activity was a sacred stahls , not to be
carelessly undertaken. It was assumed that a boy would mashubate and make some homosexual experiments, but not a
homosexual pairing; adolescent boys who paired 0旺~ and those
who incurred suspicion of trying to get alone with a girl , were
endlessly lechued and hectored and badgered by older men. A
grown man who made sexual advances to a virgin of either sex
would forfeit his professional stahls , his religious offices , and
his houseright.
Changing being took a while. Boys and girls had to be taught
how to recognise and control their fertility , which in Hainish

114

Four Ways to Forgíveness

physiology is a matter of personal decision. Conception does
not happen: it is performed. It cannot take place unless both
the woman and the man have chosen it. At thirteen , boys
began to be taught the technique of deliberately releasing
potent sperm. The teachings were full of warnings , threats , and
scoldings , though the boys were never aChJa lly punished. After
a year or two came a series of tests of achieved potency, a
threshold rihJa l, frightening , formal , extremely secret, exclusively male. To have passed the tests was , of course , a matter of
intense pride; yet Havzhiva , like most boys , came to his final
change-oιbeing rites very apprehensive , hiding fear under a
sullen stoicism.
The girls had been differently taugh t. The people of Stse
believed that a woman's cycle of fertility made it easy for her to
learn when and how to conceive , and so the teaching was easy
too. Girls' threshold rihlals were celebratory, involving praise
rather than shame , arousing anticipation rather than fea r.
Women had been telling them for years , with demonstrations ,
what a man wants , how to make him stand up tall , how to
show him what a woman wants. During this training, most girls
asked if they couldn't just go on practicing with each other ,
and got scolded and lechlred. No , they couldn' t. Once they
had changed stahlS they could do as they pleased , but everybody must go through ‘the twofold door' once.
The change-of-being rites were held whenever the people in
charge of them could get an equal number of fifteen-year-old
boys and girls from the pueblo and its farms. Often a boy or
girl had to be borrowed from one of the related pueblos to
even out the number or to pair the lineages correc t1 y. Magnificently masked and cOShlmed , silent, the participants danced
and were honored all day in the plaza and in the house
consecrated to the ceremony; in the evening they ate a rihlal
rneal in silence; then they were led off in pairs by masked and
silent rihJa lists. Many of them kept their masks on , hiding their
fear and modesty in that sacred anonymity.

A Man of the People

115

Because Other Sky people have sex only with Original and
Buried Cable people and they were the only ones of those
lineages in the group , Iyan Iyan and Havzhiva had known they
must be paired. They had recognised each other as soon as the
dancing began. Wh en they were left alone in the consecrated
room , they took off their masks at once. Their eyes me t. They
looked away.
They had been kept apart most of the time for the past
couple of years , and completely apart for the last months.
Havzhiva had begun to get his growth , and was nearly as tall as
she was now. Each saw a strange r. Decorous and serious , they
approached each other, each thinking,‘ Le t' s get it over with.'
So they touched , and that god entered them , becoming them;
the god for whom they were the doorway; the meaning for
which they were the word. It was an awkward god at fir鈍，
clumsy, but became an increasingly happy one.
Wh en they left the consecrated house the next day, they
both went to Iyan Iyan's house. ‘Havzhiva will live here ,' Iyan
Iyan said , as a woman has a right to say. Everybody in her
family made him welcome and none of them seemed surprised.
Wh en he went to get his clothes from his grandmother's
house , nobody there seemed surprised , everybody congratulated him , an old woman cousin from Etsahin made some
embarrassing jokes , and his father said ，可Ou are a man of this
house now; come back for dinner.'
So he slept with Iyan Iyan at her house , ate breakfast there ,
ate dinner at his house , kept his daily clothes at her house , kept
his dance clothes at his house , and went on with his education ,
which now had mos t1 y to do with rug-weaving on the power
broadlooms and with the nature of the cosmos. He and Iyan
Iyan both played on the adult soccer team.
He began to see more of his mother , because when he was
seventeen she asked him if he wanted to learn Sun-shlff with
her, the rites and protocols of trade , arranging fair exchange
with farmers of Stse and bargaining with other pueblos of the

116

Four Ways to Forgiveness

lineages and with foreigners. The rihlals were learned by rote ,
the protocols were learned by practice. Havzhiva went with his
mother to the market, to outlying farms , and across the bay to
the mainland pueblos. He had been getting restless with
weaving, which filled his mind with patterns that left no room
outside themselves. The travel was welcome , the work was
interesting, and he admired Tovo's authority, wit, and tac t.
Listening to her and a group of old merchants and Sun people
maneuvering around a deal was an education in itsel f. She did
not push him; he played a very minor role in these negotiations.
Training in complicated business such as Sun-shlff took years ,
and there were other , older people in training before him. But
she was satisfied with him. ‘You have a knack for persuading,'
she told him one afternoon as they were sailing home across
the golden water , watching the roofs of Stse solidify out of mist
and sunset ligh t.‘You could inherit the Sun , if you wanted to.'
00 1 want to? he though t. There was no response in him but
a sense of darkening or softening, which he could not interpre t.
He knew he liked the work. Its patterns were not closed. It took
him out of Stse , among strangers , and he liked tha t. It gave
him something to do which he didn't know how to do , and he
liked tha t.
'The woman who used to live with your father is coming for
a visit ,' Tovo said.
Havzhiva pondered. Granite had never married. The women
who had borne the children Granite sired both lived in Stse
and always had. He asked nothing, a polite silence being the
adl山 wayof 呵m命ing that one doesn't ur
叫
I
‘τThe
叮y were young
呂. No child came ,' his mother said. 'She
went away after tha t. She became a historian.'
‘Ah ,' Havzhiva said in pure , blank surprise.
He had never heard of anybody who became a historian. It
had never occurred to him 出at a person could become one ,
any more than a person could become a Stse. You were born
what yO l1 were. You were what you were born.

A Man o{ the

Peo戶le

117

The quality of his polite silence was desperately intense , and
Tovo certainly was not unaware of it. Part of her tact as a
teacher was knowing when a question needed an answer. She
said nothing.
As their sail slackened and the boat slid in toward the pier
built on the ancient bridge foundations , he asked , 'Is the
historian Buried Cable or Original?'
‘Buried Cable ,' his mother said. ‘Oh , how stiff 1 am! Boats
are such stiff creatures!' The woman who had sailed them
across , a ferrywoman of the Grass lineage , rolled her eyes , but
said nothing in defense of her sweet, supple little boa t.
‘A relative of yours is coming?' Havzhiva said to Iyan Iyan
that night
‘Oh , yes , she templed in.' Iyan Iyan meant a message had
been received in the information center of Stse and transmitted
to the recorder in her household. ‘She used to live in your
house , my mother said. Wh o did you see in Etsahin today?'
‘Just some Sun people. Your relative is a historian?'
'Crazy people,' Iyan Iyan said with indifference , and came
to sit naked on naked Havzhiva and massage his back.
The historian arrived , a little short thin woman of fifty or so
called Mezha. By the time Havzhiva met her she was wearing
Stse clothing and eating breakfast with everybody else. She had
bright eyes and was cheerful but not talkative. Nothing abollt
her showed that she had broken the social contract, done
things no woman does , ignored her lineage , become another
kind of being. For all he knew she was married to the father of
her children , and wove at a 100m, and castrated animals. Bllt
nobody shunned her , and after breakfast the old people of the
household took her off for a rehuning-traveler ceremony, just
as if she were still one of them.
He kept wondering about her , wondering what she had
done. He asked Iyan Iyan qllestions abollt her till Iyan Iyan
snapped at him ,‘1 don't know what she does , 1 don't know
what she thinks. Historians are crazy. As k her yourself!'

118

Four Ways to Forgiveness

When Havzhiva realised that he was afraid to do so , for no
reason , he understood that he was in the presence of a god
who was requiring something of him. He went up to one of
the sitting holes , rock cairns on the heights above the town.
Below him the black tile roofs and white walls of Stse nestled
under the bluffs , and the irrigation tanks shone silver among
fields and orchards. Beyond the tilled land stretched the long
sea marshes. He spent a day sitting in silence , looking out to
sea and into his souI. He came back down to his own house
and slept there. When he turned lI P for breakfast at Iyan Iyan's
house she looked at him and said nothing.
'1 was fasting,' he said.
She shrugged a little. ‘So eat,' she said , si吐ing down by him.
After breakfast she left for work. He did not, though he was
expected at the looms.
'Mother of All Children,' he said to the historian, giving her
the most respectful title a man of one lineage can give a
woman of another , 'there are things 1 do not know , which you
know.'
‘Wh at 1 know 1 will teach you with pleasure,' she said , as
ready with the formula as if she had lived here all her life. She
then smiled and forestalled his next oblique question. ‘明That
was given me 1 give,' she said , meaning there was no qllestion
of payment or obligation. 'Come on , let's go to the plaza.'
Everybody goes to the plaza in Stse to talk , and sits on the
steps or around the fountain or on hot days under the arcades ,
and watches other people come and go and sit and talk. It was
perhaps a li吐le more public than Havzhiva would have liked ,
but he was obedient to his god and his teache r.
They sat in a niche of the fountain's broad base and
conversed , greeting people every sentence or two with a nod or
a word.
可Thy did-' Havzhiva began , and stuck.
‘Why did I leave? Where did 1 go?' She cocked her head ,
bright-e yed as an araha , checking that those were the questions

A Man

of the People

119

he wanted answered. ‘Yes. Well , 1 was crazy in love with
Granite , but we had no child , and he wanted a child . . . You
look like he did then. 1 like to look at you ... 50 , 1 was
unhappy. Nothing here was any goodto me. And 1 knew how
to do everything here. Or that's what 1 thought.'
Havzhiva nodded once.
‘1 worked at the temple. l'd read messages that came in or
came by and wonder what they were abou t. 1 thought, all that's
going on in the world! Why should 1 stay here my whole life?
Does my mind have to stay here? 50 1 began to talk with some
of them in other places in the temple: who are yOll , what do
you do , what is it like there ... Right away they put me in
touch with a grollp of historians who were born in the pueblos ,
who look out for people like me , to make sure they don't waste
time or offend a god.'
Th is language was completely familiar to Havzhiva, and he
nodded again , intent.
'1 asked them questions. They asked me questions. Historians
have to do a lot of tha t. 1 found out they have schools, and
asked if 1 could go to one. 50me of them came here and talked
切 me and my family and other people , finding out if there
would be trouble if 1 left. Stse is a conservative pueblo. There
hadn't been a historian from here for four hundred years.'
She smiled; she had a quick, catching smile, but the young
man listened with unchanging, intense seriousness. Her look
rested on his face tenderly.
'People here were llpset, but nobody was angry. So after they
talked about it, 1 left with those people. We flew to Kathhad.
Th ere's a school there. 1 was twenty-two. 1 began a new
education. 1 changed being. 1 learned to be a historian.'
‘ How?' he asked , after a long silence.
She drew a long breath. ‘By asking hard questions; she said.
'Like you'間 doing now . . . And by giving IIp all the knowledge
1 had - throwing it away.'
'How?' he asked again , frowning. 'wh戶，

120

FourWays 的 Forgiveness

'Like this. When 1 left, 1 knew 1 was a Buried Cable woman.
When 1 was 出ere ， 1 had to unknow that knowledge. There,
I'm not a Buried Cable woman. I'm a woman. 1 can have sex
with any person 1 choose. 1 can take up any profession 1 choose.
Lineage matters , here. It does not matter, there. It has meaning
here , and a use. It has no meaning and no use , anywhere else
in the universe.' She was as intense as he , now. 'There are two
kinds of knowledge , local and universal. Th ere are two kinds
of time , local and historical.'
‘Are there two kinds of gods?'
‘No,' she said. 'There are no gods there. The gods are here.'
She saw his face change.
She said after a while , 'There are souls , there. Many, many
souls, minds , minds full of knowledge and passion. Living and
dead. People who lived on this earth a hundred , a thousand , a
hundred thousand years ago. Minds and souls of people from
worlds a hundred light-years from this one , all of them with
their own knowledge , their own history. The world is sacred ,
Havzhiva. Th e cosmos is sacred. That's not a knowledge 1 ever
had to give up. Al l 1 learned , here and there , only increased it.
There's nothing that is not sacred.' She spoke slowly and
quietly, the way most people talked in the pueblo. 'You can
choose the local sacredness or the great one. In the end they're
the same. But not in the life one lives. “To know there is a
choice is to have to make the choice: change or stay: river or
rock." Th e Peoples are the rock. The historians are the river.'
After a while he said,‘Rocks are the river's bed.'
She laughed. Her gaze rested on him again , appraising and
affectionate. ‘So 1 came home ,' she said. ‘For a rest.'
'But you're not - you're no longer a woman of your lineage?'
'Yes; here. Still. Al ways.'
‘But you've changed being. You'llleave again.'
'Yes ,' she said decisively. 'One can be more than one kind of
being. 1 have work to do , there.'
He shook his head , slower, but equally decisive. "νhat good

A Man of the People

121

is work without the gods? lt makes no sense to me , Mother of
Al I Children. 1 don't have the mind to understand.'
She smiled at the double meaning. ‘1 think you'll understand
what you choose to understand , Man of my People ,' she said ,
addressing him formally to show that he was free to leave when
he wanted.
He hesitated , then took his leave. He went to work ，自lling
his mind and world with the great repeated patterns of the
broadloom rugs.
That night he made it up to Iyan Iyan so ardently that she
was left spent and a bit amazed. The god had come back to
them burning , consuming.
'1 want a child ,' Havzhiva said as they lay melded , sweated
together , arms and legs and breasts and breath all mingled in
the musky dark
‘Oh ,' Iyan Iyan sighed , not wanting to talk , decide , resis t.
‘Maybe . . . Later . . . Soon . . .'
'Now ,' he said , '冶
In1Ow. ，
No
丸" she said 叩
s oft
倒i:ly. 'Hush.' He was silen t. She slep t.
More than a year later , when 出ey were nineteen , Iyan Iyan
said to him before he put out the light, '1 want a baby.'
‘It's too soon.'
明'hy? My brother's nearly thirty. And his wife would like a
baby around. Mter it' s weaned I'll come sleep with you at your
house. You always said you' d like that.'
'It's too soon ,' he repeated. '1 don't want it.'
She turned to him , laying aside her coaxing, reasonable
tone. ‘What do you want, Havzhiv肘，
‘1 don't know.'
‘You're going away. You're going to leave the People. You're
going crazy. That woman , that damned witch!'
‘There are no witches ,' he said coldly. 'Tha t' s stupid tal k.
Superstition. '
They stared at each other, the dear friends , the lovers.

122

Four Ways to Forgíveness

'Then what's wrong with you? If you want to move back
home , say so. If you want another woman , go to he r. But you
could give me my child, first! when 1 ask you for it! Have you
lost your araha?' She gazed at him with tearful eyes , fierce ,
unyielding.
He put his face in his hands. 'Nothing is right ,' he said.
‘Nothing is righ t. Everything 1 do , 1 have to do because that's
how it's done , but it 一 it doesn't make sense - there are other
ways'There's one way to live rightly ,' Iyan Iyan said ,‘that 1 know
of. And this is where 1 live. There's one way to make a baby. If
you know another, you can do it with somebody else!' She
cried hard after this , convulsively, the fear and anger of months
breaking out at last, and he held her to calm and comfort he r.
When she could speak, she leaned her head against him and
said miserably , in a small , hoarse voice , 'To have when you go ,
Havzhiva.'
At that he wept for shame and pity, and whispered , 'Yes , yes.'
But that night they lay holding each other , trying to console
each other, till they fell asleep like children.

‘1 am ashamed ,' Granite said painfully.
'Did you make this happen?' his sister asked , dry.
'How do 1 know? Maybe 1 did. First Mezha , now my son.
Was 1 too stern with him?'
‘No , no.'
'Too lax , then. 1 didn't teach him wel l. Why is he crazy?'
'He isn't crazy, brothe r. Let me tell you what 1 think. As a
child he always asked why , why , the way children do. 1 would
answer: That's how it is , that's how it's done. He lI nderstood.
BlI t his mind has no peace. My mind is like that, if 1 don't
remind mysel f. Learning the Sun-stu缸~ he always asked , why
thus? why this way , not another way? 1 answered: Because in
what we do daily and in the way we do it, we enact the gods.
He said: Then the gods are only what we do. 1 said: In what we

A Man of the People

12 3

do rightly, the gods are: that is the truth. But he wasn't satisfied
by the truth. He isn't crazy, brother , but he is lame. He can't
wal k. He can't walk with us. So , if a man can't walk , what
should he do?'
'Sit still and sing: Granite said slowly.
'If he can't sit still? He can 日子，
'Fly?'
'They have wings for him , brother.'
‘1 am ashamed: Granite said , and hid his face in his hands.
Tovo went to the temple and sent a message to Mezha at
Kathhad: 'Your pupil wishes to 10m you.' There was some
malice in the words. Tovo blamed the historian for upsetting
her son's balance , offcentering him till , as she said , his soul
was lamed. And she was jealous of the woman who in a few
days had outdone the teachings of years. She knew she was
jealous and did not care. What did her jealousy or her brother's
humiliation matter? 叭1hat they had to do was grieve.
As the boat for Oaha sailed away , Havzhiva looked back and

saw Stse: a qui It of a thousand shades of green , the sea marshes ,
the pastur郎， fields , hedgerows , orchards; the town clambering
up the bluffs above , pale granite walls , white ShlCCO walls , black
tile roofs , wall above wall and roof above roo f. As it diminished
it looked like a seabird perched there , white and black, a bird
on its nes t. Above the town the heights of the island came in
view, grey-blue moors and high , wild hills fading into the
clouds , white skeins of marsh birds ßying.
At the port in Daha , though he was farther from Stse than
he had ever been and people had a strange accent, he could
understand them and read the signs. He had never seen signs
before, but their usefulness was eviden t. Using them , he found
his way to the waiting room for the Kathhad ßye r. People were
sleeping on the cots provided , in their own blankets. He found
an empty cot and lay on 祉， wrapped in the blanket Granite had

124

Four Ways to Forgíveness

woven for him years ago. Mter a short, strange night, people
came in with fruit and hot drinks. One of them gave Havzhiva
his ticke t. None of the passengers knew anyone else; they were
all strangers; they kept their eyes down. Announcements were
made , and they all went outside and went into the machine ,
the flye r.
Havzhiva made himself look at the world as it fell out from
under him. He whispered the Staying Chant soundless峙，
steadily. The stranger in the seat next to him joined in.
Wh en the world began to tilt and rush up towards him he
shut his eyes and tried to keep breathing.
One by one they filed out of the flyer onto a flat, black place
where it was raining. Mezha came to him thro l1 gh the rain ,
saying his name. ‘Havzhiva , Man of my People , welcome!
Come on. There's a place for you at the School.'
KATHHAD AND VE

By the third year at Kathhad Havzhiva knew a great many
things that distressed him. The old knowledge had been
di伍cult but not distressing. It had been all paradox and myth ,
and it had made sense. The new knowledge was all fact and
reason , and it made no sense.
For instance , he knew now that historians did not study
history. No human mind could encompass the history of Hain:
three million years of it. The events of the first two million
years , the Fore-Eras , like layers of metamorphic rock , were so
compressed , so distorted by the weight of the succeeding
millennia and their infinite events that one could reconstruct
only the most sweeping generalities from the tiny survlvmg
details. And if one did chance to find some mirac1110usly
preserved document from a thousand millennia ago , what
then? A king ruled in Az bahan; the Empire fell to the Infidels;
a fusion rocket has landed on Ve ... But there had been
uncountable kings , empires , inventions , billions of lives lived

A Man of the People

12

5

in millions of countries , monarchies , democracies , oliga i-chies ,
anarchies , ages of chaos and ages of order , pantheon upon
pantheon of gods , infinite wars and times of peace , incessant
discoveries and forgettings , innumerable horrors and triumphs ,
an endless repetition of unceasing novelty. What is the use
trying to describe the flowing of a river at any one moment,
and then at the next moment , and then at the next, and the
next, and the next? You wear out. You say: There is a great
river , and it flows through this land , and we have named it
History
To Havzhiva the knowledge that his life , any life was one
flicker of light for one moment on the surface of that river was
sometimes distressing , sometimes restfu l.
Wh at the historians mostly did was explore , in an easy and
unhurried fashion , the local reach and moment of the rive r.
Hain itself had been for several thous.and years in an unexciting
period marked by the coexistence of small , stable , self-c ontained
societies , currently called pueblos , with a high-technology , lowdensity network of cities and information centers , currently
called the temple. Many of the people of the temple , the
historians , spent their lives traveling to and gathering knowledge about the other inhabited planets of the nearby Orion
Arm , colonised by their ancestors a couple of million years ago
during the Fore-Eras. They acknowledged no motive in these
contacts and explorations other than curiosity and fellowfeeling. They were getting in touch with their long-lost relatives. They called that greater network of worlds by an alien
word , Ekumen , which meant ‘the household.'
By now Havzhiva knew that everything he had learned in
Stse , all the knowledge he had had , could be labeled: tyPícal
pueblo culture of northwestem coastal South Contínen t. He
knew that the belie品， practices , kinship systems , technologies ,
and intellectual organising patterns of the different pueblos
were entirely different one from another , wildly different,
totally bizarre - just as bizarre as the system of Stse - and he

126

Four Ways to Forgiveness

knew that such systems were to be met with on every Known
World that contained human pop l1 lations living in small , stable
gro l1 pS with a technology adapted to their environment, a low ,
constant birth rate , and a politicallife based on consent.
At first such knowledge had been intensely distressing. It had
been painful. It had made him ashamed and angry. First he
thought the historians kept their knowledge from the pueblos ,
then he thOllght the Plleblos kept knowledge from their own
people. He accused; his teachers mildly denied. No , they said.
YOll were taught that certain things were trlle , or necessary;
and those things are true and necessary. They are the local
knowledge of Stse.
They are childish , irrational beliefs! he said. They looked at
him , and he knew he had said something childish and
irrational.
Local knowledge is not partial knowledge , they said. There
are different ways of knowing. Each has its own qualities ,
penalties , rewards. Historical knowledge and scient的c knowledge are a way of knowing. Like local knowledge , they must be
learned. The way they know in the Household isn't taught in
the pueblos, but it wasn't hidden from you , by your people or
by us. Everybody anywhere on Hain has access to all the
information in the temple.
This was .true; he knew it to be true. He could have fOllnd
out for himself, on the screens of the temple of Stse, what he
was learning now. Some of his fellow stlldents from other
Plleblos had indeed tallght themselves how to learn from the
screens, and had entered history before 出ey ever met a
historian.
Books , however , books that were the body of history , the
durable reality of 祉， barely existed in Stse , and his anger sOllght
jllstification there. YOll keep the books from llS , all the books
in the Library of Hain! No , they said mildly. The pueblos
choose not to have many books. They prefer the live knowledge , spoken or passing on the screens , passing from the breath

A Man o{ the People

12 7

to the breath , from living mind to living mind. Would yòu give
up what you learned that way? Is it less than , is it inferior to
what you've learned here from books? There's more than one
kind ofknowledge , said the historians.
By his third year , Havzhiva had decided that there was more
than one kind of people. The pueblans , able to accept that
existence is fundamentally arbitrary , enriched the world intellectually and spiritually. Those who couldn't be satisfied with
mystery were more likely to be of use as historians , enriching
the world intellectually and materially.
Meanwhile he had got quite used to people who had no
lineage , no relatives , and no religion. Sometimes he said to
himself with a glow of pride , '1 am a citizen of all history , of
the m i1l ions of years of Hainish history, and my country is the
whole galaxy!' At other times he felt miserably small , and he
would leave his screens or his books and go look for company
among his fellow students , especially the young women who
were so friendly , so companionable.
At the age of twenty-four Havzhiva , or Zhiv as he was now
called , had been at the Ekumenical School on Ve for a year.
Ve , the next planet out from Hain , was colonised eons ago ,
the 自 rst step in the vast Hainish expansion of the Fore-Eras. It
has gone through many phases as a satellite or partner of
Hainish civilisations; at this period it is inhabited entirely by
historians and Aliens.
In their current (that is , for at least the past hundred
millennia) mood of not tampering , the Hainish have let Ve
return to its own norms of coldness , dryness , and bleakness - a
climate within human tolerance , but likely to truly delight only
people from the Terran A1 tiplano or the uplands of Chiffewar.
Zhiv was out hiking through this stern landscape with his
companion, friend , and lover, Tiu.
They had met two years before , in Ka thhad. At that point
Zhiv had still been reveling in the availability of all women to

128

FourWays 的 Forgiveness

himself and himself to all women , a freedom that had only
gradually dawned on him , and about which Mezha had warned
him gently. ‘You will think there are no rules ,' she said. 'Th ere
are always rules.' He had been conscious mainly of his own
increasingly fearless and careless transgression of what had
been the rules. Not all the women wanted to have sex, and not
all the women wanted to have sex with men , as he had soon
discovered , but that still left an infinite variety. He found that
he was considered attractive. And being Hainish was a definite
advantage with the Al ien women.
The genetic alteration that made the Hainish able to control
their fertility was not a simple bit of gene-splicing; involving a
profound and radical reconstruction of human physiolo由" it
had probably taken up 切 twenty-five generations to establish so say the historians of Hain , who think they know in general
terms the steps such a transformation must have followed.
However the ancient Hainish did it, they did not do it for any
of their colonists. Th ey left the peoples of their colony worlds
to work out their own solutions to the First Heterosexual
Problem. Th ese have been , of course , various and ingenious;
but in all cases so far , to avoid conception you have to do
something or have done something or take something or use
something - unless you have sex with the Hainish.
Zhiv had been outraged when a girl from Beldene asked
him if he was sure he wouldn't get her pregnant.‘How do you
know?' she said. ‘Maybe 1 should take a zapper just to be safe.'
Insulted in the quick of his manhood , he disentangled himself,
said , 'Maybe it is only safe not to be with me ,' and stalked out.
Nobody else questioned his integrity, fortunately, and he
cruised happily on, until he met Tiu.
She was not an Al ien. He had sought out women from offworld; sleeping with Al iens added exoticism to transgression ,
or, as he put it, was an enrichment of knowledge such as every
historian should seek. But Tiu was Hainish. She had been born
and brought up in Darran曲， as had her ancestors before he r.

A Man of the People

129

She was a child of the Historians as he was a child of the
People. He realised very soon that this bond and division was
far greater than any mere foreignness: that their llnlikeness was
仕ue difference and their likeness was true kinship. She was the
cOllntry he had left his own cOllntry to discove r. She was what
he sOllght to be. She was what he sOllgh t.
吼'hat she had - so it seemed to him - was perfect eqllilibrium. Wh en he was with her he felt that for the first time in
his life he was learning to walk. To walk as she did: effortless ,
unselιconscious as an animal , and yet consciolls , careflll ,
keeping in mind all that might llnbalance her and llsing it as
tightrope walkers use their long poles . . . This , he thought , this
is a dweller in true freedom of mind , this is a woman free to be
fully human , this perfect measure , this perfect grace.
He was lltterly happy when he was with her. For a long time
he asked nothing beyond that , to be with he r. And for a long
time she was wary of him , gentle bllt distan t. He thought she
had every right to keep her distance. A pueblo boy , a fellow
who couldn't tell his llncle from his father - he knew what he
was , here , in the eyes of the ill-nahued and the insecure.
Despite their vast knowledge of human ways of being, historians retained the vast human capacity for bigotry. Ti l1 had
no such prejlldices, bllt what did he have to offer her? She had
and was everything. She was complete. Why should she look
at him? If she would only let him look at her , be with her, it
was all he wanted.
She looked at him , liked him , found him appealing and a
little frightening. She saw how he wanted her , how he needed
her , how he had made her into the center of his life and did
not even know it. That would not do. She tried to be cold , to
hun him away. He obeyed. He did not plead. He stayed away.
But after fifteen days he came to her and said , 'T ill , 1 cannot
live without yOll ,' and knowing that he was speaking the plain
truth she said ,‘Then live with me a while.' For she had missed

13 0

FourWays

的 Forgiveness

the passion his presence fi lI ed the air with. Everybody e1 se
seemed so tame , so balanced.
Their lovemaking was an immediate , immense , and continual deligh t. Tiu was amazed at herself, at her obsession with
Zhiv , at her letting him p l1 II her Ol1 t of her orbit so fa r. She
had never expected to adore anybody , let alone to be adored.
She had led an orderly life , in which the controls were
individual and internal , not social and external as they had
been in Zhiv's life in Stse. She knew what she wanted to be
and do. There was a direction in her , a 甘l1e north , that she
would always follow. Their first year together was a series of
contin l1 al shifts and changes in their relationship , a kind of
exciting love dance , l1 npredictable and ecstatic. Very grad l1alIy,
she began to resist the tension , the intensity , the ecstasy. It was
lovely b l1 t it wasn't right, she though t. She wanted to go on.
That constant direction began to pl1 11 her away from him
again; and then he fO l1 ght for his life against it.
That was what he was doing , after a long day's hike in the
Desert of As u Asi on Ve , in their miraculously warm Gethenianmade ten t. A dry , icy wind moaned among cliffs of crimson
stone above them , polished by the endless winds to a shine like
lacql1 er and carved by a lost civilisation with lines of some vast
geometry.
They might have been brother and sister , as they sat in the
glow of the Chabe stove: their red-bronze coloring was the
same , their thick , glossy, black hair , their fine , compact body
type. The pueblan decorum and quietness ofZhiv's movements
and voice met in her an artic111ate , q l1 icker , more vivid
response.
But she spoke now slowly , almost stiffly.
‘Don't force me to choose , Zhiv,' she said. ‘Ever since
started in the Schools I' ve wanted to go to Terra. Since before.
札Then 1 was a kid. All my life. Now they offer me what 1 want,
what I've worked fo r. How can you ask me to refl1 se?'
'1 don't.'

A Man

of the People

13 1

'But you want me to put it off. If 1 do , 1 may lose the chance
foreve r. Probably no t. But why risk it - for one year? You can
follow me next year!'
He said nothing.
'If you want to ,' she added stiffly. She was always too ready
to forgo her claim on him. Perhaps she had never believed
fl1 11y in his love for he r. She did not think of herself as lovable ,
as worthy of his passionate loyalty. She was frightened by it , felt
inadeq l1 ate , false. Her selιrespect was an intellechIa l thing.
'yOl1 make a god of me ,' she had told him , and did not
understand when he replied with happy serio l1 sness ,‘We make
the god togethe r.'
Tm sorry ,' he said now. 'I t' s a different form of reason.
Superstition , if you like. 1 can't help it, Ti l1. Terra is a h l1 ndred
and forty light-years away. If you go , when yO l1 get there , 1'11 be
dead.'
'yOl1 will not! You'll have lived another year here , YO l1 'll be
on your way there , YO l1 'll arrive a year after 1 do!'
‘1 know tha t. Even in Stse we leamed that,' he said patien tI y.
'B l1 t I' m superstitious. \九le die to each other if yO l1 go. Even in
Kathhad yO l1 learned that.'
'1 didn' t. It' s not true. How can you ask me to give up this
chance for what yO l1 admit is a superstition? Be fair , Zhiv!'
After a long silence , he nodded.
She sat stricken , l1 nderstanding that she had won. She had
won badly
She reached across to him , trying to comfort him and
hersel f. She was scared by the darkness in him , his grief, his
m l1 te acceptance of betraya l. But it wasn't betrayal - she
rejected the word at once. She w0111dn't betray him. They were
in love. They loved each othe r. He would follow her in a year ,
two years at the mos t. They were ad111ts , they must not cling
together like children. Adult relationships are based on mutual
freedom , muhlal trus t. She told herself all these things as she
said them to him. He said yes , and held her , and comforted

13 2

Four Ways to Forgiveness

her. In the night, in the utter silence of the desert , the blood
smgmg in his ears , he lay awake and thought, 'It has died
unborn. It was never conceived.'
They stayed together in their little apartment at the School
for the few more weeks before Tiu left. They made love
cautiously, gently , talked about history and economics and
ethnology , kept busy. Tiu had to prepare herself to work wíth
the team she was going with , studying the Terran concepts of
hierarchy; Zhiv had a paper to write on social-energy generation on Werel. Th ey worked hard. Their friends gave Tiu a
big farewell party. The next day Zhiv went with her to Ve Port.
She kissed and held him , telling him to hurry , hurry and come
to T erra. He saw her board the flyer that would take her up to
the NAFAL ship waiting in orbi t. He went back to the
apartment on the South Campus of the Schoo l. There a friend
found him three days later sitting at his desk in a curious
condition , passive , speaking very slowly if at all , unable 岫 eat
or drink. Being pueblo-born , the friend recognised this state
and called in the medicine man (the Hainish do not call them
doctors). Having ascertained that he was from one of the
Southern pueblos , the medicine man said,‘Havzhiva! The god
cannot die in you here!'
After a long silence the young man said softly in a voice
which did not sound like his voice ,‘1 need to go home.'
'Th at is not possible now ,' said the medicine man. 'But we
can arrange a Staying Chant while 1 find a person able to
address the god.' He promptly put out a call for shldents who
were ex-People of the South. Four responded. They sat all
night with Havzhiva singing the Staying Chant in two
languages and four dialects , until Havzhiva joined them in a
fifth dialect, whispering the words hoarsely, till he collapsed
and slept for thirty hours.
He woke in his own room. An old woman was having a
conversation with nobody beside him. 'You aren't here ,' she
said. 'f、~o ， you are mistaken. You can't die here. It would not

A Man of the People

133

be right, it w0111d be quite wrong. You know tha t. This is the
wrong place. This is the wrong life. You know that! Wh at are
you doing here? Are you lost? 00 you want to know the way
home? Here it is. Listen.' She began singing in a thin , high
voice , an almost tuneless , almost wordless song that was
familiar to Havzhiva ，的 if he had heard it long ago. He fell
asleep again while the old woman went on talking to nobody.
When he woke again she was gone. He never knew who she
was or where she came from; he never asked. She had spoken
and sung in his own langl1age , in the dialect of Stse.
He was not going to die now , but he was very unwell. The
medicine man ordered him to the Hospital at T白， the most
beautiful place on all Ve , an oasis where hot springs and
sheltering hills make a mild local climate and ßowers and
forests can grow. There are paths endlessly winding under great
trees , warm lakes where you can swim forever , little misty
ponds from which birds rise crying, steamshrouded hot springs,
and a thousand waterfalls whose voices are the only sound all
nigh t. There he was sent to stay till he was recovered.
He began to speak into his noter, after he had been at Tes
twenty days or so; he would sit in the sunlight on the dOQrstep
of his cottage in a glade of grasses and ferns and talk quietly to
himself by way of the little recording machine. 明1hat yO l1
select from , in order to tell your story, is nothing less than
everything,' he said , watching the branches of the old trees
dark against the sky. 'What you build up your world from , your
local , intelligible , rational , coherent world , is nothing less than
everything. And so all selection is arbitrary. Al I knowledge is
partial 一 infinitesimally partial. Reason is a net thrown out into
an ocean. Wh at truth it brings in is a fragment , a glimpse , a
scintillation of the whole truth. Al l human knowledge is local.
Every life , each human life , is local , is arbitrary , the infinitesimal momentary glitter of a reßection of . . .' His voice ceased;
the silence of the glade among the great trees continued.
After forty-five days he returned to the School. He took a

134

Four Ways to Forgíveness

newaparbnent. He changed fields , leaving social science , Tiu's
field , for Ekumenical service training, which was intellecntally
closely related but led to a different kind of work. The change
would lengthen his time at the School by at least a year, after
which if he did well he could hope for a post with the Ekumen.
He did well , and after two years was asked , in the polite fashion
of the Ekumenical councils, if he would care to go to Werel.
Yes , he said , he would. His friends gave a big farewell party for
him.
‘1 thought you were aiming for Terra ,' said one of his lessasnlte classmates. 'All 出at stuff about war and slavery and class
and caste and gender 一 isn't that Terran history?'
‘It's current events in Werel ,' Havzhiva said.
He was no longer Zhiv. He had come back from the Hospital
as Havzhiva.
Somebody else was stepping on the unasnlte classmate's
foot, bl1 t she paid no atlention. ‘1 thought you were going to
follow Tiu ,' she said. ‘1 thought tha t's why you never slept with
anybody. God , if I'd only known!' The others winced , but
Havzhiva smiled and hugged her apologetically.
In his own mind it was quite clear. As he had be甘ayed and
forsaken Iyan Iyan , so Tiu had betrayed and forsaken him.
There was no going back and no going forward. So he must
nun aside. Th ough he was one of them , he could no longer
live with the People; though he had become one of them , he
did not want to live with the historians. So he must go live
among Aliens.
He had no hope of joy. He had bungled that , he though t.
But he knew that the two long, intense disciplines that had
filled his life, that of the gods and that of history, had given
him an uncommon knowledge , which might be of use somewhere; and he knew that the right use of knowledge is
fulfillmen t.
The medicine man came to visit him the day before he left,
checked him over, and then sat for a while saying nothing.

A Man of the Peoμe

135

Havzhiva sat with him. He had long been used to silence , and
still sometimes forgot that it was not customary among
historians.
‘Wh at's wrong?' the medicine man said. It seemed to be a
rhetorical question , from its meditative tone; at any rate ,
Havzhiva made no answe r.
'Please sìand up,' the medicine man said , and when Havzhiva had done so , 'Now walk a little.' He walked a few steps;
the medicine man observed him. 'You're Ollt of balance,' he
said. ‘Did you know it?'
'Yes.'
‘1 could get a Staying Chant together this evening.'
‘It's all right,' Havzhiva said. 'I've always been oÐιbalance.'
'There's no need to be,' the medicine man said. ‘On the
other hand , maybe it' s best, since you're going to Werel. So:
Good七ye for this life.'
Th ey embraced formally , as historians did , especially when
as now it was absollltely certain that they would never see one
another again. Havzhiva had to give and get a good many
formal embraces that day. The next day he boarded the Terraces
of Darranda and went across the darkness.
YEOWE

During his journey of eighty light-years at NAFAL speed , his
mother died , and his father , and Iyan Iyan , everyone he had
known in Stse , everyone he knew in Kathhad and on Ve. By
the time the ship landed , they had all been dead for years. The
child Iyan Iyan had borne had lived and grown old and died.
This was a knowledge he had lived with ever since he saw
Tiu board her ship , leaving him to die. Because of the
medicine man , the four people who had sung for him , the old
woman , and the waterfalls of T郎， he had lived; but he had
lived with that knowledge.
Other things had changed as wel l. At the time he left Ve ,

136

Four Ways to Forgiveness

Werel's colony planet Yeowe had been a slave wo r1 d , a huge
work camp. By the time he arrived on Werel , the War of
Liberation was over , Yeowe had declared its independence,
and the instihJt ion of slavery on Werel itself was beginning to
disintegrate
Havzhiva longed to observe this terrible and magnificent
process , but the Embassy sent him promptly off to Yeowe. A
Hainishman called Sohikelwenyanmurkeres Esdardon Aya
counseled him before he left.‘ If you want danger, it's dangerous ,' he sa泊， 'and if you like hope , it's hopefu1. Werel is
lI nmaking itself, while Yeowe's trying to make itsel f. 1 don't
know if it's going to succeed. 1 tell yOll what, Yehedarhed
Havzhiva: there are great gods loose on these worlds.'
Yeowe had got rid of its Bosses, its Owners, the Four
Corporations who had run the vast slave plantations for three
hundred years; but though the thirty years of the War of
Liberation were over, the fighting had not stopped. Chiefs and
warlords among the slaves who had risen to power during the
Liberation now fought to keep and extend their powe r. Factions
had ba 仗led over the qllestion of whether to kick all foreigners
off the planet forever or to admit Al iens and join the Ekumen.
The isolationists had finally been voted down , and there was a
new Ekllmenical Embassy in the old colonial capital. Havzhiva
spent a while there learning 'the language and the table
manners ,' as they said. Then the Ambassador , a clever young
Terran named Solly, sent him sOllth to the region called
Yotebber , which was clamoring for recognition.
History is infamy, Havzhiva thollght as he rode the train
through the ruined landscapes of the world.
The Werelian capitalists who colonised the planet had
exploited it and their slaves recklessly , mindlessly, in a long
orgy of profit-making. It takes a while to spoil a wo r1 d , but it
can be done. Stri p- mining and single-crop agriculture had
defaced and sterilised the earth. The rivers were polluted , dead.
Huge dust storms darkened the eastern horizon.

A Man

of the People

137

Th e Bosses had run their plantations by force and fear. For
over a century they had shipped male slaves only, worked them
till they died , imported fresh ones as needed. Work gangs in
these all-male compounds developed into tribal hierarchies. At
last, as the price of slaves on Werel and the cost of shipping
rose , the Corporations began to buy bondswomen for Yeowe
Colony. So over the next two centuries the slave population
grew, and slave-cities were founded ,‘Assetvilles' and 'Dustytowns' spreading out from the old compounds of the plantations. Havzhiva knew that the Liberation movement had arisen
first among the women in the tribal compounds , a rebellion
against male domination , before it became a war of all slaves
against their owners.
The slow train stopped in. city after city: miles of shacks and
cabins , treeless , whole tracts bombed or burnt out in the war
and not yet rebuilt; factories , some of them gutted ruins , some
functioning but ancient-looking, rattletrap , smoke-belching. At
each station hundreds of people got off the train and onto 祉，
swarming, crowding, shouting out bribes to the porters, clambering up onto the roofs of the cars, brutally shoved off again
by uniformed guards and policemen. In the north of the long
continent，的 on Werel , he had seen many black-skinned
people, blue-black; but as the train went farther south there
were fewer of these , until in Yotebber the people in the villages
and on the desolate sidings were much paler than he was , a
bl l1 ish , dusty color. Th ese were the 'dust people ,' the descendants of a hundred generations ofWerelian slaves.
Yotebber had been an early center of the Liberation. Th e
Bosses had made reprisal with bombs and poison gas; thousands
of people had died. Whole towns had been burned to get rid
of the l1 nburied dead , human and anima l. Th e mouth of the
great river had been dammed with rotting bodies. Bl1 t all that
was past. Yeowe was free , a new member of the Ekumen of the
Worlds , and Havzhiva in the capacity of Sub-Envoy was on his
way to help the people of Yotebber Region to begin their new

138

Four 札'ays

to Forgíveness

history. Or from the point of view of a Hainishman , to rejoin
their ancient history.
He was met at the station in Yotebber City by a large crowd
surging and cheering and yelling behind barricades manned
by policemen and soldiers; in front of the barricades was a
delegation of 0伍cials wearing splendid robes and sashes of
office and variously ornate uniforms: big men , most of them ,
dignified , very much public figures. There were speeches of
welcome , reporters and photographers for the holonet and the
neareal news. It wasn't a circus , howeve r. Th e big men were
definitely in control. They wanted their gl1 est to know he was
welcome , he was popular, he was - as the Chief said in his
brief, impressive speech - the Envoy from the F l1 hlre.
That night in his luxurious suite in an Owner's city mansion
converted to a hotel , Havzhiva tho l1ght: If they knew that their
man from the fl1hue grew up in a pueblo and never saw a
neareal till he came here .
He hoped he would not disappoint these people. From the
moment he had first met them on Werel he had liked them ,
despite their monstrous society. They were full of vitality and
pride , and here on Yeowe they were fl1 ll of dreams of justice.
Havzhiva tho l1 ght of jl1 stice what an ancient Terran said of
another god: 1 believe in it becal1 se it is impossible. He slept
well , and woke ea r1 y in the warm , bright morning , full of
anticipation. He walked out to begin to get to know the city,
his city.
The doorman 一 it was disconcerting 切 find that people who
had fought so desperately for their freedom had servants 一 the
doorman tried hard to get him to wait for a car, a guide ,
evidently distressed at the great man's going O l1t so early , afoot,
without a retinue. Havzhiva explained that he wanted to walk
and was ql1 ite able to walk alone. He set 0缸~ leaving the
l1 nhappy doorman calling after him ,‘Oh , sir, please , avoid the
City Park , sir!'
Havzhiva obeyed , thinking the park must be closed for a

A Man of the People

139

ceremony or replanting. He came on a plaza where a market
was in fllll swing , and there fOllnd himself likely to become the
center of a crowd; people inevitably noticed him. He wore the
handsome Yeowan c1 othes , singlet, breeches , a light narrow
robe , but he was the only person with red-brown skin in a city
of four hundred thousand people. As soon as they saw his skin ,
his eyes , they knew him: the Alien. So he slipped away from
the market and kept to quiet residential streets , enjoying the
soft, warm air and the decrepit, charming colonial architecture
of the houses. He stopped to admire an ornate Tualite temple.
It looked rather shabby and desolate , but there was , he saw , a
fresh offering of ftowers at the feet of the image of the Mother
at the doorway. Though her nose had been knocked off during
the war , she smiled serenely, a little cross-eyed. People ca l1 ed
out behind him. Somebody said c1 0se to him , 'Foreign shit, get
off our world ,' and his arm was seized as his legs were kicked
out from under him. Contorted faces , screaming, closed in
around hi m. An enormous , sickening cramp seized his body,
doubling him into a red darkness of struggle and voices and
pain , then a dizzy shrinking and dwind1ing away of light and
sound
An old woman was sitting by him , whispering an almost
tuneless song that seemed dimly fami 1ia r.
She was knitting. For a long time she did not look at him;
when she did she said ,‘Ah.' He had trouble making his eyes
foc l1 s, but he made out that her face was bl l1 ish , a pale bl l1 ish
tan , and there were no whites to her dark eyes.
She rearranged some kind of apparahls that was atlached to
him somewhere , and said , Tm the medicine woman - the
nurse. You have a concussion , a s1ight skull frachlfe , a bruised
kidney , a broken shoulder, and a knife wound in your gut; but
you'll be al1 right; don't worry.' All this was in a foreign
language , which he seemed to understand. At least he understood ‘don't worry ,' and obeyed.

140

Four Ways to Forgiveness

He thought he was on the Terraces of Darranda in NAFAL
mode. A hundred years passed in a bad dream but did not pass.
People and clocks had no faces. He tried to whisper the Staying
Chant and it had no words. The words were gone. The old
woman took his hand. She held his hand and slowly, slowly
brought him back into time , into local time , into the dim ,
quiet room where she sat knitting.
lt was morning, hot, bright sunlight in the window. The
Chief of Yotebber Region stood by his bedside, a tower of a
man in white-and -c rimson robes.
'I' m very sorry ,' Havzhiva said , slowly and thickly because
his mouth was damaged. 'It was stupid of me to go out alone.
Th e fault was entirely mine.'
'The villains have been caught and will be tried in a court
of justice,' said the Chief.
'They were young men ,' Havzhiva said. 'My ignorance and
folly caused the incident一，
'They will be punished,' the Chief said.
The day nurses always had the holoscreen up and watched
the news and the dramas as they sat with him. They kept the
sound down , and Havzhiva could ignore it. It was a hot
afternoon; he was watching faint clouds move slowly across the
sky, when the nurse said, using the formal address to a person
of high status ,‘Oh , quick - if the gen t1 eman will look , he can
see the punishment of the bad men who attacked him!'
Havzhiva obeyed. He saw a thin human body suspended by
the feet , the arms and hands twitching, the intestines hanging
down over the chest and face. He cried out aloud and hid his
face in his arm. 'Turn it off,' he said , 'turn it off!' He retched
and gasped for ai r. 'You are not people!' he cried in his own
language, the dialect of Stse. Th ere was some coming and
going in the room. The noise of a yelling crowd ceased
abruptly. He got control of his breath and lay with his eyes
shut, repeating one phrase of the Staying Chant over and over

A Man

of the People

41

until his mind and body began to steady and find a little
balance somewhere , not much.
They came with food; he asked them to take it away.
The room was dim , lit only by a night-light somewhere low
on the wall and the lights of the city outside the window. The
old woman , the night nurse , was there , knitting in the half
dark.
'I' m sorry,' Havzhiva said at random , knowing he didn't
know what he had said to them.
。h， M r. Envoy,' the old woman said with a long sigh. ‘I
read about your people. The Hainish people. You don't do
things like we do. You don't torhue and kill each other. You
live in peace. 1 wonder , 1 wonder what we seem to you. Like
witches , like devils , maybe.'
'No,' he said, but he swallowed down another wave of
nausea.
'Wh en you feel better, when you're stronger, M r. Envoy, 1
have a thing 1 want to speak to you about.' Her voice was quiet
and full of an absolute , easy authority, which probably could
become formal and formidable. He had known people who
talked that way all his life.
'1 can listen now,' he said , but she said , 'Not now. Late r. You
are tired. Would you like me to sing?'
‘Yes,' he said , and she sat and knitted and sang voicelessly,
hmelessly , in a whispe r. The names of her gods were in the
Song: Tual , Kamye. They are not my gods , he thought, but he
closed his eyes and slept, safe in the rocking balance.
Her name was Yeron , and she was not old. She was forty-seven.
She had been through a thirty-year war and several famines.
She had art的cial teeth , something Havzhiva had never hearcl
of; and wore eyeglasses with wire frames; body mending was
not unknown on Werel , but on Yeowe most people couldn't
afford 祉， she said. She was very thin , and her hair was thin.
She had a proud bearing, but moved stiffly from an old wound

142

Four Ways to Forgíveness

in the left hip. 'Everybody, everybody in this world has a bullet
in them , or whipping scars , or a leg blown 0缸~ or a dead baby
in their heart,' she said. ‘Now you're one of us , M r. Envoy.
You've been through the fire.'
He was recovering wel l. There were five or six medical
specialists on his case. The Regional Chief visited every few
days and sent officials daily. The Chief was , Havzhiva realised ,
gratefu l. The outrageous attack on a representative of the
Ekumen had given him the excuse and strong popular support
for a strike against the diehard isolationist World Party led by
his rival , another warlord hero of the Liberation. He sent
glowing reports of his victories to the Sub-Envoy's hospital
room. The holonews was all of men in uniforms running ,
shooting, ßyers buzzing over desert hills. As he walked the
halls , gaining strength , Havzhiva saw patients lying in bed in
the wards wired in to the neareal net,‘experiencing' the
自 ghting， from the point of view, of course , of the ones with
guns , the ones with cameras, the ones who sho t.
At night the screens were dark , the nets were down , and
Yeron came and sat by him in the dim light from the window.
'you said there was something you had to tell me ,' he said.
The city night was restless ，如II of noises , music , voices down
in the street below the window she had opened wide to let in
the warm , many-scented ai r.
守的， 1 did.' She put her knitting down. ‘1 am your nurse , M r.
Envoy , but also a messenge r. When 1 heard you'd been hurt,
forgive me , but 1 said ,“Praise the Lord Kamye and the Lady of
Mercy!" Because 1 had not known how to bring my message to
you , and now 1 knew how.' Her quiet voice paused a minute.
'1 ran this hospital for fifteen years. During the wa r. 1 can still
pull a few strings here.' Again she paused. Like her voice , her
silences were familiar to him. 'l' m a messenger to the Ekumen ,'
she said ,‘from the women. Women here. Women all over
Yeowe. We want to make an alliance with you . . .1 know, the
government already did tha t. Yeowe is a member of the

A Man of the People

143

Ekumen of the Worlds. 叭le know tha t. But what does it mean?
To us? It means nothing. Do you know what women are , here ,
in this world? They are nothing. They are not part of the
governmen t. Women made the Liberation. They worked and
they died for it just like the men. But they weren't generals ,
they aren't chiefs. They are nobody. In the villages they are less
than nobody , they are work animals , breeding stock. Here it' s
some better. But not good. 1 was trained in the Medical School
at Besso. 1 am a doctor, not a nurse. Under the Bosses , 1 ran
this hospita l. Nowa man runs it. Our men are the owners now.
And we're what we always were. Property. 1 don't think tha t' s
what we fought the long war fo r. Do you , M r. Envoy? 1 think
what we have is a new liberation to make. We have to finish
the job.'
Mter a long silence , Havzhiva asked softly, ‘Are you
organised?'
‘Oh, yes. Oh , yes! Just like the old days. We can organise in
the dark!' She laughed a li 股le. ‘ But 1 don't think we can win
freedom for outselves alone by ourselves alone. There has to
be a change. The men think they have to be bosses. They have
to stop thinking tha t. Well , one thing we have learned in my
lifetime , you don't change a mind with a gun. You kill the boss
and you become the boss. We must change that mind. Th e old
slave mind , boss mind. We have got to change 祉， Mr. Envoy.
With your help. The Ekumen's help.'
'I' m here to be a link between your people and the Ekumen.
But I' ll need time ,' he said. '1 need to learn.'
'All the time in the world. We know we can't turn the boss
mind around in a day or a yea r. This is a matter of education.'
She said the word as a sacred word. ‘It will take a long time.
You take your time. If we just know that you willlisten.'
'1 willlisten ,' he said.
She drew a long breath , took up her knitting again. Presently
she said,‘It won't be easy to hear us.'
He was tired. The intensity of her talk was more than he

144

Four Ways to Forgíveness

could yet handle. He did not know what she meant. A polite
silence is the adult way of signifying that one doesn't understand. He said nothing.
She looked at him. 'How are we to come to you? You see ,
tha t' s a problem. 1 tell you , we are nothing. We can come to
you only as your nurse. Your housemaid. The woman who
washes your clothes. We don't mix with the chiefs. We aren't
on the councils. We wait on table. We don't eat the banquet.'
'T ell me-' he hesitated. 'Tell me how to start. Ask to see
me if you can. Come as you can , as it . . . if it' s safe?' He had
always been quick to learn his lessons. Tlllisten. I'll do what 1
can.' He would never learn much distrust.
She leaned over and kissed him very gently on the mouth.
Her lips were light, dry , soft.
'There ,' she said , 'no chief wil1 give you that.'
She took up her knitting again. He was halιasleep when she
asked , 'Your mother is living, M r. Havzhiv肘，
'A11 my people are dead.'
She made a li tt1 e soft sound. ‘Bereft,' she said. 'And no wife?'
‘No.'
‘We wil1 be your mothers , your sisters , your daughters. Your
people. 1 kissed you for that love that wil1 be between us. You
wil1 see.'

‘The list of the persons invited to the reception , M r. Yehedarhed ,' said Doranden , the Chief' s chief liaison to the Sub•
Envoy.
Havzhiva looked through the list on the handscreen carefully , ran it past the end , and said ,‘Where is the rest?'
Tm so sorry , M r. Envoy - are there omissions? This is the
entire list.'
'But these are all men.'
In the infinitesimal silence before Doranden replied , Havzhiva felt the balance of his life poised.
‘You wish the guests to bring their wives? Of course! If this

A Man o{ the People

145

is the Ekumenical custom , we shall be delighted to invite the
ladies!'
There was something li p-smacking in the way Yeowan men
said 'the ladies ,' a word which Havzhiva had thought was
applied only to women of the owner class on Were l. The
balance dipped. 'What ladies?' he asked , frowning. 'I'm talking
about women. 00 they have no part in this society?'
He became very nervous as he spoke , for he now knew his
ignorance of what constihlted danger here. If a walk on a q l1 iet
street could be nearly fatal , embarrassing the Chief' s liaison
might be completely so. Ooranden was certainly embarrassed
- f1 oored. He opened his mouth and shut it.
'I' m sor哼， M r. Ooranden ,' Havzhiva said,‘please pardon my
poor efforts at jocosity. Of course 1 know that women have alI
kinds of responsible positions in your society. 1 was merely
saying, in a stl1 pidly l1 nforhmate manner , that 1 sho l1Id be very
gIad to have sl1 ch women and their h l1sbands, as well as the
wives of these guests , atlend the reception. Unless 1 am truly
making an enormO l1 S bl l1 nder concerning your customs? 1
tho l1ght you did not segregate the sexes socialIy, as they do on
Werel. Please , if 1 was wrong, be so kind as to eXC l1se the
ignorant foreigner once again.'
Loquacity is half of diplomacy, Havzhiva had already
decided. The other half is silence.
Ooranden availed himself of the latler option , and with a
few earnest reassurances got himself away. Havzhiva remained
nervol1s until the fo lI owing morning, when Ooranden
reappeared with a revised list containing eleven new names , all
female. There was a school principal and a cO l1 ple of teachers;
the restwere marked 'retired.'
‘Splendid, splendid!' said Havzhiva. ‘May 1 add one more
name?' - Of course , of course , anyone Your Excellencydesires
- 'Or. Yeron ,' he said.
Again the infinitesimal silence, the grain of dust dropping
on the scales. Ooranden knew that name. 'Yes ,' he said.

146

Four Ways 的 Forgiveness

‘Dr. Yeron nursed me , you know, at your excellent hospital.
We became friends. An ordinary nurse might not be an
appropriate guest among such very distinguished people; but 1
see there are several other doctors on our list.'
'Quite ,' said Doranden. He seemed bemused. The Chief
and his people had become used to patronising the Sub-Envoy,
ever so slightly and polite1 y. An invalid , though now well
recovered; a victim; a man of peace, ignorant of attack and
even of se1 f-defense; a scholar, a foreigner , unwo r1 dly in every
sense: they saw him as something like that , he knew. Much as
they valued him as a symbol and as a means to their ends , they
thought him an insignificant man. He agreed with them as to
the fact , but not as to the quality , of his insignificance. He
knew that what he did might signi命 He had just seen it
‘ Sure1 y you understand the reason for having a bodyguard,
Envoy ,' the General said with some impatience.
'This is a dangerous city, General Denkam , yes , 1 understand
tha t. Dangerous for everyone. 1 see on the net that gangs of
young men , such as those who attacked me , roam the streets
quite beyond the control of the police. Every child , every
woman needs a bodyguard. 1 should be distressed to know that
the safety which is every citizen's right was my special
privilege.'
The General blinked but stuck to his guns. ‘We can't let you
get assassinated ,' he said.
Havzhiva loved the bluntness of Yeowan honesty. ‘1 don't
want to be assassinated ,' he said. '1 have a suggestion , si r. There
are policewomen , female members of the city police force , are
there not? Find me bodyguards among them. After al1, an
armed woman is as dangerous as an armed man , isn't she? And
1 should like to honor the great part women played in winning
Yeowe' s freedom , as the Chief said so eloquently in his talk
yesterday.'
The General departed with a face of cast iron.

A Man of the People

147

Havzhiva did not particularly like his bodyguards. They were
hard , tough women , unfriendly, speaking a dialect he could
hardly understand. Several of them had children at home , but
they refused to talk about their children. They were fiercely
efficien t. He was well protected. He saw when he went about
with these cold-eyed escorts that he began to be looked at
di旺erently by the city crowds: with amusement and a kind of
fellow-feeling. He heard an old man in the market say , 'That
fellow has some sense.'
Everybody called the Chief the Chief except to his face. ‘M r.
President,' Havzhiva said,‘the question really isn't one of
Ekumenical principles or Hainish customs at all. None of that
is or should be of the least weight , the least importance , here
on Yeowe. This is your world.'
The Chief nodded once , massively.
‘Into which ,' said Havzhi凹， by now insuperably loquacious ,
'immigrants are beginning to come from 叭'erel now , and
many , many more will come , as the Werelian ruling class tries
to lessen revolutionary pressure by allowing increasing numbers
of the underclass to emigrate. You , sir , know far better than 1
the opportunities and the problems that this great inAux of
population will cause here in Yotebbe r. Now of course at least
half the immigrants will be female , and 1 think it worth
considering that there is a very considerable difference between
Werel and Yeowe in what is called the construction of gender
- the roles , the expectations the behavior, the relationships of
men and women. Among the Werelian immigrants most of the
decision-makers , the people of authority , will be female. The
Council of the Hame is about nine-tenths women , 1 believe.
Their speakers and negotiators are mostly women. These
people are coming into a society governed and represented
entirely by men. 1 think there is the possibility of misunderstandings and conAict, unless the sihlation is carefully

148

Four Ways to Forgiveness

considered beforehand. Perhaps the llSe of some women as
representatives -'
‘Among slaves on the Old World,' the Chief said , 'women
were chiefs. Among our people, men are chiefs. Th at is how it
is. The slaves of the Old World will be the free men of the
NewWorld.'
'And the women , M r. President?'
‘A free man's women are free ,' said the Chie f.
‘叭1 ell ,

then,' Yeron said , and sighed her deep sigh. '1 glless we
have to kick IIp some dllst.'
‘Wh at dllst people are good at,' said Dobibe.
'Then we better kick IIp a whole lot,' said Tllalyan. 'Becallse
no matter what we do , they'll get hysterical. They'll yell and
scream abollt castrating dykes who kill boy babies. If there's
five of lIS singing some damn song, it' ll get into the neareals as
five hllndred of us with machine guns and the end of
civilisation on Yeowe. So 1 say le t' s go for it. Le t's have five
thousand women out singing. Le t's stop the trains. Lie down
on the tracks. Fifty thollsand women lying on the tracks all
over Yotebbe r. You think?'
The meeting (of the Yotebber City and Regional Edllcational Aid Association) was in a schoolroom of one of the
city schools. Two of Havzhiva's bodygllards , in plain clothes ,
waited lI nobtrusively in the hall. Forty women and Havzhiva
were jammed into small chairs attached to blank netscreens.
'Asking for?' Havzhiva said.
'The secret ballot!'
‘No job discrimination!'
'Pay for our work!'
'The secret ballot!'
‘Child care!'
'Th e secret ballot!'
‘Respect!'

A Man

of the Peo戶le

149

Havzhiva's noter scribbled away madly. The women went
on shouting for a while and then se設led down to talk again.
One of the bodyguards spoke 切 Havzhiva as she drove him
home. 'Sir,' she said. Was those all teachers?'
'Yes ,' he said. 'In a way.'
‘Be damn ,' she said. 'Different from they used to be.'

‘Yehedarhed! What the hell are you doing down there?'
‘Ma'am?'

‘You were on the news. Al ong with about a million women
lying across rai1road tracks and all over flyer pads and draped
around the President's Residence. You were talking to women
and smiling.'
‘It was hard not to.'
‘Wh en the Regional Govemment begins shooting, will you
stop smiling?'
'Yes. Will you back us?'
'How?'
‘Words of encouragement to the women of Yotebber from
the Ambassador of the Ekumen. Yeowe a model of true
freedom for immigrants from the Slave World. Words of praise
to the Govemment of Yotebber - Yotebber a model for all
Yeowe of restraint, enlightenment, et cetera.'
'Sure. 1 hope it helps. Is this a revollltion , Havzhiva?'
'It is edllcation, ma'am.'

The gate stood open in its massive frame; there were no walls.
'In the time of the Colony,' the Elder said, 'this gate was
opened twice in the day: to let the people out to work in the
moming, to let the people in from work in the evening. At all
other times it was locked and barred.' He displayed the great
broken lock that hung on the outer face of the gate , the massive
bolts rusted in their hasps. His geshue was solemn, measured ,
like his words , and again Havzhiva admired the dignity these
people had kept in degradation , the stateliness they had

15 0

Four Ways to Forgiveness

maintained in , or against , their enslavemen t. He had begun to
appreciate the immense inß l1 ence of their sacred text, the
Arkamye , preserved in oral tradition. 'This was what we had.
This was om belonging ,' an old man in the city had told him ,
tO l1 ching the book which , at sixty-five or seventy , he was
learning to read.
Havzhiva himself had begl1 n to read the book in its original
langl1 age. He read it slowly , trying to understand how this tale
of fierce courage and abnegation had for three millennia
informed and nomished the minds of people in bondage.
Often he heard in its cadences the voices he had heard speak
that day.
He was staying for a month in Hayawa Tribal Village , which
had been the first slave compo l1 nd of the Ag ric111tural Plantation Corporation of Yeowe in Yotebber , three hundred fifty
years ago. In this immense , remote region of the eastern coast,
m l1 ch of the society and culture of plantation slavery had been
preserved. Yeron and other women of the Liberation Movement had told him that to know who the Yeowans were he
m l1 st know the plantations and the tribes.
He knew that the compounds had for the 品的t cenhlry been
a domain of men without women and witho l1 t children. They
had developed an internal government, a strict hierarchy of
force and favoritism. Power was won by tests and ordeals and
kept by a nimble balancing of independence and collusion.
Wh en women slaves were brought in at last, they entered this
rigid system as the slaves of slaves. By bondsmen as by Bosses ,
they were l1 sed as servants and sexl1 al outlets. Sexl1 al loyalty
and partnership contin l1 ed to be recognised only between men ,
a neX l1 S of passion , negotiation , stahls , and tribal politics.
Ouring the next cenhuies the presence of children in the
compo l1 nds had altered and enriched tribal cl1 stoms , b l1 t the
system of male dominance , so entirely advantageous to the
slave-owners , had not essentially changed.
明'e hope to have yom presence at the initiation tomorrow,'

A Man of the People

15 1

the Elder said in his grave w.呵， and Havzhiva assured him that
nothing could please or honor him more than attendance at a
ceremony of such importance. The Elder was sedately but
visibly gratified. He was a man over fifty , which meant he had
been born a slave and had lived as a boy and man through 出e
years of the Liberation. Havzhiva looked for scars, remembering what Yeron had said, and found them: the Elder was thin ,
meager, lame , and had no upper teeth; he was marked all
through by famine and war. Also he was ritually scarred , four
parallel ridges running from neck to elbow over the point of
the shoulder like long epaulets , and a dark blue open eye
tattooed on his forehead , the sign, in this tribe , of assigned ,
unalterable chiefdom. A slave chief, a chattel master of chattels ,
tiIl the walls went down.
The Elder walked on a cer包in path from the gate to the
longhouse , and Havzhiva following him observed that no one
else used this path: men , women , children trotted along a
wider, parallel road that diverged off to a different entrance to
the longhouse. This was the chiefs' way, the narrow way.
That night, while the children to be initiated next day fasted
and kept vigil over on the women's side , all the chiefs and
elders gathered for a feas t. There were inordinate amounts of
the heavy food Yeowans were accustomed to , spiced and
ornately served , the marsh rice that was the basis of everything
fancied up with colorings and herbs; above all there was meat.
Women slipped in and out serving ever more elaborate platters,
each one with more meat on it - ca仕le fle品， Boss food , the
sure and certain sign of freedom.
Havzhiva had not grown up eating meat , and could count
on it giving him diarrhea , but he chewed his way manfully
through the stews and steaks, knowing the significance of the
food and the meaning of plenty to those who had never had
enough.
Mter huge baskets of fruit finally replaced the platters, the
women disappeared and the music began. The tribal chief

15 2

Four Ways to Forgiveness

nodded to his leos , a word meaning 'sexl1al favorite/adopted
brother/not heir/not son.' The yO l1 ng man , a self-assured , goodnatured beal1妙， smiled; he c1 apped his long hands very softly
once , then began 切 brush the grey-bl l1e palms in a sl1 btle
rhythm. As the table fell silent he sang, bl1 t in a whispe r.
Instruments of music had been forbidden on most plantations; most Bosses had allowed no singing except the rihlal
hymns to Tual at the tenthday service. A slave caught wasting
Corporation time in singing might have acid poured down his
throa t. So long as he could work there was no need for him to
make noise.
On such plantations the slaves had developed this almost
silent music , the touch and brush of palm against palm, a
barely voiced , barely varied , long line of melody. The words
sung were deliberately broken , distorted , fragmented , so that
they seemed meaningless. Shesh , the owners had called 祉，
rubbish , and slaves were permitted to 'pat hands and sing
rubbish' so long as they did it so softly it could not be heard
outside the compound walls. Having sung so for three hundred
years , they sang so now.
To Havzhiva it was unnerving, almost frightening , as voice
after voice joined, always at a whisper, increasing the complexi可 of the rhythms till the cross-beats nearly, but never quite ,
joined into a single texhue of hushing sibilant sound, threaded
by the long-held, quarter-tonal melody sung on syllables that
seemed always about to make a word but never did. Caught in
it, soon almost lost in 祉， he kept thinking now - now one of
them will raise his voice - now the leos will give a shout, a
shout of triumph , letting his voice free! 一 But he did no t. N one
did. Th e soft, rushing, waterlike music with its in自nitely
delicate shifting rhythm went on and on. Bottles of the orange
Yote wine passed up and down the table. They drank. Th ey
drank freely , at leas t. They got drunk. Laughter and shouts
began to interrupt the music. But they never once sang above
a whispe r.

A Man of the People

153

They all reeled back to the longhouse on the chiefs' path ,
embracing, peeing companionably, one or two pausing to
vomit here and there. A kind , dark man who had been seated
next to Havzhiva now joined him in his bed in his alcove of
the longhollse.
Earlier in the evening this man had told him that during the
night and day of the initiation heterosexllal intercourse was
forbidden , as it would change the energies. The initiation
wOllld go crooked, and the boys might not become good
members of the tribe. Only a witch , of course , would deliberately break the taboo , but many women were witches and
wOllld try to sedllce a man Ollt of malice. Regular , that is ,
homosexual , intercourse would encourage the energies, keep
the initiation straight, and give the boys strength for their
ordeal. Hence every man leaving the banquet would have a
partner for the nigh t. Havzhiva was glad he had been assigned
to this man , not to one of the chiefs , whom he found daunting ,
and who might have expected a properly energetic performance. As it was , as well as he could remember in the morning ,
he and his companion had been too drunk to do much but fall
asleep amidst well-intended caresses.
Too much Yote wine left a ringing headache , he knew that
already , and his whole skull reconfirmed the knowledge when
he woke.
At noon his friend brought him to a place of honor in the
plaza , which was filling up with men. Behind them were
the men's longhouses , in front of them the ditch that separated
the women's side, the inside , from the men's or gate side - still
so-called , though the compound walls were gone and the gate
alone stood , a monument, towering above the huts and longhouses of the compound and the flat grainfields that stretched
away in all directions , shimmering in the windless , shadowless
hea t.
From the women's huts , six boys came at a run to the ditch.
It was wider than a thirteen-year-old could jump , Havzhiva

154

FourWays 的 Forgiveness

thought; but two of the boys made it. The other four leapt
valiantly, fell short, clambered Ol1t, one of them hobbling,
having hurt a leg or foot in his fall. Even the two who had
made the jump successfl111y looked exha l1sted and frightened ,
and all six were bll1 ish grey from fasting and staying awake.
Elders surrol1nded them and got them standing in line in the
plaza , naked and shivering, facing the crowd of all the men of
the tribe.
No women at all were visible , over on the women's side.
A catechism began, chiefs and elders barking questions
which m l1st evidently be answered without delay, sometimes
by one boy, sometimes by all together, depending on the
questioner's pointing or sweeping geshue. They were questions
of rihtal , protocol , and ethics. Th e boys had been well drilled ,
delivering their answers in prompt yelps. The one who had
lamed himself in the jump suddenly vomited and then fainted ,
slipping q l1 ietly down in a little heap. Nothing was done , and
some questions were still pointed to him , followed by a
moment of painf111 silence. After a while the boy moved , sat
up , sat a while shuddering, then stm自led to his feet and stood
with the others. His bluish lips moved in answer to all the
questions , tho l1gh no voice reached the audience.
Havzhiva kept his apparent atlention fixed on the rihlal ,
though his mind wandered back a long time , a long way. We
teach what we know, he thought, and all our knowledge is
loca l.
After the inquisition came the marking: a single deep Cl1 t
from the base of the neck over the point of the shoulder and
down the outer arm to the elbow, made with a hard , sharp
stake of wood dragged gouging through skin and ßesh to leave ,
when it healed , the furrowed scar that proved the man. Slaves
would not have been allowed any metal tools inside the gate,
Havzhiva reßected , watching steadily as behooved a visitor and
gues t. After each arm and each boy, the officiating elders
stopped to resharpen the stake , rubbing it on a big grooved

A Man

of the People

155

stone that sat in the plaza. The boys' pale blue lips drew back,
baring their white teeth; they writhed , half-fainting , and one of
them screamed aloud , si1 encing himself by c1 apping his free
hand over his mouth. One bit on his thumb till blood flowed
from it as well as from his lacerated arms. As each boy's
marking was finished the Tribal Chief washed the wounds and
smeared some ointment on them. Dazed and wobbling, the
boys stood again in line; and now the old men were tender
with them , smiling, calling them ‘tribesman,'‘hero.' Havzhiva
drew a long breath of relie f.
But now six more children were being brought into the
plaza , led across the ditch-bridge by old women. These were
gir1 s, decked with anklets and bracelets, otherwise naked. At
the sight of them a great cheer went up from the audience of
men. Havzhiva was surprised. Women were to be made
members of the tribe too? That at least was a good thing , he
thought.
Two of the girls were barely adolescent, the others were
younger, one of them surely not more than six. They were
lined up , their backs to the audience , facing the boys. Behind
each of them stood the veiled woman who had led her across
the bridge; behind each boy stood one of the naked elders. As
Havzhiva watched , unable to turn his eyes or mind from what
he saw, the little girls lay down face up on the bare , greyish
ground of the plaza. One of them , slow to lie down , was tugged
and forced down by the woman behind he r. The old men
came around the boys , and each one lay down on one of the
girls , to a great noise of cheering, jeering, and laughter and a
chant of ‘ha-ah-ha-ah!' from the spectators. The veiled women
crouched at the girls' heads. One of them reached out and
held down a thin , flailing arm. The elders' bare buttocks
pumped , whether in achlal coitus or an imitation Havzhiva
could not tell. ‘Th at's how you do it, watch , watch!' the
spectators shouted to the boys , amid jokes and comments and

15 6

FOUT Ways to FOTgiveness

roars of laughte r. The elders one by one stood up , each
shielding his penis with curious modesty.
When the last had stood up , the boys stepped forward. Each
lay down on a girl and pumped his buttocks up and down ,
though not one of them , Havzhiva saw , had had an erection.
The men around him grasped their own penises , shouting ,
‘Here , try mine!' and cheering and chanting until the last boy
scrambled to his fee t. The girls lay flat , their legs parted , like
little dead lizards. There was a slight, terrible movement
towards them in the crowd of men. But the old women were
hauling the girls to their feet , yanking them up , hurrying them
back across the bridge , followed by a wave of howls and jeers
from the audience.
‘They're drugged , you know ,' said the kind , dark man who
had shared Havzhiva's bed , looking into his face. ‘The girls. It
doesn't hurt them.'
‘Yes , 1 see ,' said Havzhiva , standing still in his place of
hono r.
‘These ones are lucky , privileged to assist initiation. It' s
important that girls cease to be virgin as soon as possible , you
know. Always more than one man must have them , you know.
So that they can't make claims 一“this is your son ,"“this baby
ís the chíe f's son ," you know. Tha t's all witchcraft. A son ís
chosen. Being a son has nothíng to do with bondswomen's
cunts. Bondswomen have to be taught that early. But the gírls
are given drugs now. It' s not like the old days , under the
Corporations.'
'1 understand ,' Havzhíva said. He looked into his friend's
face , thinking 出at his dark skin meant he must have a good
deal of owner blood , perhaps indeed was the son of an owner
or a Boss. Nobody's son , begotten on a slave woman. A son is
chosen. All knowledge is local , all knowledge is partial. In Stse,
ín the Schools of the Ekumen , in the compounds ofYeowe.
'you still call them bondswomen ,' he said. His tact, all hís

A Man

of the People

157

feelings were frozen , and he spoke in mere stl1 pid intellechlal
curiosity
'No ,' the dark man said ,‘ no , I' m sorry , the language 1
learned as a boy - 1 apologise 一'
'Not to me.'
Ag ain Havzhiva spoke only and coldly what was in his head.
The man winced and was silent, his head bowed.
'Please , my friend , take me to my room now ,' Havzhiva said ,
and the dark man gratefully obeyed him.
He talked softly into his noter in Hainish in the dark. 'You
can't change anything from ol1 tside it. Standing apart, looking
down , taking the overview, you see the pattern. Wh a t' s wrong,
wha t' s missing. You want to fix it. But you can't patch it. You
have to be in it, weaving it. You have to be part of the weaving.'
This last phrase was in the dialect of Stse.
Four women squatted on a patch of gro l1 nd on the women's
side , which had ro l1 sed his curiosity by its l1 ntrodden smoothness: some kind of sacred space , he had tho l1 gh t. He walked
towards them. They sq l1 atted graceless峙， h l1 nched forward
between their knees , with the indifference to their appearance ,
the carelessness of men's gaze , that he had noticed before on
the women's 訂de. Their heads were shaved , their skin chalky
and pale. D l1st people , dusties , was the old epithet, b l1 t to
Havzhiva their color was more like clay or ashes. The azure
tinge of palms and soles and wherever the skin was fine was
almost hidden by the soil they were handling. They had been
talking fast and ql1 ietly , but went silent as he came nea r. Two
were old , withered up , with knobby , wrinkled knees and fee t.
Two were young women. They all glanced sidelong from time
to time as he squatted down near the edge of the smooth patch
of ground.
On 祉， he saw, they had been spreading dust, colored earth ,
making some kind of pa仕ern or picture. Following the

158

Four Ways to Forgiveness

boundaries between colors he made out a long pale figure a
li仗le like a hand or a branch , and a deep curve of earthen red.
Having greeted them , he said nothing more , b l1t simply
squatted there. PresentI y they went back to what they were
doing，個Iking in whispers to one another now and then.
Wh en they stopped working, he said,‘Is it sacred?'
The old women looked at him , scowled , and said nothing.
'You can't see it: said the darker of the young women , with
a ßashing, teasing smile that took Havzhiva by surprise.
'1 shouldn't be here , you mean.'
‘No. You can be here. Bl1 t yO l1 can't see it.'
He rose and looked over the earth painting they had made
with grey and tan and red and l1 mber dl1st. Th e lines and forms
were in a definite relationship, rhythmical but pl1 zzling.
'It's not all there: he said.
'Th is is only a little , little bit of it: said the teasing woman ,
her dark eyes bright with mockery in her dark face.
'Never all of it at once?'
'No,' she said, and the others said, 'No: and even the old
women smiled.
'Can you tell me what the picture is?'
She did not know the word 'picture.' She glanced at 也e
others; she pondered, and looked l1 p at him shrewdly.
‘We make what we know, here ,' she said , with a soft gesture
over the softly colored design. A warm evening breeze was
already blurring the bO l1 ndaries between the colors.
'Th ey don't know it: said the other young woman , ashenskinned , in a whisper.
'The men? - They never see it whole?'
'Nobody does. Only l1S. We have it here.' The dark woman
did not tO l1 ch her head bl1 t her heart, covering her breasts with
her long, work-hardened hands. She smiled again.
Th e old women stood up; they muttered together , one said
something sharply to the yO l1 ng women , a phrase Havzhiva did
not understand; and they shlmped 。在

A Man

‘They don't approve

of the People

159

of your talking of this work to a man:

he said.
'A ci句I man: said the dark woman , and laughed. 'They think
we'll mn away.'
‘ Do you want to mn away?'
She shmgged. 可1here to?'
She rose to her feet in one graceful movement and looked
over the earth painting, a seemingly random , abstract pattern
of lines and colors, curves and areas.
'Can you see it?' she asked Havzhiva , with that liquid teasing
flash of the eyes.
'Maybe someday 1 can learn to ,' he said , meeting her gaze.
可ou'll have to find a woman to teach you ,' said the woman
the color of ashes.

‘We are a free

people now: said the Young Chief, the Son and
Heir, the Chosen.
‘1 haven't yet known a free people ,' Havzhiva said, polite ,
ambiguous.
'We won our freedom. We made ourselves free. By courage ,
by sacrifice, by holding fast to the one noble thing. We are a
free people.' The Chosen was a strong-faced, handsome ,
intelligent man of forty. Six gouged lines of scarring ran down
his upper arms like a rough mantle , and an open blue eye
stared between his eyes , unwinking.
'you are free men ,' Havzhiva said.
There was a silence.
‘Men of the cities do not understand our women ,' the
Chosen said. ‘Our women do not want a man's freedom. It is
not for them. A woman holds fast to her baby. Th at is the
noble thing for her. That is how the Lord Kamye made woman ,
and the Merciful Tual is her example. In other places it may
be differen t. There may be another kind of woman , who does
not care for her children. That may be. Here it is as 1 have
said.'

16。

Four Ways to Forgiveness

Havzhiva nodded , the deep , single nod he had learned from
the Yeowans , almost a bow. 'That is so ,' he said.
The Chosen looked gratified.
'1 have seen a picture ,' Havzhiva went on.
The Chosen was impassive; he might or might not know the
word. 'Lines and colors made with earth on earth may hold
knowledge in them. Al I knowledge is local , all tmth is partial ,'
Havzhiva said with an easy , colloql1 ial dignity that he knew
was an imitation of his mother, the Heir of the Sl1 n , talking to
foreign merchants. 'No tmth can make another tmth l1 ntme.
All knowledge is a part of the whole knowledge. A tme line, a
tme color. Once you have seen the larger pattern, you cannot
go back to seeing the part as the whole.'
Th e Chosen stood like a grey stone. After a while he said , 'If
we come to live as they live in the cities , all we know will be
lost.' Under his dogmatic tone was fear and grie f.
‘Chosen One,' Havzhiva said ,‘you speak the tmth. Much
will be los t. 1 know it. The lesser knowledge must be given to
gain the greater. An d not once only.'
。The men of this tribe wi1l not deny our tmth ,' the Chosen
said. His unseeing, unwinking central eye was fixed on the sun
that hung in a yellow dust-haze above the endless fields ,
though his own dark eyes gazed downward at the earth.
His gl1 est looked from that alien face to the fierce , white ,
small sun that sti1l blazed low above the alien land. ‘1 am sure
of that,' he said.
Wh en he was fifty-five , Stabile Yehedarhed Havzhiva went
back to Yotebber for a visi t. He had not been there for a long
time. His work as Ekumenical Advisor to the Yeowan Ministry
of Social Justice had kept him in the north , with frequent trips
to the other hemisphere. He had lived for years in the Old
Capital with his partner, bl1 t often visited the New Capital at
the request of a new Ambassador who wanted to draw on his
expertise. His partner - they had lived together for eighteen

A Man

of the People

161

years , but there was no marriage on Yeowe 一 had a book she
was trying to finish , and admitted that she would like to have
the apartment to herself for a couple of weeks while she wrote.
'Take that trip south you keep mooning about ,' she said. '1' 11
fly down as soon as I' m done. 1 won't te11 any damned
politicians where you are. Escape! Go , go , go!'
He wen t. He had never liked flying , though he had had to
do a great deal of 祉， and so he made the long journey by train.
They were good , fast trains , terribly crowded , people at every
station swarming and mshing and shouting bribes to the
conductors , though not trying to ride the roofs of the cars , not
at 130 kmh. He had a private room in a through car to
Yotebber City. He spent the long hours in silence watching the
landscape whirl by , the reclamation projects , the old wastelands , the young forests , the swarming cities , miles of shacks
and cabins and cottages and houses and apartment buildings ,
sprawling Werel-style compounds with connected houses and
kitchen gardens and worksheds , factories , huge new plants; and
then suddenly the country again , canals and irrigation tanks
reflecting the colors of the evening sky , a bare-legged child
walking with a great white OX past a 自 eld of shadowy grain.
The nights were short, a dark , rocking sweetness of sleep.
On the third afternoon he got off the train in Yotebber City
Station. No crowds. No chiefs. No bodyguards. He walked
through the hot, familiar streets , past the market, through the
City Park. A little bravado , there. Gangs , muggers were still
about , and he kept his eye alert and his feet on the main
pathways. On past the old Tualite temple. He had picked up a
white flower that had dropped from a shmb in the park. He set
it at the Mother's fee t. She smiled , looking cross-eyed at her
mlssmg nose. He walked on to the big , rambling new compound where Yeron lived.
She was seventy-four and had retired recently from the
hospital where she had taught, practised , and been an administrator for the \a st fifteen years. She was little changed from

162

FourWays 的 Forgiveness

the woman he had first seen sitting by his bedside, only she
seemed smaller all ove r. Her hair was quite gone , and she wore
a g1ittering kerchief tied round her head. They embraced hard
and kissed , and she stroked him and patted him , smi 1i ng
irrepressibly. They had never made love , but there had always
been a desire between them , a yearning for the other, a great
comfort in touch. ‘Look at that, look at that grey!' she cried ,
petting his hair ,‘how beautiful! Come in and have a glass of
wine with me! How is your Araha? Wh en is she coming? You
walked right across the city carrying that bag? You're sti11 crazy!'
He gave her the gift he had brought her, a treatise on Certain
Diseases of Werel-Yeowe by a team of Ekumenical medical
researchers , and she seized it greedily. For some while she
conversed only between plunges into the table of contents and
the chapter on be r1 ot. She poured out the pale orange wine.
They had a second glass. 可ou look fine , Havzhiva; she said ,
pl1 tting the book down and looking at him stead i1 y. Her eyes
had faded to an opaque bluish darkness. ‘Being a saint agrees
with yO l1.'
'It' s not that bad , Yeron.'
‘A hero , then. YO l1 can't deny that you're a hero.'
'No; he said with a laugh ‘ Knowing what a hero is , 1 won't
deny it.'
'Where would we be withollt yOll?'
'Just where we are now. . .' He sighed. ‘ Sometimes 1 think
we're losing what little we've ever won. This Tualbeda , in
Detake Province , don't underestimate him , Yeron. His
speeches are pure misogyny and anti-immigrant prej l1dice , and
people are eating it up 一，
She made a gesture that utterly dismissed the demagogue.
'There is no end to that; she said. 'But 1 knew what you were
going to be to l1 S. Right away. Wh en 1 heard your name , even.
1 knew.'
'you didn't give me much choice , you know.'
‘Bah. You chose , man.'

A Man of the People

163

'Yes ,' he said. He savored the wine. '1 did.' After a while he
said , 'Not many people have the choices 1 had. How to live ,
whom to live with , what work to do. Sometimes 1 think 1 was
able to choose because 1 grew up where all choices had been
made for me.'
‘So you rebelled , made your own way ,' she said , nodding.
He smiled. 'I' m no rebel.'
'Bah!' she said again. 'No rebel? You , in the thick of it, in
the heart of our movement all the wa戶，
‘Oh yes,' he said. 'But not in a rebellious spirit. That had to
be your spirit. My job was acceptance. To keep an acceptant
spirit. That' s what 1 learned growing up. To accept. Not to
change the world. Only to change the sou l. So that it can be
in the world. Be rightly in the world.'
She listened but looked unconvinced. 'Sounds like a
woman's way of being,' she said. 'Men generally want to
change things to suit.'
'Not the men of my people ,' he said.
She poured them a third glass of wine. 'Tell me about your
people. 1 was always afraid to ask. The Hainish are so old! So
learned! They know so much history , so many worlds! Us here
with our three hundred years of misery and murder and
ignorance - you don't know how small you make us feel.'
‘1 think 1 do ,' Havzhiva said. After a while he said, '1 was
bom in a town called Stse.'
He told her about the pl1 eblo, about the Other Sky people ,
his father who was his uncle , his mother the Heir of the Sun ,
the rites , the festivals , the daily gods , the l1 nus l1al gods; he told
her about changing being; he told her about the historian's
visit, and how he had changed being again , going to Kathhad.
'All those rules!' Yeron said. 'So complicated and unnecessary. Like our tribes. No wonder you ran away.'
'All 1 did was go leam in Kathhad what 1 wouldn't leam in
Stse,' he said, smiling. 'What the rules are. Ways of needing
one another. Human ecology. What have we been doing here ,

164

FourWays 的 Forgiveness

a11 these years , but trying to find a good set of rules - a pattern
that makes sense?' He stood up , stretched his shoulders , and
said , Tm drunk. Come for a walk with me.'
They went out into the sunny gardens of the compound and
walked slowly along the paths between vegetable plots and
flower beds. Yeron nodded to people weeding and hoeing, who
looked up and greeted her by name. She held Havzhiva's arm
firmly , with pride. He matched his steps to hers.
'Wh en you have to sit sti1l, you want to fly ,' he said , looking
down at her pale , gnarled , delicate hand on his arm. ‘If you
have to fly , you want to sit still. 1 learned sitting, at home. 1
learned flying , with the historians. But 1 still couldn't keep my
balance. '
'Then you came here ,' she said.
'Then 1 came here.'
'And learned?'
‘How to walk,' he said. ‘How to walk with my people.'

A 叭loman's Liberation
1.

SHOMEKE

My dear friend has asked me to write the story of my life ,
thinking it might be of interest to people of other worlds and
times. 1 am an ordinary woman , but 1 have lived in years of
mighty changes and have been advantaged to know with my
very flesh the nature of servihlde and the nature of freedom.
1 did not learn to read or write until 1 was a grown woman ,
which is all the excuse 1 will make for the faults of my narrative.
1 was born a slave on the planet 叫他 rel. As a child 1 was
called Shomekes' Radosse Rakam. That is , Property of the
Shomeke Family, Granddaughter of Dosse , Granddaughter of
Ka mye. The Shomeke family owned an estate on the eastern
coast of Voe Deo. Dosse was my grandmother. Kamye is the
Lord God.
The Shomekes possessed over four hundred assets , mostly
used to cultivate the fields of gede , to herd the saltgrass cattle ,
to work in the mills , and as domestics in the House. The
Shomeke family had been great in history. Our Owner was an
important man political峙， often away in the capital.
Assets took their name from their grandmother because it
was the grandmother that raised the child. Th e mother worked
all day, and there was no fathe r. Women were always bred to
more than one man. Even if a man knew his child he could
not care for it. He might be sold or traded away at any time.

166

Four Ways to Forgiveness

Young men were seldom kept long on the estates. If they
were valuable , they were traded to other estates or sold to
the factories. If they were worthless , they were worked to
death.
Women were not often sold. The young ones were kept for
work and breeding, the old ones to raise the young and keep
the compound in orde r. On some estates women bore a baby a
year till they died , but on ours most had only two or three
children. The Shomekes valued women as workers. Th ey did
not want the men always getting at the women. The grandmothers agreed with them and guarded the young women
closely.
I say men , women , children , but you are to understand that
we were not called men , women , children. Only our owners
were called so. We assets or slaves were called bondsmen,
bondswomen , and pups or young. 1 will use those words ,
though 1 have not heard or spoken them for many years , and
never before on this blessed world.
The bondsmen's part of the compound , the gateside , was
ruled by the Bosses , who were men , some relations of the
Shomeke family , others hired by them. On the inside the
young and the bondswomen lived. There two cutfrees, castrated
bondsmen, were the Bosses in name , but the grandmothers
ruled. Indeed nothing in the compound happened without the
grandmothers' knowledge.
If the grandmothers said an asset was too sick to work, the
Bosses would let that one stay home. Sometimes the grandmothers could save a bondsman from being sold away, sometimes they could protect a girl from being bred by more than
one man , or could give a delicate girl a contraceptive. Everybody in the compound obeyed the council of the grandmothers. Bllt if one of them went too far , the Bosses would
have her ßogged or blinded or her hands cut off: When I was a
young child, there lived in our compollnd a woman we called
Great-Grandmother, who had holes for eyes and no tongue. I

A Woman's Lí beration

167

thought that she was thus because she was so old. 1 feared that
my grandmother Dosse's tongue would wither in her mouth. 1
told her tha t. She said , 'No. It won't get any shorter, because 1
don't let it get too long.'
1 lived in the compound. My mother birthed me there , and
was allowed to stay three months to nurse me; then 1 was
weaned to cow's milk , and my mother returned to the House.
Her name was Shomekes' Rayowa Yowa. She was light-skinned
like most of the assets , but very beautiful , with slender wrists
and ankles and delicate feahues. My grandmother , too , was
light, but 1 was dark , darker than anybody else in the
compound.
My mother came to visit, the cutfrees letting her in by their
ladder-d oo r. She found me rubbing grey dust on my body.
Wh en she scolded me , 1 胎ld her that 1 wanted to look like the
others.
‘Listen , Rakam ,' she said to me ,‘ they are dust people. They'll
never get out of the dus t. You're something bette r. And you
will be beautiful. Why do you think you're so blac缸， 1 had no
idea what she mean t.‘ Someday I'll tell you who yom father is ,'
she said ，的 if she were promising me a gift. 1 knew that the
Shomekes' stallion, a prized and valuable animal , serviced
mares from other estates. 1 did not know a father could be
human.
That evening 1 boasted to my grandmother: ‘I'm beautiful
because the black stallion is my father!' Dosse struck me across
the head so that 1 fell down and wep t. She said ,‘Never speak
of your fathe r.'
1 knew there was anger between my mother and my
grandmother , but it was a long time before 1 understood why.
Even now 1 am not sure 1 understand all that lay between
them.
We little pups ran around in the compound. We knew
nothing outside the walls. All our world was the bondswomen's
huts and the bondsmen's longhouses , the kitchens and kitchen

168

Four Ways to Forgiveness

gardens , the bare plaza beaten hard by b~ue fee t. To me , the
stockade wall seemed a long way off.
When the 自 eld and mill hands went out the gate in the early
morning 1 didn't know where they wen t. They were just gone.
All day long the whole compound belonged to us pups , naked
in the Sl1 mmer , mostly naked in the winter too , running around
playing with sticks and stones and mud , keeping away from the
grandmothers , until we begged them for something to eat or
they put us to work weeding the gardens for a while.
In the evening or the early night the workers would come
back , trooping in the gate guarded by the Bosses. Some were
worn out and grim , others would be cheerful and talking and
calling back and forth. The great gate was slammed behind the
last of them. Smoke went up from all the cooking stoves. The
burning cowdung smelled swee t. People gathered on the
porches of the huts and longhouses. Bondsmen and bondswomen lingered at the ditch that divided the gateside from the
inside , talking across the ditch. Aft er the meal the freedmen
led prayers to Tua l's statue , and we lifted our own prayers to
Kamye , and then people went to their beds , except for those
who lingered to 'jump the ditch.' Some nights , in the summer,
there would be singing, or a dance was allowed. In the winter
one of the grandfathers - poor old broken men, not strong
people like the grandmothers - would ‘sing the word.' That is
what we called reciting the Arkamye. Every night, always , some
of the people were teaching and others were learning the
sacred verses. On winter nights one of these old worthless
bondsmen kept alive by the grandmothers' charity would begin
切 sing the word. Then even the pups would be still to listen 如
that story.
The friend of my heart was Walsu. She was bigger than 1,
and was my defender when there were fights and quarrels
among the young or when older pups called me ‘Bl ackie' and
‘Bossie.' 1 was small but had a fierce tempe r. Together , Walsu
and 1 did not get bothered much. Then Walsu was sent out the

A Woman's Liberatíon

169

gate. Her mother had been bred and was now shlffed big, so
that she needed help in the fi. elds to make her quota. Gede
must be hand-harvested. Every day as a new section of the
bearing stalk comes ripe it has to be picked , and so gede pickers
go throllgh the same fi. eld over and over for twenty or thirty
days , and then move on to a later planting. Walsu went with
her mother to help her pick her rows. When her mother fell
ill , Walsll took her place, and with help from other hands she
kept up her mother's quota. She was then six years old by
owner's cOllnt, which gave all assets the same birthday, new
year's day at the beginning of spring. She might have tmly
been seven. Her mother remained ill both before birthing and
after, and Walsu took her place in the gede field all that time.
She never afterward came back to play, only in the evenings 岫
eat and sleep. 1 saw her then and we could talk. She was proud
of her work. 1 envied her and longed to go through the gate. 1
followed her to it and looked through it at the world. Now the
walls of the compound seemed very close.
1 told my grandmother Dosse that 1 wanted to go to work in
the fields.
'Yoll're too young.'
'I'll be seven at the new year.'
'Your mother made me promise not to let you go out.'
Next time my mother visited the compound, 1 said , 'Grandmother won't let me go ou t. 1 want to go work with Walsu.'
'Never: my mother said. 'You were born for be仕er than that.'
'WhatJor?'
‘YOll'll see.'
She smiled at me. 1 knew she meant the House , where she
worked. She had told me often of the wonderful things in the
HOllse , things that shone and were colored brightly, things that
were thin and delicate , clean things. It was quiet in the HOllse ,
she said. My mother herself wore a beautiflll red scarf, her
voice was soft, and her clothing and body were always clean
and fresh.

170

Four Ways to Forgíveness

可九1h en will 1 see?'
1 teased her until she said , 'Al I right! I'll ask my lady.'
'Ask her what?'
All 1 knew of my-Iady was that she too was delicate and
clean, and that my mother belonged to her in some particular
way, of which she was proud. 1 knew my-Iady had given my
mother the red scarf.
Tll ask her if you can come begin training at the House.'
My mother said ‘the House' in a way that made me see it as
a great sacred place like the place in our prayer: May 1 enter in
the clear house, in the rooms of þeace.
1 was so excited 1 began to dance and sing, Tm going to the
House, to the House!' My mother slapped me to make me stop
and scolded me for being wild. She said ,‘You are too young!
You can't behave! If you get sent away from the House , you
can never come back.'
1 promised to be old enough.
可ou must do everything right,' Yowa told me. 'You must do
everything 1 say when 1 say it. Never question. Never delay. If
my lady sees that you're wild , she'll send you back here. And
that will be the end of you forever.'
1 promised to be tame. 1 promised to obey at once in
everything, and not to speak. The more frightening she made
it, the more 1 desired to see the wonderflll , shining HOllse.
When my mother left 1 did not believe she would speak 切
my-Iady. 1 was not used to promises being kept. But after some
days she retumed , and 1 heard her speaking to my grandmothe r.
Dosse was angry at fir哎， speaking IOlldly. 1 crept under the
window of the hut to listen. 1 heard my grandmother weep. 1
was frightened and amazed. My grandmother was patient with
me , always looked after me , and fed me well. It had never
entered my mind that there was anything more to it than that,
until 1 heard her crying. Her crying made me cry，的 if 1 were
part ofher.
可ou could let me keep her one more year ,' she said. ‘She's

A Woman's Líberatíon

171

just a baby. 1 would never let her out the gate.' She was
pleading, as if she were powerless , not a grandmothe r.‘ She is
my joy, Yowa!'
‘ Oon't you want her to do well , then?'
‘Just a year more. She's too wild for the House.'
‘She's run wild too long. She'll get sent out to the fields if
she stays. A year of that and they won't have her at the House.
She'll be dus t. Anyhow, there's no use crying about it. 1 asked
my lady , and she's expected. 1 can't go back without her.'
可owa ， don't let her come to harm ,' Oosse said very low , as
if ashamed to say this to her daughter, and yet with strength in
her voice.
'I' m taking her to keep her out of harm ,' my mother said.
Then she called me , and 1 wiped my tears and came.
It is queer , bllt 1 do not remember my first walk through the
world outside the compound or my first sight of the HOllse. 1
suppose 1 was frightened and kept my eyes down , and everything was so strange to me that 1 did not understand what 1
saw. 1 know it was a number of days before my mother took me
to show me to Lady Tazeu. She had to scrub me and train me
and make sure 1 would not disgrace he r. 1 was terrified when
at last she took my hand , scolding me in a whisper all the time ,
and brought me out of the bondswornen's quarters , through
halls and doorways of painted wood , into a bright, sunny roorn
with no roof; full of flowers growing in pots.
1 had hardly ever seen a Rower , only the weeds in the
kitchen gardens , and 1 stared and stared at thern. My mother
had to jerk my hand to make me look at the wornan lying in a
chair among the Rowe筒， in clothes soft and brightly colored
like the Rowers. 1 could hardly tell them apart. The woman's
hair was long and shining, and her skin was shining and black.
My rnother Pllshed me , and 1 did what she had rnade me
practice over and over: 1 went and knelt down beside the chair
and waited , and when the woman pllt Ollt her long, narrow ,
soft hand , black above and azure on the palm , 1 touched my

172

Four Ways to Forgiveness

forehead to it. 1 was sllpposed to say ‘1 am your slave Rakam ,
ma'am ,' bllt my voice wOllld not come Oll t.
明1hat a pretty 1ittle thing,' she said. 'So dark.' Her voice
changed a little on the last words.
‘甘le Bosses came in ... that night,' Yowa said in a timid ,
smiling way, looking down as if embarrassed.
'No doubt about that: the woman said. 1 was able to glance
up at her again. She was beautifu 1. 1 did not know a person
could be so beautifu 1. 1 think she saw my wonde r. She put out
her long, soft hand again and caressed my cheek and nec k.
'Very, very pret紗， Yowa ,' she said. 'You did quite right to bring
her here. Has she been bathed?'
She wOllld not have asked that if she had seen me when 1
first came，自lthy and smelling of the cowdung we made our
fires with. She knew nothing of the compound at all. She knew
nothing beyond the beza, the women's side of the House. She
was kept there just as 1 had been kept in the compollnd,
ignorant of anything outside. She had never smelled cowdung,
的 1 had never seen flowers.
My mother assured her 1 was clean, and she said, 'Th en she
can come to bed with me tonigh t. I'd like tha t. W il1 you like to
come sleep with me , pretty little 一， She glanced at my mother,
who murmured ,‘Rakam.' Ma'am pursed her lips at the name.
'1 don't like that,' she murmured. ‘So ugly. Toti. Yes. You can
be my new Toti. Bring her this evening, Yowa.'
She had had a foxdog called Toti , my mother told me. Her
pet had died. 1 did not know animals ever had names , and so it
did not seem odd to me to be given an anima l's name , but it
did seem strange at first not to be Rakam. 1 could not think of
myself as Toti.
That night my mother bathed me again and oiled my skin
with sweet oil and dressed me in a soft gown , softer even than
her red scarf. Again she scolded and warned me , bllt she was
excited, too , and pleased with me , as we went to the beza
again , through other halls , meeting some other bondswomen

A Woman's Li beration

173

on the way , and to the lady's bedroom. It was a wonderflll
room , hllng with mirrors and draperies and paintings. 1 did not
llnderstand what the mirrors were , or the paintings , and was
frightened when 1 saw people in them. Lady Tazell saw that 1
was frightened. ‘Come , little one ,' she said , making a place for
me in her great, wide , soft bed strewn with pillows,‘come and
cllddle IIp.' 1 crawled in beside her , and she stroked my hair
and skin and held me in her warm , soft arms until 1 was
comfortable and at ease. 'There , there , little Toti ,' she said , and
so we slept.
1 became the pet of Lady Tazell Wehoma Shomeke. 1 slept
with her almost every nigh t. Her hllsband was seldom home
and when he was there did not come to her , preferring
bondswomen for his pleasure. Sometimes she had my mother
or other, yOllnger bondswomen come into her bed , and she
sent me away at those times , llntil 1 was older, ten or eleven ,
when she began to keep me and have me join in with them ,
teaching me how to be pleasured. She was gentle , but she was
the mistress in love , and 1 was her instrument which she
played.
1 was also trained in household arts and duties. She taught
me to sing with her, as 1 had a tme voice. Al l those years 1 was
never punished and never made 胎 do hard work. 1 who had
been wild in the compound was perfectly obedient in the
Great House. 1 had been rebellious to my grandmother and
impatient of her commands , bllt whatever my lady ordered me
to do 1 gladly did. She held me fast to her by the only kind of
love she had to give me. 1 thought that she was the Merciflll
Tual come down upon the earth. That is not a way of speaking,
也at is the tmth. 1 thought she was a higher being, superior to
mysel f.
Perhaps you will say that 1 could not or should not have had
pleasure in being used without my consent by my mistress , and
if 1 did , 1 should not speak of 祉， showing even so little good in

174

FOUT Ways to FOTgiveness

so great an evi l. But 1 knew nothing of consent or refusal.
are freedom words.
She had one child, a son , three years older than 1. She lived
q l1 ite alone among us bondswomen. The Wehomas were
nobles of the Islands , old-fashioned people whose women did
not travel , so she was cut off from her family. The only
company she had was when Owner Shomeke brought friends
with him from the capital , but those were a]] men , and she
could be with them only at table.
1 seldom saw the Owner and only at a distance. 1 thought he
too was a superior being, but a dangerous one.
As for Erod , the Young Owner, we saw him when he came
to visit his mother daily or when he went out riding with his
tutors. We girls wO l1ld peep at him and giggle to each other
when we were eleven or twelve , because he was a handsome
boy, night-black and slender like his mother. 1 knew that he
was afraid of his father , because 1 had heard him weep when
he was with his mother. She would comfort him with candy
and caresses , saying, 'He']] be gone again soon , my darling.' 1
too felt sorry for Erod , who was like a shadow, soft and harmless.
He was sent off to school for a year at fifteen , but his father
brought himback before the year was up. Bondsmen told us
the Owner had beaten him crue]]y and had forbidden him
even to ride off the estate.
Bondswomen whom the Owner used told us how brutal he
was , showing us where he had bruised and hurt them. Th ey
hated him , bl1 t my mother would not speak against him. Who
do you think you are?' she said to a gi r1 who was complaining
of his use of her. ‘A lady to be treated like glass?' And when the
girl found herself pregnant, stuff亡d was the word we used , rny
mother had her sent back to the compound. 1 did not
understand why. 1 thought Yowa was hard and jealous. Now 1
think she was also protecting the girl from our lady's jealousy.
1 do not know when 1 understood that 1 was the Owner's
daughter. Because she had kept 出at secret from our lady, my

甘lOse

A Woman's Liberation

175

mother believed it was a secret from all. But the bondswomen
all knew it. 1 do not know what 1 heard or overheard , but when
1 saw Erod , 1 would Shldy him and think that 1 looked much
more like our father than he did , for hy then 1 knew what a
father was. And 1 wondered that Lady Tazeu did not see it. But
she chose to live in ignorance.
During these years 1 seldom went to the compound. After 1
had been a hal舟ear or so at the Hou咒 1 was eager to go back
and see Walsu and my grandmother and show them my fine
clothes and clean skin and shining hair; but when 1 went, the
pups 1 used to play with threw dirt and stones at me and tore
my clothes. Walsu was in the fields. 1 had to hide in my
grandmother's hut all day. 1 never wanted to go back. When
my grandmother sent for me , 1 would go only with my mother
and always stayed close by he r. Th e people in the compound ,
even my grandmother, came to look coarse and foul 切 me.
Th ey were dirty and smelled strongly. They had sores , scars
from punishment, lopped fingers , ears, or noses. Their hands
and feet were coarse, with deformed nails. 1 was no longer used
to people who looked so. We domestics of the Great House
閑時 entirely different from them , 1 though t. Serving the higher
beings , we became like them.
When 1 was thirteen and fourteen Lady Tazeu stil1 kept me
in her bed, making love to me often. But also she had a new
pet, the daughter of one of the cooks , a pretty little girl though
white as clay. One night she made love to me for a long time
in ways that she knew gave me great ecstasy of the body. When
1 lay exhausted in her arms she whispered 'good-bye , good-bye ,'
kissing me all over my face and breasts. 1 was too spent to
wonder at this.
The next morning my lady called in my mother and myself.
to tell us that she intended to give me to her son for his
seventeenth birthday. ‘1 shall miss you terribly, Toti darling,'
she said, with tears in her eyes. 'You have been my joy. But
there isn't another girl on the place that 1 could let Erod have.

176

Four Ways to Forgiveness

YOll are the cleanest, dearest, sweetest of them all. 1 know yOll
are a virgin ,' she meant a virgin to men , 'and 1 know my boy
will enjoy you. And he'll be kind to her, Yowa ,' she said
earnestly to my mother. My mother bowed and said nothing.
There was nothing she cOllld say. And she said nothing to me.
It was too late to speak of the secret she had been so proud of:
Lady Tazell gave me medicine to prevent conception , bllt
my mother , not trusting the medicine , went to my grandmother
and brollght me contraceptive herbs. 1 took both faithfully that
week.
If a man in the House visited his wife he came to the beza ,
bllt if he wanted a bondswoman she was ‘sent across.' So on
the night of the YOllng Owner's birthday 1 was dressed all in
red and led over , for the first time in my life , to the men's side
of the HOllse.
My reverence for my lady extended to her son , and 1 had
been tallght that owners were superior by nahue to us. BlI t he
was a boy whom 1 had known since childhood , and 1 knew that
his blood and mine were half the same. It gave me a strange
feeling towards him.
1 thought he was shy , afraid of his manhood. Other girls had
tried to tempt him and failed. The women had told me what 1
was to do , how to offer mys eI f and encourage him , and 1 was
ready to do tha t. 1 was brought to him in his great bedroom , all
of stone carved like lace , with high , thin windows of violet
glass. 1 stood timidly near the door for a while , and he stood
near a table covered with papers and screens. He came forward
at last, took my hand , and led me to a chai r. He made me sit
down , and spoke to me standing, which was all improper, and
confused my mind.
‘Rakam ,' he said - 'that's your name, isn't it?' 一 1 nodded 'Rakam , my mother means only kindness , and you must not
think me ungrateful to her , or blind to your beauty. But 1 will
not take a woman who cannot freely offer hersel f. Intercourse
between owner and slave is rape.' And he talked on , talking

A Woman's Liberation

177

beautifully, as when my lady read aloud from one of her books.
1 did not understand much , except that 1 was to come whenever
he sent for me and sleep in his bed , but he would never touch
me. And 1 was not to speak of this to anyone. '1 am sorry, 1 am
very sorry to ask you to lie: he said, so earnestly that 1 wondered
if it hmt him to lie. That made him seem more like a god than
a human being. If it hmt to lie , how could you stay alive?
‘1 will do just as yOll say, Lord Erod: 1 said.
So , most nights , his bondsmen came to bring me across. 1
wOllld sleep in his great bed, while he worked at the papers on
his table. He slept on a cOllch beneath the windows. Often he
wanted to talk to me , sometimes for a long time , telling me his
ideas. Wh en he was in school in the capital he had become a
member of a group of owners who wished to abolish slavery,
called The Community. Getting wind of this , his father had
ordered him out of school, sent him home , and forbidden him
to leave the estate. So he too was a prisoner. But he corresponded constanÙY with others in Th e Community through
the net, which he knew how to operate without his father's
knowledge , or the governmen t's.
His head was so full of ideas he had to speak them. Often
Geu and Ahas , the young bondsmen who had grown up with
him , who always came to fetch me across , stayed with us while
he talked to all of us about slavery and freedom and many
other things. Often 1 was sleepy, bllt 1 did listen , and heard
much 1 did not know how to understand or even believe. He
胎ld us there was an organisation among assets , called the
Hame , that worked to steal slaves from the plantations. These
slaves would be brought to members of The Communi甘， who
wOllld make out false papers of ownership and treat them well ,
renting them to decent work in the cities. He told us about the
cities, and 1 loved to hear all tha t. He told us about Yeowe
Colony, saying that there was a revolution there among the
slaves.
Of Yeowe 1 knew nothing. It was a great blue-green star that

178

Four Ways to Forgiveness

set after the sun or rose before it, brighter than the smallest of
the moons. It was a name in an old song they sang in the
compound:

0 , 0 , Ye-o-we ,
Nobody never comes back.
1 had no idea what a revolution was. Wh en Erod told me that
it meant that assets on plantations in this place called Yeowe
were fighting their owners , 1 did not understand how assets
cOllld do tha t. From the beginning it was ordained that there
ShOllld be higher and lower beings, the Lord and the hllman ,
the man and the woman , the owner and the owned. Al I my
world was Shomeke Estate and it stood on that one fOllndation.
Who wOllld want to overhun it? Everyone would be crushed
in the ruins.
1 did not like Erod to call assets slaves , an llgly word that
took away our vallle. 1 decided in my mind that here on Werel
we were assets , and in that other place , Yeowe Colony, there
were slaves , worthless bondspeople , intractables. That was why
they had been sent there. It made good sense.
By this you know how ignorant 1 was. Sometimes Lady
Tazeu had let us watch shows on the holonet with her , bllt she
watched only dramas , not the reports of events. Of the world
beyond the estate 1 knew nothing but what 1 learned from
Erod , and that 1 cOllld not llnderstand.
Erod liked us to arglle with him. He thollght it meant our
minds were growing free. Geu was good at it. He would ask
qllestions like ,‘But if there's no assets , who'll do the work?'
Then Erod could answer at length. His eyes shone , his voice
was eloquent. 1 loved him very mllch when he talked to us. He
was beautiful and what he said was beautiful. It was like
hearing the old men 'singing the word ,' reciting the Arkam戶，
when 1 was a li仗le pllp in the compollnd.
1 gave the contraceptives my lady gave me every month to
girls who needed them. Lady Tazeu had arollsed my sexuality

A Woman's Liberation

179

and accustomed me to being used sexually. 1 missed her
caresses. But 1 did not know how to approach any of the
bondswomen , and they were afraid to approach me , since
belonged to the Young Owne r. Being with Erod often , while
he talked 1 yearned for him in my body. 1 lay in his bed and
dreamed that he came and stooped over me and did with me
as my lady used to do. Bllt he never touched me.
Geu also was a handsome young man , clean and well
mannered , rather dark-skinned , attractive to me. His eyes were
always on me. Bllt he would not approach me , llntil 1 told him
that Erod did not tOllch me.
Thus 1 broke my promise to Erod not to tell anyone; bllt 1
did not think myself bOllnd to keep promises , as 1 did not think
myself bOllnd to speak the truth. Honor of that kind was for
owners , not for us.
After that, Geu used to tell me when to meet him in the
attics of the House. He gave me li位le pleasure. He wOllld not
pene甘ate me , believing that he mllst save my virginity for our
master. He had me take his penis in my mouth instead. He
would tllrn away in his climax, for the slave's sperm must not
defile the master's woman. Th at is the honor of a slave.
Now you may say in disgllst that my story is all of sllch
things , and there is far more to life , even a slave's life , than sex.
That is very true. 1 can say only 血at it may be in our sexuality
that we are most easily enslaved, both men and women. It may
be there , even as free men and women , that we find freedom
hardest to keep. The politics of the flesh are the roots of power.
1 was yOllng, fllll of health and desire for joy. And even now,
even here , when 1 look back across the years from this world to
that, to the compound and the HOllse of Shomel惚， 1 see images
like those in a bright dream. 1 see my grandmother's big, hard
hands. 1 see my mother smiling, the red scarf about her neck. 1
see iny lady's black, silky body among the cushions. 1 smell 出e
smoke of the cowdllng fires , and the perfllmes of the beza. 1
feel the so面，自ne clothing on my young body, and my lady's

18。

Four Ways to Forgiveness

hands and lips. 1 hear the old men singing the word , and my
voice twining with my lady's voice in a love song, and Erod
telling us of freedom. His face is illuminated with his vision.
Behind him the windows of stone lace and violet glass keep
out the night. 1 do not say 1 would go bac k. 1 would die before
1 would go back to Shomeke. 1 would die before 1 left this free
world , my world , to go back to the place of slavery. But
whatever 1 knew in my youth of beauty, of love , and of hope ,
was there.
And there it was betrayed. All that is built upon that
foundation in the end betrays itsel f.
1 was sixteen years old in the year the world changed.
The 自 rst change 1 heard about was of no interest to me
except that my lord was excited about 祉， and so were Geu and
Ahas and some of the other young bondsmen. Even my
grandmother wanted to hear about it when 1 visited he r. 'That
Yeowe , that slave world ,' she said ,‘ they made freedom? They
sent away their owners? They opened the gates? My lord , my
sweet Lord Kamye , how can that be? Praise his name , praise
his marvels!' She rocked back and forth as she squatted in the
dust, her arms about her knees. She was an 0泊， shrunken
woman now. 'Tell me!' she said.
1 knew little else to tell he r. 'All the soldiers came back here ,'
1 said. 'And those other people , those alemens , they're there on
Yeowe. Maybe they're the new owners. Tha t' s all somewhere
way out there ,' 1 said , Aipping my hand at the sky.
明!hat's alemens?' my grandmother asked , but 1 did not
know.
It was all mere words to me.
But when our Owner, Lord Shome址， came home sick , that
1 understood. He came on a Ayer to our li仕Ie port. 1 saw him
carried by on a stretcher, the whites showing in his eyes , his
black skin mottled grey. He was dying of a sickness that was
ravaging the cities. My mother , si仕mgwl出 Lady Tazeu , saw a
politician on the net who said that the alemens had brought

A Woman's Líberation

181

the sickness 切 Werel. He talked so fearsomely that we thought
everybody was going to die. Wh en 1 told Ge l1 about it he
snorted. ‘Aliens , not alemens ,' he said,‘ and they've got nothing
to do with it. My lord talked with the doctors. It's jl1 st a new
kind of pl1sworm.'
That dreadful disease was bad eno l1 gh. We knew that any
asset found to be infected with it was slaughtered at once like
an animal and the corpse bl1 rned on the spo t.
They did not slaughter the Owne r. The HO l1se filled with
doctors , and Lady Tazeu spent day and night by her husband's
bed. It was a cruel death. It went on and on. Lord Shomeke in
his suffering made terrible sounds , screams , howls. One would
not believe a man c0111d cry out hom after hom as he did. His
flesh ulcerated and fell away , he went mad , but he did not die.
As Lady Tazeu became like a shadow, worn and silent, Erod
filled with strength and excitement. Sometimes when we heard
his father howling his eyes would shine. He would whisper,
‘Lady Tual have mercy on him ,' but he fed on those cries. 1
knew from Geu and Ahas , who had been bro l1 ght l1 p with him ,
how the father had tormented and despised him , and how
Erod had vowed to be everything his father was not and to
l1 ndo all he did.
But it was Lady Taze l1 who ended it. One night she sent
away the other attendants , as she often did , and sat alone with
the dying man. Wh en he began his moaning howl , she took
her little sewing knife and Cl1 t his throa t. Then she cut the
veins in her arms across and across , and lay down by him , and
so died. My mother was in the next room all nigh t. She said
she wondered a li仕le at the silence , but was so weary that she
fell asleep; and in the morning she went in and found them
lying in their cold blood.
Al l 1 wanted to do was weep for my lady, but everything was
in confusion. Everything in the sickroom must be burned , the
doctors said , and the bodies must be burned without delay.
Th e House was under quarantine , 50 only the priests of the

182

Four Ways to Forgiveness

House could hold the funera l. No one was to leave the estate
for twenty days. But several of the doctors themselves left when
Erod , who was now Lord Shomeke , told them what he
intended to do. 1 heard some confused word of it from Ah肘，
but in my grief 1 paid little heed.
That evening, all the House assets stood outside the Lady's
Chapel during the funeral service to hear the songs and prayers
within. The Bosses and cutfrees had brought the people from
the compound , and they stood behind us. We saw the procession come out, the white biers carried by, the pyres lighted ,
and the black smoke go up. Long before the smoke ceased
rising , the new Lord Shomeke came to llS all where we stood.
Erod stood up on the li仕le rise of ground behind the chapel
and .spoke in a strong voice such as 1 had never heard from
him. Always in the House it had been whispering in the dark.
Now it was broad day and a strong voice. He stood there black
and straight in his white mourning clothes. He was not yet
twenty years old. He said,‘Listen , you people: yòu have been
slaves , you will be free. You have been my property, you will
own your own lives now. This morning 1 sent to the Government the Order of Manumission for every asset on the estate,
four hundred and eleven men , women , and children. If you
will come to my office in the Counting House in the morning,
1 will give you your papers. Each of you is named in those
papers as a free person. You can never be enslaved again. You
are free to do as you please from tomorrow on. There will be
money for each one of you to begin your new life with. Not
what you deserve , not what you have earned in all your work
for us , but what 1 have to give you. 1 am leaving Shomeke. 1
will go to the capital , where 1 will work for the freedom of
every slave on Werel. The Freedom Day that came to Yeowe
is coming to us , and soon. Any of you who wish to come with
me , come! There's work for us all to do!'
1 remember all he said. Those are his words as he spoke
them. When one does not read and has not had one's mind

A Woman's Lí beration

18 3

filled up by the images on the nets , words spoken strike down
deep in the mind.
There was sllch a silence when he stopped speaking as 1 had
never heard.
One of the doctors began talking, protesting to Erod that he
mllst not break the quarantine.
'The evil has been burned away ,' Erod said , with a great
gesture to the black smoke rising. 'This has been an evil place ,
but no more harm will go forth from Shomeke!'
At that a slow sOllnd began among the compollnd people
standing behind us , and it swelled into a great noise of
jubilation mixed with wailing , crying, shouting , singing. 'Lord
Kamye! Lord Kamye!' the men shollted. An old woman came
forward: my grandmothe r. She strode through llS House assets
as if we were a field of grain. She stopped a good way from
Erod. People fell silent to listen to the grandmothe r. She said ,
'Lord Master, are yOll turning llS Ollt of our homes?'
‘No ,' he said. 'They are yours. The land is yours to use. The
profit of the fields is yours. This is your home , and you are
free!'
At that the ShOllts rose up again so loud 1 cowered down and
covered my ears , bllt 1 was crying and shouting too , praising
Lord Erod and Lord Kamye in one voice with the rest of them.
We danced and sang there in sight of the bllrning pyres
llntil the sun went down. At last the grandmothers and the
clltfrees got the people to go back to the compound , saying
they did not have their papers ye t.叭1e domestics went straggling back to the HOllse , talking about tomorrow , when we
would get our freedom and our money and our land.
Al l that next day Erod sat in the COllnting HOllse and made
out the papers for each slave and counted out the same amount
of money for each: a hllndred klle in cash , and a draft for five
hundred kue on the district bank , which could not be drawn
for forty days. Th is was , he explained to each one，切 save them
from exploitation by the unscruplllous before they knew how

184

Four Ways to Forgiveness

best to use their money. He advised them to form a cooperative,
切 pool their funds , to run the estate democratically. 'Money in
the bank, Lord!' an old crippled man came out crying, jigging
on his twisted legs. ‘Money in the bank, Lord!'
If they wanted , Erod said over and over, they could save
their money and contact the Hame, who would help them buy
passage to Yeowe with it.
'0, 0 , Ye -o -we ,' somebody began singing, and they changed
the words:

Everybody's going to go.
0 , 0 , Ye -o -we,
Everybody's going to go!'
They sang it all day long. Nothing could change the sadness
of it. 1 want to weep now, remembering that song，出at day.
The next morning Erod left. He could not wait to get away
from the place of his misery and begin his life in the capital
working for freedom. He did not say good-bye to me. He took
Geu and Ahas with him. The doctors and their aides and assets
had allleft the day before. We watched his ßyer go IIp into the
au.
We went back to the House. It was like something dead.
Th ere were no owners in it, no masters , no one to tell us what
to do.
My mother and 1 went in to pack up our clothing. We had
said little to each other, but felt we could not stay there. We
heard other women running through the beza , rummaging in
Lady Tazeu's rooms , going through her closets , laughing and
screaming with excitement, finding jewelry and valuables. We
heard men's voices in the hall: Bosses' voices. Without a word
my mother and 1 took what we had in our hands and went out
by a back door, slipped throllgh the hedges of the garden, and
ran all the way to the compound.
The great gate of the compound stood wide open.

A Woman's Líberatíon

18 5

How can 1 tell you what that was to us , to see that , to see
that gate stand open? How can 1 tell you?
2.

ZESKRA

Erod knew nothing about how the estate was run , because the
Bosses ran it. He was a prisoner tOO. He had lived in his
screens , his dreams , his visions.
The grandmothers and others in the compound had spent
all that night trying to make plans , to draw our people together
so they could defend themselves. That morning when my
mother and 1 came , there were bondsmen guarding the
compound with weapons made of farm tools. The grandmothers and cutfrees had made an election of a headman , a
strong, well-liked field hand. In that way they hoped to keep
the young men with them.
By the afternoon that hope was broken. The young men ran
wild. They went up to the House to loot it. The Bosses shot
them from the windows , killing many; the others fled away.
The Bosses stayed holed up in the House , drinking the wine of
the Shomek凹. Owners of other plantations were flying reinforcements to them. We heard the flyers land , one after
anothe r. The bondswomen who had stayed in the House were
at their mercy now.
As for us in the compound , the gates were closed again. We
had moved the great bars from the outside to the inside , so we
thought ourselves safe for the night at leas t. But in the midnight
they came with heavy tractors and pushed down the wall , and
a hundred men or more , our Bosses and owners from all the
plantations of the region , came swarming in. They were armed
with guns. We fought them with farm tools and pieces of wood.
One or two of them were hurt or kil1 ed. Th ey kil1 ed as many
of us as they wanted to kil1 and then began to rape us. It went
on all nigh t.
A group of men took all the old women and men and held

186

FourWays 的 Forgíveness

them and shot them between the eyes , the way they kill cattle.
My grandmother was one of them. 1 do not know what
happened to my mothe r. 1 did not see any bondsmen living
when they took me away in the morning. 1 saw white papers
lying in the blood on the ground. Freedom papers.
Several of us girls and young women still alive were herded
into a truck and taken to the port field. There they made us
enter a ftyer , shoving and using sticks , and we were carried off
in the ai r. 1 was not then in my right mind. Al I 1 know of this
is what the others told me late r.
We found ourselves in a compound, like our compound in
every way. 1 thought they had brought us back home. Th ey
shoved us in by the cutfrees' ladder. It was still morning and
the hands were out at work , only the grandmothers and pups
and old men in the compound. Th e grandmothers came to us
fierce and scowling. 1 could not understand at first why they
were all strangers. 1 looked for my grandmothe r.
They were frightened of us , thinking we must be nmaways.
Plantation slaves had been running away , the last years , trying
to get to the cities. They thought we were in廿actables and
would bring trouble with us. But they helped us clean ourselves , and gave us a place near the cutfrees' towe r. There were
no huts empty, they said. They told us this was Zeskra Estate.
They did not want to hear about what had happened at
Shomeke. They did not want us to be there. They did not need
our trouble.
We slept there on the ground without shelte r. Some of the
bondsmen came across the ditch in the night and raped us
because there was nothing to prevent them from 祉， no one to
whom we were of any value. We were too weak and sick to
自ght them. One of us , a girl named Abye , tried to figh t. The
men beat her insensible. In the morning she could not talk or
wal k. She was left there when the Bosses came and took us
away. Another girl was left behind too , a big farmhand with
white scars on her head like parts in her hai r. As we were going

A Woman's Liberation

187

1 looked at her and saw that it was Wals l1, who had been my
friend. We had not recognised each othe r. She sat in the dirt,
her head bowed down.
Five of l1S were taken from the compound to the Great
HOl1 se of Zesk凹， to the bondswomen's quarters. There for a
while 1 had a little hope , since 1 knew how to be a good
domestic asset. 1 did not know then how different Zeskra was
from Shomeke. The House at Zeskra was fl1 11 of people , fl111 of
owners and bosses. It was a big family , not a single Lord as at
Shomeke but a dozen of them with their retainers and relations
and visitors , so there might be thirty or forty men staying on
the men's side and as many women in the beza , and a HOl1se
staff of fifty or more. We were not bro l1 ght as domestics , b l1 t as
l1 se-women.
After we were bathed we were left in the use-women's
quarters , a big room without any private places. There were
ten or more l1 se-women already there. Those of them who
liked their work were not glad to see us , thinking of us as rivals;
others welcomed l1 S, hoping we might take their places and
they might be let join the domestic staff. Bl1t none were very
l1 nkind , and some were kind , glvmg l1 S clothes , for we had
been naked all this time , and comforting the yO l1 ngest of l1S,
Mio , a li吐le compo l1 nd girl of ten or eleven whose white body
was mottled all over with brown-and-bl l1 e bruises.
One of them was a tall woman called Sezi-Tl1 al. She looked
at me with an ironic face. Something in her made my so111
awaken.
'Yol1 're not a dl1sty ,' she said. ‘You're as black as old Lord
Devil Zeskra himsel f. YOl1 're a Bossbaby , aren't yO l1?'
'No ma'am ,' 1 said. 'A lord's child. And the Lord's child. My
name is Rakam.'
‘Your Grandfather hasn't treated yO l1 too well lately,' she
said. ‘Maybe yO l1 sho111d pray to 出e Mercif111 Lady T l1al.'
'1 don't look for mercy,' 1 said. From then on Sezi-Tualliked
me , and 1 had her protection , which 1 needed.

188

Four Ways to Forgiveness

We were sent across to the men's side most nights. When
there were dinner parties , after the ladies left the dinner room
we were brought in to sit on the owners' knees and drink wine
with them. Then they would use us there on the couches or
take us to their rooms. The men of Zeskra were not cruel.
Some liked to rape , but most preferred to think that we desired
them and wanted whatever they wanted. Such men could be
satis自 ed ， the one kind if we showed fear or submission , the
other kind if we showed yielding and deligh t. But some of their
visitors were another kind of man.
There was no law or rule against damaging or killing a usewoman. Her owner might not like it, but in his pride he could
not say so: he was supposed to have so many assets that the loss
of one or another did not matter at al l. So some men whose
pleasure lay in torture came to hospitable estates like Zeskra
for their pleasure. Sezi-Tual , a favorite of the Old Lord , could
and did protest to him , and such guests were not invited back.
But while 1 was there , Mio , the little girl who had come with
us from Shomeke , was murdered by a gues t. He tied her down
to the bed. He made the knot across her neck so tight that
while he used her she strangled to death.
1 will say no more of these things. 1 have told what 1 must
tell. There are truths that are not usefu l. Al I knowledge is local ,
my friend has said. Is it true , where is it true , that that child
had to die in that way? Is it true , where is it true , that she did
not have to die in that way?
1 was often used by Lord Yaseo , a middle-aged man , who
liked my dark skin, calling me 'My Lady.' Al so he called me
‘ Rebel ,' because what had happened at Shomeke 出 ey called a
rebellion of the slaves. Nights when he did not send for me 1
served as a common-girl.
After 1 had been at Zeskra two years Sezi-Tual came to me
one morning early. 1 had come back late from Lord Yaseo's
bed. Not many others were there , for there had been a drinking
party the night before , and all the common-girls had been sent

A Woman's Líberation

189

fo r. Sezi-Tual woke me. She had strange hair , curly , in a bush.
1 remember her face above me , that hair curling out a11 about
it. 'Rakam: she whispered , 'one of the visitor's assets spoke to
me last night. He gave me this. He said his name is Suhame.'
'Suhame: 1 repeated. 1 was sleepy. 1 looked at what she was
holding out to me: some dirty crumpled pape r. '1 can't read!' 1
said , yawning, impatient.
But 1 looked at it and knew it. 1 knew what it said. It was the
freedom pape r. It was my freedom pape r. 1 had watched Lord
Erod write my name on it. Each time he wrote a name he had
spoken it aloud so that we would know what he was writing. 1
remembered the big flourish of the first letler of both my
names: Radosse Rakam. 1 took the paper in my hand , and my
hand was shaking. 可九1here did you get this?' 1 whispered.
‘Betler ask this Suhame ,' she said. Now 1 heard what that
name mean t:‘ from the Hame.' It was a password name. She
knew that too. She was watching me , and she bent down
suddenly and leaned her forehead against mine , her breath
catching in her throat. 'If 1 can , 1'11 help ,' she whispered.
1 met with ‘Suhame' in one of the pantries. As soon as 1 saw
him 1 knew him: Ahas , who had been Lord Erod's favorite
along with Geu. A slight , silent young man with dusty skin , he
had never been much in my mind. He had watchful eyes , and
1 had thought when Geu and 1 spoke that he looked at us with
ill will. Now he looked at me with a strange face , still watchful ,
yet blank.
"凡1hy are you here with 出at Lord Boeb泣， 1 said. 'Aren't you
free?'
‘1 am as free as you are: he said.
1 did not understand him , then.
'Didn't Lord Erod protect even you?' 1 asked.
'Yes. 1 am a free man.' His face began to come alive , losing
that dead blankness it had when he first saw me. 'Lady Boeba's
a member of The Community. 1 work with the Hame. I' ve

190

Four Ways to Forgíveness

been trying to find people from Shomeke. We heard several of
the women were here. Are there others still alive , Rakam?'
His voice was soft, and when he said my name my breath
caught and my throat swe11ed. 1 said his name and went to
him , holding him. 'Ratual , Ramayo , Keo are still here ,' 1 said.
He held me gen t1 y. ‘Walsu is in the compound ,' 1 said , 'if she's
still alive.' 1 wept. 1 had not wept since Mio's death. He too was
in tears.
We talked , then and late r. He explained to me that we were
indeed , by law , free , but that law meant nothing on the Estates.
The government would not interfere between owners and those
they claimed as their assets. If we claimed our rights , the
Zeskras would probably kíll t時， since they considered us stolen
goods and did not want to be shamed. We must run away or
be stolen away, and get to the city, the capital , before we could
have any safety at a11.
We had to be sure that none of the Zeskra assets would
betray us out of jealousy or to gain favo r. Sezi-Tual was the
only one 1 trusted entirely.
Ahas arranged our escape with Sezi-Tual's help. 1 pleaded
once with her to join us , but she thought that since she had no
papers she would have to live always in hiding , and that would
be worse than her life at Zeskra.
‘You could go to Yeowe ,' 1 said.
She laughed. 'All 1 know about Yeowe is nobody ever came
bac k. Wh y run from one hell to the next one?'
Rahlal chose not to come with us; she was a favorite of one
of the young lords and content to remain so. Ramayo , the
oldest of us from Shomeke , and Keo , who was now about
自fteen ， wanted to come. Sezi-Tual went down to the compound and found that Walsu was alive , working as a field hand.
Arranging her escape was far more di伍 cult than ours. There
was no escape from a compound. She could get away only in
daylight, in the fields , under the overseer's and the Boss's eyes.
It was difficult even to talk to her, for the grandmothers were

A Woman's Liberation

191

distrllstflll. Bllt Sezi-Tual managed it, and Walsu 切ld her she
would do whatever she must do 'to see her paper again.'
Lady Boeha's flyer waited for llS at the edge of a great gede
field that had just been harvested. It was late summer. Ra mayo ,
Keo , and 1 walked away from the House separately at different
times of the morning. Nobody watched over us closely, as there
was nowhere for us to go. Zeskra lies among other great estates,
where a nmaway slave wOllld find no friends for hundreds of
miles. One by one, taking different ways , we came throllgh 出e
fields and woods , crollching and hiding all the way to the flyer
where Ahas waited for llS. My heart beat and beat so 1 could
not breathe. There we waited for Walsll.
'Th ere!' said Keo , perched l1 p on the wing of the flyer. She
pointed across the wide field of stl1 bble.
Walsll came running from the strip of trees on the far side
of the field. She ran heavily, steadily, not as if she were afraid.
Bllt all at once she halted. She tllrned. We did not know why
for a momen t. Then we saw two men break from the shadow
of the trees in pursuit of her.
She did not run from them , leading them towards llS. She
ran back at them. She leapt at them like a hllnting ca t. As she
made that leap, one of them fired a glln. She bore one man
down with her, falling. The other fired again and again. ‘In ,'
Ah as said,‘now.' We scrambled into the flyer and it rose into
the air, seemingly all in one instant, the same instant in which
Walsll made that great leap, she too rising into the air, into her
death, into her freedom.

3.

THE CITY

1 had folded IIp my freedom paper into a tiny packet. 1 carried
it in my hand all the time we were in the flyer and while we
landed and went in a Pllblic car throllgh the city streets. Wh en
Ah as fOllnd what 1 was cllltching, he said 1 need not worry
about it. Our manumission was on record in the Government

19 2

Four Ways to Forgiveness

Office and would be honored , here in the City. We were free
people , he said. We were gare鉤，出at is , owners who have no
assets. 'Just like Lord Erod ,' he said. That meant nothing to
me. Th ere was too much to learn. 1 kept hold of my freedom
paper until 1 had a place to keep it safe. 1 have it still.
We walked a little way in the streets and then Ahas led us
into one of the huge houses that stood side by side on the
pavemen t. He called it a compound, but we thought it must
be an owner's house. There a middle-aged woman welcomed
us. She was pale-skinned , but talked and behaved like an
owner , so that 1 did not know what she was. She said she was
Ress , a rentswoman and an elderwoman of the house.
Rentspeople were assets rented out by their owners to a
company. If they were hired by a big company, they lived in
the company compounds, but there were many, many rentspeople in the City who worked for small companies or
businesses they managed themselves , and they occupied buildings run for pro祉， called open compounds. In such places the
occupants must keep curfew, the doors being locked at night,
but that was all; they were selιgoverned. This was such an
open compound. It was supported by Th e Community. Some
of the occupants were rentspeople , but many were like us ,
gareots who had been slaves. Over a hundred people lived
there in forty apartments. It was supervised by several women ,
whom 1 would have called grandmothers , but here they were
called elderwomen.
On the estates deep in the country, deep in the past, where
the life was protected by miles of land and by the custom of
centuries and by determined ignorance , any asset was absolutely at the mercy of any owne r. From there we had come into
this great crowd of two million people where nothing and
nobody was protected from chance or change , where we had
to learn as fast as we could how to s切y alive , but where our life
was in our own hands.

A Woman's Liberatíon

193

1 had never seen a street. 1 could not read a word. 1 had
much to learn.
Ress made that clear at once. She was a City woman , quickthinking and quick-talking, impatient, aggressive , sensitive. 1
could not like or understand her for a long time. She made me
feel stupid , slow, a clod. Often 1 was angry at he r.
There was anger in me now. 1 had not felt anger while 1
lived at Zeskra. 1 could no t. It would have eaten me. Here
there was room for 祉， but 1 found no use for it. 1 lived with it
in silence. Keo and Ramayo had a big room together, 1 had a
small one next to theirs. 1 had never had a room to myself. At
first 1 felt lonely in it and as if ashamed , but soon 1 came to
like it. The first thing 1 did freely , as a free woman , was to shut
my doo r.
Nights , 1 would shut my door and study. Days , we had work
training in the morning , classes in the afternoon: reading and
writing , arithmetic , history. My work training was in a small
shop which made boxes of paper and thin wood to hold
cosmetics , candies , jewelry, and such things. 1 was trained in
all the different steps and crafts of making and ornamenting
the boxes , for that is how most work was done in the City, by
artisans who knew all their trade. The shop was owned by a
member of The Community. The older workers were rentspeople. Wh en my training was finished 1 too would be paid
wages.
Till then Lord Erod supported me as well as Keo and
Ramayo and some men from Shomeke compound , who lived
in a different hO l1 se. Erod never came to the house. 1 think he
did not want to see any of the people he had so disastro l1 s1y
freed. Ahas and Geu said he had sold most of the land at
Shomeke and l1 sed the money for The Community and to
make his way in politics , as there was now a Ra dical Party
which favored emancipation.
Geu came a few times to see me. He had become a City
man , dapper and knowing. 1 felt when he looked at me he was

194

Four Ways to Forgiveness

thinking 1 had been a use-woman at Zeskra , and 1 did not like
to see him.
Ah肘， whom 1 had never thought about in the old days , 1
now admired , knowing him brave , resolute , and kind. It was he
who had looked for us , found us , rescued us. Owners had paid
the money but Ahas had done it. He came often to see us. He
was the only link that had not broken between me and my
childhood.
And he came as a friend , a companion, never driving me
back into my slave body. 1 was angry now at every man who
looked at me as men look at women. 1 was angry at women
who looked at me seeing me sexually. To Lady Tazeu all 1 had
been was my body. At Zeskra that was all 1 had been. Even to
Erod who would not touch me that was all 1 had been. Flesh
to touch or not to touch ，的 they pleased. To use or not to use ,
as they chose. 1 hated the sexual parts of myself, my genitals
and breasts and the swell of my hips and belly. Ever since 1 was
a child , 1 had been dressed in soft clothing made to display all
that sexuality of a woman's body. When 1 began to be paid and
could buy or make my own clothing, 1 dressed in hard , heavy
cloth. What 1 liked of myself was my hands , clever at their
work , and my head , not clever at learning , but stilllearning, no
matter how long it took.
What 1 loved to learn was history. 1 had grown up without
any history. There was nothing at Shomeke or Zeskra but the
way things were. Nobody knew anything about any time when
things had been differen t. Nobody knew there was any place
where things might be different.叭re were enslaved by the
present hme.
Erod had talked of change , indeed , but the owners were
going to make the change. We were to be changed , we were to
be freed , just as we had been owned. In history 1 saw that any
freedom has been made , not given.
The first book 1 read by myself was a history of Yeowe ,
written very simply. It told about the days of the Colony, of the

A\凡loman's

Li beration

195

Four Corporations , of the terrible first century when the ships
carried slave men to Yeowe and precio l1 s ores back. Slave men
were so cheap then they worked them to death in a few years
in the mines , bringing in new shipments continl1 ally. 0 , 0 ,
Yeowe , nobody never comes back. Then the Corporations began
to send women slaves to work and breed , and over the years
the assets spilled Ollt of the compo l1 nds and made cities - whole
great cities like this one 1 was living in. But not run by the
owners or Bosses. Rl1 n by the assets , the way this hO l1 se was run
by l1 S. On Yeowe the assets had belonged to the Corporations.
They could rent their freedom by paying the Corporation a
part of what they earned , the way sharecropper assets paid their
owners in parts ofVoe Deo. On Yeowe they called those assets
freedpeople. Not free people , b l1 t freedpeople. And then , this
history 1 was reading said , they began to think , why aren't we
free people? So they made the revol l1 tion , the Liberation. It
began on a plantation called Nadami , and spread from there.
Thirty years they fO l1 ght for their freedom. And jl1 st three years
ago they had won the war , they had driven the Corporations ,
the owners , the bosses , off their world. They had danced and
sung in the streets' freedom , freedom! This book 1 was reading
(slowly , but reading it) had been printed there - there on
Yeowe , the Free World. The Al iens had bro l1 ght it to Werel.
To me it was a sacred book.
1 asked Ahas what it was like now on Yeowe , and he said
they were making their government , writing a perfect Constihltion to make all men eqllal under the Law.
On the net, on the news , they said they were fighting each
other on Yeowe , there was no government at all , people were
starving, savage tribesmen in the cOllntryside and youth gangs
in the cities running amllck , law and order broken down.
Corruption , ignorance , a doomed attempt , a dying world , they
said.
Ahas said that the Government of Voe Deo , which had
fOllght and lost the war against Yeowe , now was afraid of a

196

FOUT Ways to FOTgiveness

Liberation on Werel. 'Don't believe any news ,' he counseled
me. 'Especially don't believe the neareals. Don't ever go into
them. They're just as much lies as the rest, but if you feel and
see a thing , you will believe it. And they know tha t. They don't
need guns if they own our minds.' The owners had no reporters ,
no cameras on Yeowe , he said; they invented their ‘news,' using
actors. Only some of the Al iens of the Ekumen were allowed
on Yeowe , and the Yeowans were debating whether they should
send them away , keeping the world they had won for themselves alone.
‘But then what about us?' 1 said , for 1 had beglln dreaming
of going there , going to the Free World , when the Hame could
charter ships and send people.
'Some of them say assets can come. Others say they can't
feed so many, and would be overwhelmed. They're debating it
democratically. It will be decided in the first Yeowan elections ,
soon.' Ahas was dreaming of going there too. We talked
together of our dream the way lovers talk of their love.
But there were no ships going to Yeowe now. Th e Hame
could not act openly and The Community was forbidden 切
act for them. The Ekumen had offered transportation on their
own ships to anyone who wanted to go , but the government of
Voe Deo refused to let them use any spaceport for 出at purpose.
甘ley could carry only their own people. No Werelian was to
leave Werel.
It had been only forty years since Werel had at last allowed
the Aliens to land and maintain diplomatic relations. As 1 went
on reading history 1 began to understand a little of the nahue
of the dominant people of Were l. The black-skinned race that
conquered all the other peoples of the Great Continent, and
finally all the world , those who call themselves the owners,
have lived in the belief that there is only one way to be. Th ey
have believed they are what people should be , do as people
shollld do , and know all the tmth that is known. Al l the other
peoples of Werel , even when they resisted them , imitated

A Woman's Liberatíon

197

them , trying to become them , and so became their property.
When a people came Ollt of the sky looking differently, doing
differently , knowing differently, and wOllld not let themselves
be conqllered or enslaved , the owner race wanted nothing to
do with them. It took them four hllndred years to admit that
they had eqllals.
1 was in the crowd at a rally of the Ra dical Party, at which
Erod spoke, as bealltiflllly as eve r. 1 noticed a woman beside
me in the crowd listening. Her skin was a CuriOlls orangebrown , like the rind of a pini, and the whites showed in the
corners of her eyes. 1 thollght she was síck 一 1 thought of the
pllsworm , how Lord Shomeke's skin had changed and his eyes
had shown their whites. 1 shllddered and drew away. She
glanced at me , smiling a li tt1 e , and rehlTned her aUention to
the speake r. Her hair curled in a bllSh or clOlld, like SeziTllal' s. Her clothing was of a delicate cloth , a strange fashion.
It came llpon me very slowly what she was , that she had come
here from a world llnimaginably fa r. And the wonder of it was
that for all her strange skin and eyes and hair and mind , she
was hllman , as 1 am hllman: 1 had no dOllbt of that. 1 felt it.
For a moment it dishlTbed me deeply. Then it ceased to
trollble me and 1 felt a great curiosity, almost a yearning, a
drawing to he r. 1 wished to know her, to know what she knew.
In me the owner's sOlll was struggling with the free sOlll. So
it will do all my life.
Keo and Ramayo stopped going to school after they had
learned to read and write and llse the calculator, bllt 1 kept on.
When there were no more classes to take from the school the
Hame kept, the teachers helped me find classes in the net.
Thollgh the government controlled sllch courses, there were
fine teachers and grollps from all over the world , talking abollt
literahlTe and history and the sciences and arts. Always 1 wanted
more history.
Ress , who was a member of the Hame , first took me to the
Library of Voe Deo. As it was open only to owners , it was not

198

Four~悟"的 Forgive l1 esS

censored by the government. Freed assets , if they were lightskinned , were kept out by the librarians on one pretext or
another. 1 was dark-skinned , and had learned here in the City
to carry myself with an indifferent pride that spared one many
insults and offenses. Ress told me to stride in as if 1 owned the
place. 1 did so , and was given all privileges without question.
So 1 began to read freely , to read any book 1 wanted in that
great library, every book in ít if 1 could. That was my joy, that
reading. That was the heart of my freedom.
Beyond my work at the boxmaker法， which was well paid ,
pleasant, and among pleasant companions, and my learning
and reading, there was not much to my life. 1 did not want
more. 1 was lonely, but felt that loneliness was no high price to
pay for what 1 wanted.
Ress , whom 1 had disliked , was a friend to me. 1 went with
her to meetings of the Hame , and also to entertainments that 1
would have known nothing about without her guidance. 'Come
on , Bumpkin,' she would say. 'Got to educate the plantation
pup.' And she would take me to the makil theater , or to asset
dance halls where the music was good. She always wanted to
dance. 1 let her teach me , but was not very happy dancing.
One night as we were dancing the 'slow-go' her hands began
pressing me to her, and looking in her face 1 saw the mask of
sexual desire on 祉， soft and blank. 1 broke away. '1 don't want
to dance ,' 1 said.
We walked home. She came up to my room with me , and
at my door she tried to hold and kiss me. 1 was sick with anger.
‘1 don't want that!' 1 said.
'I' m sorry, Rakam ,' she said , more gen tI y than 1 had ever
heard her speak.‘1 know how you must fee l. But you've got to
get over that, you've got to have your own life. I'm not a man ,
and 1 do want you.'
1 broke in - 'A woman used me before a man ever did. Did
you ask me if 1 wanted you? 1 will never be used again!'
That rage and spite came bursting out of me like poison

A Woman's Liberation

199

from an infection. If she had tried to touch me again , 1 would
have hurt her. 1 slammed my door in her face. 1 went trembling
切 my desk , sat down , and began to read the book that was
open on í t.
Next day we were both ashamed and stiff. But Ress had
patience under her City quickness and roughness. She did not
try to make love to me again , but she got me to tmst her and
talk to her as 1 could not talk to anybody else. She listened
intenÙy and told me what she though t. She said,‘Bumpkin ,
you have it all wrong. No wonde r. How could you have got it
right? You think sex is something that gets done to you. It's no t.
It's something you do. With somebody else. Not to them. You
never had any sex. All you ever knew was rape.'
‘Lord Erod told me all that a long time ago ,' 1 said. 1 was
bitter. ‘1 don't care what it's called. 1 had enough of it. For the
rest of my life. And I' m glad to be without it.'
Ress made a face. 'At twenty-two?' she said. ‘Maybe for a
while. If you're happy, then fine. But think about what 1 said.
It's a big part oflife to just cut out.'
‘If 1 have to have sex, 1 can pleasme myself,' 1 said , not
caring if 1 hmt her. ‘Love has nothing to do with it.'
'Th at's where you're wrong,' she said, but 1 did not listen. 1
would learn from teachers and books which 1 chose for myself,
but 1 would not take advice 1 had not asked for. 1 refused to be
told what to do or what to think. If 1 was free , 1 would be free
by mysel f. 1 was like a baby when it first stands up.
Ahas had been giving me advice too. He said it was foolish
to pursue education so fa r.‘ There's nothing useful you can do
with so much book learning ,' he said. 'It's self-indulgent. We
need leaders and members with practical skills.'
'We need teachers!'
‘Yes,' he said, 'but you knew enough to teach a year ago.
Wh at's the good of ancient history, facts about alien worlds?
We have a revolution to make!'
1 did not stop my reading, but 1 felt guilty. 1 took a class at

200

Four Ways to Forgíveness

the Hame school teaching illiterate assets and freedpeople to
read and write , as 1 myself had been taught only three years
before. It was hard work. Reading is hard for a grown person to
learn , tired , at night, after work all day. It is much easier to let
the net take one's mind ove r.
1 kept arguing with Ahas in my mind , and one day 1 said to
him , 'Is there a Library on Yeowe?'
‘1 don't know.'
'You know there isn' t. The Corporations didn't leave any
libraries there. They didn't have any. They were ignorant
people who knew nothing but profi t. Knowledge isa good in
itsel f. 1 keep on learning so that 1 can bring my knowledge to
Yeowe. If 1 could , l' d bring them the whole Library!'
He stared. '\九fhat owners thought, what owners did - tha t' s
all their books are abou t. They don't need that on Yeowe.'
‘Yes they do ,' 1 said , certain he was wrong , though again 1
could not say why.
At the school they soon called on me to teach history , one of
the teachers having left. These classes went well. 1 worked hard
preparing them. Presently 1 was asked to speak to a study group
of advanced studen尬， and that, too , went well. People were
interested in the ideas 1 drew from history and the comparisons
1 had learned to make of our world with other worlds. 1 had
been shldying the way various peoples bring up their children ,
who takes the responsibility for them and how that responsibility is understood , since this seemed to me a place where a
people frees or enslaves itsel f.
To one of these talks a man from the Embassy of the
Ekumen came. 1 was frightened when 1 saw the alien face in
my audience. 1 was worse frightened when 1 recognised him.
He had taught the first course in Ekumenical History that 1
had taken in the ne t. 1 had listened to it devotedly though 1
never participated in the discussion. 吭吭at 1 learned had had a
great influence on me. 1 thought he would find me presump-

A Woman's Liberation

201

tuous for talking of things he truly knew. 1 stammered on
through my lec h.ue , trying not to see his white-comered eyes.
He came up to me afterwards , introduced himself politely,
complimented my talk , and asked if 1 had read SlI ch-and-such
a boo k. He engaged me so deftly and kindly in conversation
that 1 had to like and trust him. And he soon eamed my trus t.
1 needed his guidance , for much foolishness has been written
and spoken , even by wise people , about the balance of power
between men and women, on which depend the lives of
children and the value of their education. He knew useful
books to read , from which 1 cO l1 ld go on by myself.
His name was Esdardon Aya. He worked in some high
position , 1 was not sure what, at the Embassy. He had been
bom on Hain , the Old World , humanity's first home , from
which all our ancestors came.
Sometimes 1 thought how strange it was that 1 knew about
such things , such vast and ancient matters , 1 who had not
known anything ol1 tside the compound walls till 1 was six , who
had not known the name of the cO l1 ntry 1 lived in till 1 was
eighteen! Wh en 1 was new to the City someone had spoken of
'Voe Deo ,' and 1 had asked , '\九1here is that?' They had all
stared at me. A woman , a hard-voiced old City rentswoman ,
had said ,‘ Here , Dtisty. Right here's Voe Deo. Your cO l1 ntry
and mine!'
1 told Esdardon Aya tha t. He did not laugh. 'A country, a
people ,' he said. 'Those are strange and very difficult ideas.'
My country was slavery ,' 1 said , and he nodded.
By now 1 seldom saw Ahas. 1 missed his kind friendship , b l1 t
it had all h.uned to scolding. 'Yo l1 're pl1旺"ed l1 p, p l1 blishing,
talking to audiences all the time ,' he said. 'You're putting
yourself before our cause.'
1 said , 'But 1 talk to people in the Hame , 1 write about things
we need to know. Everything 1 do is for freedom.'
'The Community is not pleased with that pamphlet of yours ,'
he said , in a serious , counseling way , as if telling me a secret 1

202

FourWays 的 Forgíveness

needed to know. ‘I've been asked to tell you to submit your
writings to the commíttee before you publish agaín. That press
is run by hotheads. The Hame is causing a good deal of trouble
to our candidates.'
'Our candidates!' 1 said in a rage.
Are you sti1l taking orders from the Young Owner?'
That shmg him. He said , 'If you put yourself fi帥， if you
won't cooperate , you bring danger on us all.'
'1 don't put myself first - politicians and capitalists do tha t. 1
put freedom firs t. Wh y can't you cooperate with me? It goes
two ways , Ahas!'
He left angry , and left me angry.
1 think he missed my dependence on him. Perhaps he was
jealous , too , of my independence , for he did remain Lord
Erod's man. His was a loyal heart. Our disagreement gave us
both much bitter pain. 1 wish 1 knew what became of him in
the troubled times that followed.
There was truth in his accusation. 1 had found that 1 had the
gift in speaking and writing of moving people's minds and
hearts. Nobody told me that such a gift is as dangerous as it is
strong. Ahas said 1 was puttíng myself first , but 1 knew 1 was not
doing tha t. 1 was wholly in the service of the truth and of
liberty. No one told me that the end cannot puri命 the means ,
since only the Lord Kamye knows what the end may be. My
grandmother could have told me tha t. The Arkamye would
have reminded me of 祉， but 1 díd not often read in 祉， and in
the City there were no old men singing the word , evenings. If
there had been , 1 would not have heard them over the sound
of my beautiful voíce speaking the beautiful truth.
1 believe 1 díd no harm , except as we all díd , ín bringing it
to the attentíon of the rulers of Voe Deo that the Hame was
growing bolder and the Radical Party was growing stronger,
and that they must move agaínst us.
The first sígn was a divisive one. In the open compounds , as
well as the men's síde and the women's síde there were several

A Woman's Líberatíon

20 3

apartments for couples. This was a radical thing. Any kind of
marriage between assets was illegal. They were allowed to live
in pairs only by their owners' indulgence. Assets' only legitimate loyalty was to their owne r. The child did not belong to
the mother, but to the owne r. But since gareots were living in
the same place as owned assets , these apartments for couples
had been tolerated or ignored. Now suddenly the law was
invoked , asset couples were arrested ，自ned if they were wage
earners , separated , and sent to company-run compound houses.
Ress and the other elderwomen who ran our house were fined
and warned that if ‘immoral arrangements' were discovered
again , they would be held responsible and sent to the labor
camps. Two little children of one of the cOllples were not on
the governmen t's list and so were left, abandoned , when their
parents were taken off. Keo and Ra mayo took them in. They
became wards of the women's side ，的 orphans in the compOllnds always did.
There were fierce debates about this in meetings of the
Hame and Th e Community. Some said the right of assets to
live together and to bring IIp their children was a cause the
Ra dical Party shollld Sllpport. It was not directly threatening to
ownership, and might appeal to the nahual instincts of many
owners, especially the women , who could not vote bllt who
were valuable allies. Others said that private affections must be
overridden by loyalty to the callse of liberty, and that any
personal isslle must take second place to the great issue of
emancipation. Lord Erod spoke thus at a meeting. 1 rose 個
answer him. 1 said that there was no freedom without sexual
freedom , and that until women were allowed and men were
willing to take responsibility for their children , no woman ,
whether owner or asset, would be free.
'Men must bear the responsibility for the public side of life ,
the greater world the child will enter; women , for the domestic
side of life , the moral and physical upbringing of the child.
Th is is a division enjoined by God and Nahue ,' Erod answered.

4

20

Four Ways to Forgiveness

'Then will emancipation for a woman mean she's free to
enter the beza, be locked in on the women's side?'
‘Of course not: he began, b l1 t 1 broke in again, fearing his
golden tongue - 'Then what is freedom for a woman? Is it
different from freedom for a man? Or is a free person free?'
Th e moderator was angrily thumping his s詛咒 but some
other as時t women took up my question. When wil1 the
Ra dical Party speak for u泣， they said , and one elderwoman
cried, 'Where are your women , you owners who want to abolish
slavery? Why aren't they here? Don't you let them O l1t of the
beza?'
The moderator pounded and finally got order restored. 1 was
half-triumphant and halιdismayed. 1 saw Erod and also some
of the people from the Hame now looking at me as an open
troublemaker. And indeed my words had divided us. But were
we not already divided?
A group of us women went home talking through the streets,
talking aloud. Th ese were my streets now, with their tra伍c and
lights and dangers and life. 1 was a City woman , a free woman.
Th at night 1 was an owner. 1 owned the City. 1 owned the
future.
Th e arguments went on. 1 was asked to speak at many places.
As 1 was leaving one such meeting, the Hainishman Esdardon
Aya came to me and said in a casual w:呵， as if discussing my
speech,‘Rakam , you're in danger of arrest.'
1 did not understand. He walked along beside me away from
the others and went on: 'A rumor has come to my attention at
the Embassy... The government of Voe Deo is about to
change the stahls of manumitted assets. You're no longer to be
considered gareots. You must have an owner-sponsor.'
This was bad news , but after thinking it over 1 said , '1 think 1
can 自 nd an owner 切 sponsor me. Lord Boeba , maybe.'
'The owner-sponsor wil1 have to be approved by the government . .. This will tend to weaken The Communi可 both

A Woman's Liberatioll

20

5

through the asset and the owner members. It's very clever, in
its way ,' said Esdardon Aya.
‘Wh at happens to us if we don't find an approved sponsor?'
可ou'll be considered runaways.'
That meant death , the labor camps , or auction.
'0 Lord Kamye ,' 1 said , and took Esdardon Aya's arm ,
because a curtain of dark had fallen across my eyes.
We had walked some way along the stree t. Wh en 1 could
see again 1 saw the street, the high houses of the C 旬， the
shining lights 1 had thought were mine.
'1 have some friends ,' said the Hainishman , walking on with
me ,‘who are planning a trip to the Kingdom of Bambur.'
After a while 1 said，、九Th at wOllld 1 do there?'
‘A ship to Yeowe leaves from there.'
'To Yeowe ,' 1 said.
'So 1 hear ,' he said ，的 if we were talking about a streetcar
line. 'In a few years , 1 expect Voe Deo wil1 begin offering rides
to Yeowe. Exporting intractables , trollblemakers , members of
the Hame. But that will involve recognising Yeowe as a nation
state , which they haven't brought themselves to do ye t. They
are , however , permitting some semilegitimate trade arrangements by their client states . . . A couple of years ago , the King
of Bambur bought one of the old Corporation ships , a genuine
old Colony Trade r. The King thought he' d 1ike to visit the
moons of 叭lerel. But he found the moons boring. So he rented
the ship to a consortium of scho 1ars from the University of
Bambur and businessmen from his capital. Some manufadurers in Bambur carry on a little trade with Yeowe in it , and
some scientists at the university make scientifi.c expeditions in
it at the same time. Of course each trip is very expensive , so
they carry as many scientists as they can whenever they go.'
1 heard all this not hearing 祉， yet understanding it.
‘ So far ,' he said ,‘they've gotten away with 祉，
He always sounded quiet, a little amused , yet not superior.
'Does The Community know about this ship?' 1 asked.

206

Four Ways to Forgíveness

‘Some members do , 1 believe. And people in the Hame. BlI t
it' s very dangerous to know abou t. If Voe Deo were to find Ollt
that a client state was exporting valuable property. . . In fact ,
we b e1 ieve they may have some suspicions. So this is a decision
that can't be made ligh t1 y. It is both dangerous and irrevocable.
Beca l1 se of that danger , 1 hesitated to speak of it to you. 1
hesitated so long that you must make it very quickly. In fact,
tonight, Rakam.'
1 looked from the lights of the City up to the sky they hid.
'1'11 go,' 1 said. 1 thought ofWalsu.
‘Good,' he said. At the next corner he changed the direction
we had been walking, away from my house , towards the
Embassy of the Ekumen.
1 never wondered why he did this for me. He was a secret
man , a man of secret power , bl1 t he always spoke truth , and 1
think he fo11owed his own heart when he could.
As we entered the Embassy gro l1 nds , a great park softly
il1 uminated in the winter night by groundlights , 1 stopped. ‘My
books,' 1 said. He looked his question. ‘1 wanted to take my
books to Yeowe,' 1 said. Now my voice shook with a rush of
tears，的 if everything 1 was leaving came down to that one
thing. ‘Th ey need books on Yeowe , 1 think,' 1 said.
After a moment he said , '1' 11 have them sent on our next
ship. 1 wish 1 cO l1 ld put you on that ship,' he added in a lower
vOl ce. ‘But of course the Ekumen can't give free rides to
runaway slaves . . .'
1 turned and took his hand and laid my forehead against it
for a moment, the only time in my life 1 ever did that of my
own free wil1.
He was start1 ed. 'Come , come,' he said , and hurried me
along.
The Embassy hired 叭'erelian guards , mostly veots , men of
the old warrior caste. One of them , a grave , courteous , very
silent man , went with me on the flyer to Bambur, the island
kingdom east of the Great Continen t. He had a11 the papers 1

A Woman's Li beration

20 7

needed. From the flyer port he took me to the Royal Space
Observatory, which the King had built for his spaceship. There
withollt delay 1 was taken to the ship , which stood in its great
scaffolding ready to depart.
1 imagine that they had made comfortable apartments IIp
front for the King when he went to see the moons. The body
of the ship , which had belonged to the Agricllltural Plantation
Corporation , still consisted of great compartments for the
produce of the Colony. It would be bringing back grain from
Yeowe in four of the cargo bays that now held farm machinery
made in Bambur. The fifth compartment held assets.
The cargo bay had no seats. They had laid felt pads on the
floor , and we lay down and were strapped to stanchions , as
cargo would have been. There were about fifty 'scientists.' 1
was the last to come aboard and be strapped in. The crew were
hasty and nervous and spoke only the language of Bambll r. 1
could not understand the instrllctions we were given. 1 needed
very badly to relieve my bladder , bllt they had shollted ‘No
time , no time!' So 1 lay in torment while they closed the great
doors of the bay , which made me think of the doors of Shomeke
compollnd. Arollnd me people called ollt to one another in
their langllage. A baby screamed. 1 knew that language. Then
the great noise began , beneath lI S. Slowly 1 felt my body pressed
down on the floor , as if a hllge soft foot were stepping on me ,
till my sholllder blades felt as if they were clltting into the mat,
and my tonglle pressed back into my throat as if to choke me ,
and with a sharp stab of pain and hot relief my bladder released
its urine.
Then we began to be weightless - to float in our bonds. Up
was down and down was IIp , either was both or neithe r. 1 heard
people all arollnd me calling Ollt again , saying one another's
names , saying what mllst be ,‘Are you all right? Yes , I'm all
right.' The baby had never ceased its fierce , piercing yells. 1
began to feel at my restraints , for 1 saw the woman next to me
sitting up and rubbing her arms and chest where the straps had

208

FourWays 的 Forgiveness

held he r. But a great blurry voice came bellowing over the
loudspeaker , giving orders in the language of Bambur and then
in Voe Oean: 'Do not unfasten the straps! 00 not attempt to
move about! The ship is under attack! The situation is
extremely dangerous!'
So 1 lay floating in my little mist of urine , listening to the
strangers around me talk , understanding nothing. 1 was utterly
miserable , and yet fearless as 1 had never been. 1 was carefree.
It was like dying. It would be foolish to worry about anything
while one died.
The ship moved strangely, shuddering , seeming to turn
Several people were sick. The air filled with the smell and tiny
droplets of vomi t. 1 freed my hands enough to draw the scarf 1
was wearing up over my face as a filter , tllcking the ends under
my head to hold it.
Inside the scarf 1 could no longer see the huge vault of the
cargo bay stretching above or below me , making me feel 1 was
about to fly or fall into it. It smelled of myself, which was
comforting. It was the scarf 1 often wore when 1 dressed up to
give a talk , fine gauze , pale red with a silver thread woven in at
intervals. Wh en 1 bought it at a City market , paying my own
earned money for 祉， 1 had thought of my mother's red scarf,
given her by Lady Tazeu. 1 thought she would have liked this
one , though it was not as brigh t. Now 1 lay and looked into the
pale red dimness it made of the vault, starred with the lights at
the hatches , and thought of my mother , Yowa. She had
probably been killed that morning in the compound. Perhaps
she had been carried to another estate as a use-woman , but
Ahas had never found any trace of he r. 1 thought of the way
she had of carrying her head a little to the side , deferent yet
alert , gracious. Her eyes had been full and bright,‘ eyes that
hold the seven moons ,' as the song says. 1 thought then: But 1
will never see the moons again.
At that 1 felt so strange that to comfort myself and distract
my mind 1 began to sing under my breath , there alone in my

A Woman's Líberation

209

tent of red gauze warm with my own breath. 1 sang the freedom
songs we sang in the Hame , and then 1 sang the love songs
Lady Tazeu had taught me. Finally 1 sang ‘0 , 0 , Yeowe ,' softly
at first , then a li仕le louder. 1 heard a voice somewhere out in
that soft red mist world join in with me , a man's voice , then a
woman's. Assets from Voe Deo all know that song. We sang it
togethe r. A Bambur man's voice picked it up and put words in
his own language to it, and others joined in singing it. Then
the singing died away. The baby's crying was weak now. Th e
air was very foul.
We learned many hours later, when at last clean air entered
the vents and we were told we could release our bonds , that a
ship of the Voe Dean Space Defense Fleet had intercepted the
freighter's course just above the atmosphere and ordered it to
stop. The captain chose to ignore the signal. Th e warship had
fired , and though nothing hit the freighter the blast had
damaged the controls. The freighter had gone on , and had
seen and heard nothing more of the warship. We were now
about eleven days from Yeowe. The warship , or a group of
them , might be in wait for us near Yeowe. The reason they
gave for ordering the freighter to halt was 'suspected contraband
merchandise.'
That ßeet of warships had been built centuries ago to protect
Werel from the attacks they expected from the Alien Empire ,
which is what they then called the Ekumen. They were so
frightened by that imagined threat that they put all their energy
into the technology of space ßight; and the colonisation of
Yeowe was a resul t. Mter four hundred years without any threat
of attack , Voe Deo had finally let the Ekumen send envoys and
ambassadors. They had used the Defense Fleet to transport
troops and weapons during the War of Liberation. Now they
were using them the way estate owners used hunting dogs and
hunting cats , to hunt down runaway slaves.
1 found the two other Voe Deans in the cargo bay, and we
moved our 'bedstraps' together so we could talk. Both of them

210

Four Ways 的 Forgiveness

had been brought to Bambur by the Hame , who had paid their
fare. It had not occurred to me that there was a fare to be paid.
1 knew who had paid mine.
'Can't fly a spaceship on love ,' the woman said. She was a
strange person. She really was a scientis t. Highly trained in
chemistry by the company that rented her , she had pers l1 aded
the Hame to send her to Yeowe because she was sure her skills
would be needed and in demand. She had been making higher
wages than many gareots did , but she expected to do still betler
on Yeowe. 'I' m going to be rich ,' she said.
The man , only a boy , a mill hand in a northern city, had
simply run away and had the lllck to meet people who c0111d
save him from death or the labor camps. He was sixteen,
ignorant, noisy , rebellious , sweet-nahued. He became a general
favorite , like a puppy. 1 was in demand beca l1se 1 knew the
history of Yeowe and throllgh a man who knew both our
langl1 ages 1 could tell the Bamburs something about where
they were going 一 the cenhuies of Corporation slavery,
Nadami , the War, the Liberation. Some of them were rentspeople from the cities , others were a gro l1 p of estate slaves
bought at auction by the Hame with false money and l1 nder a
false name and hurried onto this flight , knowing very li仕le of
where they were going. It was that trick that had drawn Voe
Oeo's attention to this fligh t.
Yoke , the mill boy , spec111ated endlessly abo l1 t how the
Yeowans wO l1 ld welcome us. He had a story , half a joke , half a
dream , about the bands playing and the speeches and the big
dinner they would have for us. The dinner grew more and
more elaborate as the days went on. They were long , hungry
days ，自oating in the feahlreless great space of the cargo bay,
marked only by the alternation every twelve hours of brighter
and dimmer lighting and the issuing of two meals during the
'day,' food and water in h.bes you squeezed into your mouth. 1
did not think much about what might happen. 1 was between
happenings. If the warships found us , we would probably die.

A Woman's Líberatioll

211

If we gotωYeowe ， it would be a new life. Now we were
floating.

4.

YEOWE

The ship came down safe at the Port ofYeowe. They unloaded
the crates of machinery fir:哎， then the other cargo. We came
out sta自ering and holding on to one another, not able to stand
up to the great pull of this new world drawing us down to its
center, blinded by the light of the sun that we were closer to
than we had ever been.
‘Over here! Over here!' a man shouted. 1 was grateful to hear
my language, but the Bamburs looked apprehensive.
Over here - in here - strip - wait - All we heard when we
were first on the Free World was orders. We had to be
decontaminated , which was painful and exhausting. We had to
be examined by doctors. Anything we had brought with us had
to be decontaminated and examined and listed. That did not
take long for me. 1 had brought the clothes 1 wore and had
worn for two weeks now. 1 was glad to get decontaminated.
Finally we were told to stand in line in one of the big empty
cargo sheds. Th e sign over the doors still read APCY Agriculhual Plantation Corporation of Yeowe. One by one we
were processed for entry. The man who processed me was
short, white , middle-aged , with spectacles, like any clerk asset
in the City, but 1 looked at him with reverence. He was the
first Yeowan 1 had spoken to. He asked me questions from a
form and wrote down my answers. 'Can yO l1 read?' 一‘Yes.' 一
‘Skills?' 一 1 stammered a moment and said , 'Teaching - 1 can
teach reading and history.' He never looked up at me.
1 was glad to be patient. After all , the Yeowans had not asked
us to come. We were admitted only because they knew if they
sent .us back, we w0111d die horribly in a public execution. We
were a profitable cargo to Bambur, but to Yeowe we were a

212

Four Ways

的 Forgiveness

problem. But many of us had skills they must need , and 1 was
glad they asked us about them.
When we had all been processed , we were separated into
two groups: men and women. Yoke hugged me and went off to
the men's side laughing and waving. 1 stood with the women.
We watched all the men led off to the shuttle that went to the
Old Capita l. Now my patience failed and my hope darkened. 1
prayed , 'Lord Kam戶， not here , not here too!' Fear made me
angry. When a man came giving us orders again , come on , this
W呵， 1 went up to him and said ,‘Who are you? Wh ere are we
going? We are free women!'
He was a big fellow with a round , white face and bluish
eyes. He looked down at me , huffy at first , then smiIi ng. 'Yes ,
Little Sister, you're free ,' he said. 'But we've all got to work,
don't we? YOll ladies are going south. They need people on the
rice plantations. You do a little work , make a little money, look
around a li tt1 e , all right? If you don't like it down there , come
on back. We can always use more pretty little ladies round
here.'
1 had never heard the Yeowan country accent, a singing,
blurry softening, with long , clear vowels. 1 had never heard
asset women called ladies. No one had ever called me Little
Siste r. He did not mean the word ‘use' as 1 took it, surely. He
meant well. 1 was bewildered and said no more. But the
chemist, Tualtak, said , 'Listen, I' m no field hand , I'm a trained
scientist 一，

‘Oh, you're all scientists,' the Yeowan said with his big smile.
'Come on now, ladies!' He strode ahead , and we followed.
Tualtak kept talking. He smiled and paid no heed.
We were taken to a train car waiting on a siding. Th e huge ,
bright sun was setting. Al l the sky was orange and pink, full of
ligh t. Long shadows ran black along the ground. The warm air
was dusty and sweet-smelling. Wh ile we stood waiting to climb
up into the car 1 stooped and picked up a little reddish stone
from the ground.

A Woman's Li beration

21 3

It was round , with a tiny stripe of white clear through it. It
was a piece of Yeowe. 1 held Yeowe in my hand. That li tt1 e
stone , too , 1 stil1 have.
Our car was shunted along to the main yards and hooked
onto a train. When the train started we were served dinner ,
soup from great kettles wheeled through the car, bowls of
sweet, heavy marsh rice , pini fruit - a luxury on Werel , here a
commonplace. 叭fe ate and ate. 1 watched the last light die
away from the long, rolling hills that the train was passing
through. The stars came out. No moons. Never again. But 1
saw 叭'erel nsmg in the east. It was a great blue-green star ,
looking as Yeowe looks from Werel. But you would never see
Yeowe rising after sunset. Yeowe followed the sun.
I' m alive and I' m here , 1 thought. I' m following the sun. 1
let the rest go , and fell asleep to the swaying of the train.
We were taken off the train on the second day at a town on
the great river Yot. Our group of twenty-three was separated
there , and ten of us were taken by oxcart to a vil1 age , Hagayot.
It had been an APCY compound , growing marsh rice to feed
the Colony slaves. Now it was a cooperative village , growing
marsh rice to feed the Free People. We were enrolled as
members of the cooperative. We lived share and share alike
with the villagers until payout, when we could pay them back
what we owed the cooperative.
It was a reasonable way to handle immigrants without money
who did not know the language or who had no skills. But 1 did
not understand why they had ignored our skills. Wh y had they
sent the men from Bambur plantations , field hands , into the
city, not here? Wh y only women?
1 did not understand why , in a village of free people , there
was a men's side and a women's side , with a ditch between
them.
1 did not understand why, as 1 soon discovered , the men
made all the decisions and gave all the orders. But, it being so ,
1 did understand that they were afraid of us Werelian women ,

21

4

Four Ways to Forgíveness

who were not l1 sed to taking orders from our eq l1 als. And 1
that 1 must take orders and not even look as if 1
tho l1 ght of q l1 estioning the m. The men of Hagayot Village
watched l1 S with fierce suspicion and a whip as ready as any
Boss's. 'Maybe you told men what to do back over there ,' the
foreman told us the first morning in the fields. 'Well , tha t' s
back over there. Tha t' s not here. Here we free people work
togethe r. You think you're Bosswomen. There aren't any
Bosswomen here.'
There were grandmothers on the women's side , but they
were not the powers our grandmothers had been. Here , where
for the first century there had been no slave women at all , the
men had had to make their own life , set up their own powers.
When women slaves at last were sent into those slave-kingdoms
of men , there was no power for them at al l. They had no voice.
Not till they got away to the cities did they ever have a voice
on Yeowe.
1 learned silence.
But it was not as bad for me and Tualtak as for our eight
Bambur companions. We were the first immigrants any of
these villagers had ever seen. They knew only one language.
They thought the Bambur women were witches because they
did not talk ‘like human beings.' They whipped them for
talking to each other in their own language.
1 will confess that in my first year on the Free World my
heart was as low as it had been at Zeskra. 1 hated standing all
day in the shallow water of the rice paddies. Our feet were
always sodden and swollen and full of tiny burrowing worms
we had to pick out every nigh t. But it was needed work and not
too hard for a healthy woman. It was not the work that bore me
down.
Hagayot was not a tribal village , not as conservative as some
of the old villages 1 learned about late r. Girls here were not
rihlally raped , and a woman was safe on the women's side. She
‘ jumped the ditch' only with a man she chose. But if a woman
l1 nderstood

A Woman's Liberatiol1

21

5

went anywhere alone , or even got separated from the other
women working in the paddies., she was supposed to be 'asking
for it,' and any man thought it his right to force himself on her.
1 made good friends among the village women and the
Bamburs. They were no more ignorant than 1 had been a few
years before and some were wiser than 1 would ever be. There
was no possibility of having a friend among men who thought
themselves our owners. 1 could not see how life here would
ever change. My heart was very low, nights , when 1 lay among
the sleeping women and children in our h l1 t and thought, Is
this what Walsu died for?
In my second year there , 1 resolved to do what 1 could to
keep above the misery that threatened me. One of the Bambur
women , meek and slow of understanding, whipped and beaten
by both women and men for speaking her language , had
drowned in one of the great rice paddies. She had lain down
there in the warm shallow water not much deeper than her
ankles , and had drowned. 1 feared that yielding, that water of
despair. 1 made up my mind to use my skill , to teach the village
women and children to read.
1 wrote out some li仗Ie primers on rice cloth and made a
game of it for the little children , first. Some of the older girls
and women were curious. Some of them knew that people in
the towns and cities could read. They saw it as a mystery, a
witchcraft that gave the city people their great powe r. 1 did not
deny this.
F or the women , 1 first wrote down verses and passages of the
Arkamye, all 1 could remember , so that they could have it and
not have to wait for one of the men who called themselves
‘priests' to recite it. Th ey were proud of learning to read these
verses. Th en 1 had my friend Seugi te l1 me a story, her own
recollection of meeting a wild hunting cat in the marshes as a
child. 1 wrote it down , entitling it 'The Marsh Lion , by Aro
Seugi ,' and read it aloud to the author and a circle of girls and

216

FourWays 的 Forgiveness

women. They marveled and laughed. Seugi wept , touching the
writing that held her voice.
The chief of the village and his headmen and foremen and
honorary sons , all the hierarchy and government of the village ,
were suspicious and not pleased by my teaching , yet did not
want to forbid me. The government of Yotebber Region had
sent word that they were establishing country schools where
village children were to be sent for half the yea r. The village
men knew that their sons would be advantaged if they could
already read and write when they went there.
The Chosen Son , a big , mild , pale man , blind in one eye
from a war wound , came to me at las t. He wore his coat of
office , a tight , long coat such as Werelian owners had worn
three hundred years ago. He told me that 1 should not teach
girls to read , only boys.
1 told him 1 would teach all the children who wanted 個
learn or none of them
'Girls do not want to learn this ,' he said
'They do. Fourteen girls have asked to be in my class. Eight
boys. 00 you say girls do not need religious training, Chosen
Son?'
This gave him pause. 'They should learn the life of the
Merciful Lady ,' he said.
'1 will write the Life of Tual for them ,' 1 said at once. He
walked away, saving his dignity.
1 had little pleasure in my victory , such as it was. At least 1
went on teaching.
Tualtak was always at me to run away, run away to the city
downrive r. She had grown very thin , for she could not digest
the heavy food. She hated the work and the people. ‘It's al1
right for you , you were a plantation pup , a dusty , but 1 never
was , my mother was a rentswoman , we lived in fine rooms on
Haba Street, 1 was the brightest trainee they ever had in the
laboratory ,' and on and on , over and over , living in the world
she had los t.

A Woman's Li beratíon

21 7

Sometimes 1 listened to her talk about running away. 1 tried
to remember the maps of Yeowe in my lost books. 1 remembered the great river , the Yot , running from far inland three
thousand kilos to the South Sea. But where were we on its vast
length , how far from Yotebber City on its delta? Between
Hagayot and the city might be a hundred villages like this one.
'Have you been raped?' 1 asked Tualtak.
She took 0旺'e nse. Tm a rentswoman , not a use-woman ,' she
snapped.
1 said , '1 was a use-woman for two years. If 1 was raped again ,
1 would kill the man or kill mysel f. 1 think two Werelian
women walking alone here would be raped. 1 can't do it,
Tualtak.'
'It can't all be like this place!' she cried , so desperate that 1
felt my own throat close up with tears.
‘Maybe when they open the schools 一 there will be people
from the cities then 一， It was all 1 had to offer her , or myself,
as hope. ‘Maybe if the harvest's good this year , if we can get
our money , we can get on the train .
That indeed was our best hope. The problem was to get our
money from the chief and his cohorts. They kept the cooperative's income in a stone hut which they called the Bank of
Hagayot, and only they ever saw the money. Each individual
had an account, and they kept tally faithfully , the old Banker
Headman scratching your account out in the dirt if you asked
for it. But women and children could not withdraw money
from their account. All we could get was a kind of scrip , clay
pieces marked by the Banker Headman , good to buy things
from one another , things people in the vi1I age made , clothes,
sandals , tools , bead necklaces , rice bee r. Our real money was
safe , we were told , in the bank. 1 thought of that old lame
bondsman at Shomeke , )lggmg and singing ‘Money in the
bank, Lord! Money in the bank!'
Before we ever came , the women had resented this system.
Now there were nine more women resenting it.

218

Four Ways to Forgiveness

One night 1 asked my friend Seugi , whose hair was as white
as her skin ,‘ Seugi , do you know what happened at a place
called Nadami?'
'Yes ,' she said. 'The women opened the doo r. All the women
rose up and then the men rose up against the Bosses. But they
needed weapons. And a woman ran in the night and stole the
key from the owner's box and opened the door of the strong
place where the Bosses kept their guns and bullets, and she
held it open with the strength of her body, so that the slaves
could arm themselves. And they killed the Corporations and
made that place , Nadami , free.'
‘Even on Werel they tell that story,' 1 said. ‘Even there
women tell about Nadami , where the women began the
Liberation. Men tell it too. 00 men here tell it? 00 they know
Seugi and the other women nodded.
‘If a woman freed the men of Nadami ,' 1 said , 'maybe the
women of Hagayot can free their money.'
Seugi laughed. She called out to a group of grandmothers ,
'Listen to Rakam! Listen to this!'
After plenty of talk for days and weeks , it ended in a
delegation of women , thirty of lI S. We crossed the ditch bridge
onto the men's side and ceremoniously asked to see the chie f.
Our principal bargaining counter was shame. Sellgi and other
village women did the speaking, for they knew how far they
cOllld shame the men withollt goading them into anger and
retaliation. Listening to them , 1 heard dignity speak to dignity,
pride speak to pride. For the first time since 1 came to Yeowe 1
felt 1 was one of these people , that this pride and dignity were
mme.
Nothing happens fast in a village. Bllt by the next harvest,
the women of Hagayot could draw their own earned share Ollt
of the bank in cash
'Now for the vote ,' 1 said to Seugi , for there was no secret
ballot in the village. Wh en there was a regional election, even

A\月1oman's

Líberation

21

9

in the worldwide Ratification of the Constitl1 tion , the chiefs
polled the men and filled Ol1 t the ballots. They did not even
poll the women. They wrote in the votes they wanted cast.
But 1 did not stay to help bring abollt that change at Hagayo t.
T l1 altak was really ill and half-crazy with her longing to get Ollt
of the marshes , to the city. And 1 too longed for that. So we
took our wages , and Seugi and other women drove llS in an
oxcart on the callseway across the marshes to the freight station.
There we raised the flag that signaled the next train to stop for
passengers.
It came along in a few hours , a long train of boxcars loaded
with marsh rice , heading for the mills of Yotebber City. 叭le
rode in the crew car with the train crew and a few other
passengers , village men. 1 had a big knife in my belt, bllt none
of the men showed llS any disrespect. Away from their compounds they were timid and shy. 1 sat IIp in my bunk in that
car watching the gre祉， wild , phoney marshes whirl by , and the
villages on the banks of the wide river , and wished the train
would go on foreve r.
Bllt Tualtak lay in the bunk below me , cOllghing and fretfu l.
Wh en we got to Yotebber City she was so weak 1 knew 1 had to
get her to a doctor. A man from the train crew was kind , telling
llS how to get to the hospital on the Pllblic cars. As we rattled
throllgh the hot, crowded city streets in the crowded car , 1 was
still happy. 1 could not help it.
At the hospital they demanded our citizen's registration
papers.
1 had never heard of such papers. Later 1 fOllnd that ours
had been given to the chiefs at Hagayot, who had kept them ,
as they kept all ‘their' women's papers. At the time , all 1 could
do was stare and say,‘1 don't know anything about registration
papers.
1 heard one of the women at the desk say to the other , 'Lord ,
how dusty can you get?'
1 knew what we looked like. 1 knew we looked dirty and low.

220

Four Ways to Forgiveness

I knew I seemed ignorant and stupid. But when I heard that
word ‘dusty' my pride and dignity woke up again. I put my
hand into my pack and brought out my freedom paper, that
old paper with Erod's writing on it, all crumpled and folded ,
all dusty.
'This is my Citizen's Registration paper,' I said in a loud
voice , making those women jump and turn. ‘My mother's
blood and my grandmother's blood is on it. My friend here is
sick. She needs a docto r. Now bring us to a doctor!'
A thin little woman came forward from the corridor. 'Come
on this way,' she said. One of the deskwomen started to protes t.
This little woman give her a loo k.
We followed her to an examination room.
Tm D r. Yeron,' she said , then corrected hersel f. Tm serving
as a nurse,' she said. 'But I am a docto r. And you - you come
from the Old World? from Werel? Sit down there , now, child ,
take 0叮 your shirt. How long have you been here?'
Within a quarter of an hom she had diagnosed Tualtak and
got her a bed in a ward for rest and observation , found out om
histories , and sent me off with a note to a friend of hers who
would help me find a place to live and a job.
'Teaching!' D r. Yeron said. 'A teacher! Oh , woman , you are
rain to the dry land!'
Indeed the first school I talked to wanted to hire me at once ,
to teach anything I wanted. Because I come of a capitalist
people , I went to other schools to see if 1 could make more
money at them. But I came back to the first one. I liked the
people there.
Before the War of Liberation, the cities of Yeowe , which
were cities of Corporation-owned assets who rented their own
freedom , had had their own schools and hospitals and many
kinds of training programs. There was even a University for
assets in the Old Capital. The Corporations, of course , had
controlled all the information that came to such instihltions ,
and watched and censored all teaching and writing, keeping

A Woman's Liberatíon

221

everything aimed towards the maximisation of their profits. But
within that narrow frame the assets had been free 怕 use the
information they had as they pleased , and city Yeowans had
valued education deeply. During the long war, thirty years , all
that system of gathering and teaching knowledge had broken
down. A whole generation grew IIp learning nothing bllt
fighting and hiding, famine and disease. The head of my
school said to me ,‘Our children grew IIp illiterate, ignoran t. Is
it any wonder the plantation chiefs ;llSt took over where the
Corporation Bosses left off? Wh o was to stop tli.em?'
These men and women believed with a fierce passion that
only edllcation wOllld lead to freedom. They were still fighting
the War of Liberation.
Yotebber City was a big, poor, sllnny, sprawling city with
wide streets , low buildings, and hllge old shady trees. The
traffic was mosÙY afoot, with cycles tinging and public cars
clanging along among the slow crowds. There were miles of
shacks and shanties down in the old ßoodplain of the river
behind the levees , where the soil was rich for gardening. The
center of the city was on a low rise , the mills and train yards
spreading out from it. Downtown it looked like the City ofVoe
Deo, only older and poorer and gentler. Instead of big stores
for owners, people bOllght and sold everything from stalls in
open markets. The air was soft here in the sOllth , a warm , soft
sea air fllll of mist and sllnligh t. 1 stayed happy. 1 have by the
grace of the Lord a mind that can leave misfortune behind ,
and 1 was happy in Yotebber City.
Tualtak recovered her health and fOllnd a good job as a
chemist in a factory. 1 saw her seldom , as our friendship had
been a matter of necess旬， not choice. Whenever 1 saw her she
talked about Haba Street and her laboratory on Werel and
complained abollt her work and the people here.
D r. Yeron did not forget me. She wrote a note and told me
to come visit her, which 1 did. Presently, when 1 was settled ,
she asked me to come with her to a meeting of an edllcational

222

Four Ways to Forgiveness

society. This , 1 found , was a group of democrats , mostly
teachers , who sO l1 ght to work against the al1 tocratic power of
the tribal and regional chiefs l1 nder the new Constitution , and
to COl1 nteract what they called the slave mind , the rigid ,
misogynistic hierarchy that 1 had encountered in Hagayo t. My
experience was usef111 to them , for they were all city people
who had met the slave mind only when they fO l1 nd themselves
governed by it. The women of the gro l1 p were the angries t.
They had lost the most at Liberation and now had less to lose.
In general the men were gradualists , the women ready for
revol l1 tion. As a Werelian , ignorant of politics on Yeowe , 1
listened and did not tal k. It was hard for me not to tal k. 1 am a
talker , and sometimes 1 had plenty to say. Bl1 t 1 held my tongue
and heard them. They were people worth hearing.
Ignorance defends itself savagely, and iIl iteracy, as 1 well
knew, can be shrewd. Though the Chief, the President of
Yotebber Region , e1 ected by a manipulated ballot, might not
l1 nderstand our counter-manipulations of the school curricu111m , he did not waste much energy trying to control the schools ,
mer e1 y sending his inspectors to meddle with our classes and
censor our books. Bl1 t what he saw as important was the fact
that, just as the Corporations had , he controlled the ne t. The
news , the information programs , the puppets of the neareals , all
danced to his strings. Against that, what harm could a lot of
teachers do? Parents who had no schooling had children who
entered the net to hear and see and feel what the Chief wanted
them to know: that freedom is obedience to leaders , that virtue
is violence , that manhood is domination. Against the enactment
of such truths in daily life and in the heightened sensational
experience of the neareals , what good were words?
'Li teracy is irre1 evant,' one of our gro l1 p said sorrowfully.
'The chiefs have jumped right over our heads into the postliterate information technology.'
1 brooded over that , hating her fancy words , irrelevant,
postliterate , beca l1 se 1 was afraid she was righ t.

A Woman's Liberation

223

To the next meeting of our group , to my surprise , an Alien
came: the Su b-Envoy of the Ekumen. He was sl1 pposed to be
a great feather in om Chief' s cap , sent down from the Old
Capital apparently to Sl1 pport the Chief's stand against the
World Pa旬， which was still strong down here and still
clamoring that Yeowe should keep out all foreigners. 1 had
heard vagl1 ely that sl1 ch a person was here , but 1 had not
expected to meet him at a gathering of subversive
schooIteachers.
He was a short man , red-brown , with white corners to his
eyes , b l1 t handsome if one cO l1 ld ignore tha t. He sat in the seat
in front of me. He sat perfectly still , as if accustomed to sitling
still , and listened without speaking，的 if acc l1 stomed to listening. At the end of the meeting he huned around and his queer
eyes looked straight at me.
'Radosse Rakam?' he said.
1 nodded , dumb.
'l' m Yehedarhed Havzhiva,' he said. '1 have some books for
yO l1 from old music.'
1 stared. 1 said , 'Books?'
'From old music,' he said again. 'Esdardon A抖， on Were l.'
‘My books?' 1 said.
He sm i1 ed. He had a broad , quick sm i1 e.
‘Oh, where?' 1 cried.
'They're at my house. We can get them tonight, if you like.
1 have a car.' There was something ironic and light in how he
said that, as if he was a man who did not expect to have a car,
though he might enjoy it.
D r. Yeron came ove r.‘ So you found her,' she said to the
Sub-Envoy. He looked at her with such a bright face that 1
thought, these two are lovers. Though she was much older
than he , there was nothing unlikely in the though t. D r. Yeron
was a magnetic woman. It was odd to me to think 祉， though ,
for my mind was not given to speculating about people's sexual
a缸airs. That was no interest of mine.

224

Four Ways 的 Forgiveness

He pllt his hand on her arm as they taIked , and 1 saw with
pecllliar intensity how gentIe his tOllch was , aImost hesitant ,
yet trustfú l. Th at is Iove , 1 though t. Yet they parted, 1 saw,
without that look of private llnderstanding that lovers often give
each othe r.
He and 1 rode in his government electric car, his two siIent
bodygllards , policewomen, sitting in the front sea t. We spoke
of Esdardon A戶， whose name , he expIained to me , meant OId
Music. 1 toId him how Esdardon Aya had saved my life by
sending me here. He listened in a way that made it easy to taIk
to him. 1 said , '1 was sick to leave my books , and I've thollght
abollt them , missing them , as if they were my family. Bllt 1
think maybe I' m a fool to feel that way.'
‘Why a fool?' he asked. He had a foreign accent, but he had
the Yeowan lilt already , and his voice was beautifuI , low and
warm.
1 tried to expIain everything at once: ‘WelI, they mean so
much to me because 1 was illiterate when 1 came to the City,
and it was the books that gave me freedom , gave me the world
- the worlds - But now, here , 1 see how the net, the hoIos , the
neareaIs mean so much more to people , glvmg them the
present time. Maybe it's just cI inging to the past to cI ing to
books. Yeowans have to go towards the fuhue. And we'II never
change people's minds just with words.'
He listened intently, as he had done at the meeting , and
then answered slowIy,‘But words are an essential way of
thinking. And books keep the words true . . . 1 didn't read till 1
was an adult, either.'
‘You didn't?'
'1 knew how , bllt 1 didn' t. 1 lived in a village. It's cities that
have to have books ,' he said , quite decisively, as if he had
thought about this matter. 'If they don't, we keep on starting
over every generation. It's a waste. You have to save the words.'
When we got to his hOllse , IIp at theωp end of the old part
of town , there were four crates of books in the entrance hall.

A Woman's Lí beratio l1

225

'These aren't all mine!' 1 said.
。ld Music said they were yours ,' M r. Yehedarhed said , with

his quick smile and a quick glance at me. YOll can tell where
an Alien is looking mllch better than yOll can tell with l1 S. 帆布 th
us , except for the few people with bluish eyes , you have to be
close enough to see the dark pupil move in the dark eye.
‘1 haven't got anywhere to put so many ,' 1 said, amazed,
realising how that strange man, Old Music, had helped me to
Freedom yet again.
'At your school , maybe? The schoollibrary?'
It was a good idea, but 1 thought at once of the Chief' s
inspectors pawing through them , perhaps confiscating them.
Wh en 1 spoke of that, the Sub-Envoy said ,‘What if 1 present
them as a gift from the Embassy? 1 think that might embarrass
the inspectors.'
'Oh ,' 1 said , and burst Ollt，‘叭1hy are you so kind? You , and
he - Are you Hainish tooγ
‘Yes ,' he said , not answering my other question. ‘1 was. 1
hope to be Yeowan.'
He asked me to sit down and drink a little glass of wine with
him before his guard drove me home. He was easy and friendly ,
but a quiet man. 1 saw he had been hurt. There were scars on
his face and a gap in his hair where he had had a head injury.
He asked me what my books were , and 1 said ,‘ History.'
At that he smiled , slowly this time. He said nothing , but he
raised his glass to me. 1 raised mine , imitating him , and we
dran k.
Next day he had the books delivered to our school. When
we opened and shelved them , we realised we had a great
treasure. 'There's nothing like this at the University,' said one
of the teachers , who had studied there for a year.
There were histories and anthropologies of Werel and of the
worlds of the Ekumen , works of philosophy and politics by
Werelians and by people of other worlds , there were compendiums of literahne, poetry and stories , encyclopedias , books of

226

FourWays 的 Forgíveness

science , atlases , dictionaries. In a corner of one of the crates
were my own few books , my own treasure , even that first little
crude Hístory ofYeowe, Printed at Yeowe Uníversíty ín the Year
One of Li卸的. Most of my books 1 left in the school library,
but 1 took that one and a few others home for love , for comfor t.
1 had found another love and comfort not long since. A child
at school had brought me a present, a spotted-cat kitten , just
weaned. The boy gave it to me with such loving pride that 1
could not refuse it.叭1hen 1 tried to pass it on to another
teacher they all laughed at me. ‘You're elected, Rakam!' they
said. So unwillingly 1 took the li仕Ie being home , afraid of its
frailty and delicacy and near to feeling a disgust for it. Women
in the beza at Zeskra had had pets , spotted cats and foxdogs ,
spoiled little animals fed better than we were. 1 had been called
by the name of a pet animal once.
1 alarmed the kitten taking it out of its basket , and it bit my
thumb to the bone. It was tiny and frail but it had teeth. 1
began to have some respect for it.
That night 1 put it to sleep in its basket , but it climbed up
on my bed and sat on my face until 1 let it under the covers.
There it slept perfectly still all nigh t. In the morning it woke
me by dancing on me , chasing dust motes in a sunbeam. It
made me laugh , waking, which is a pleasant thing. 1 felt that 1
had never laughed very much , and wanted to.
The kitten was all black, its spots showing only in certain
lights , black on blac k. 1 called it Owne r. 1 found it pleasant to
come home evenings to be greeted by my little Owner.
Now for the next half year we were planning the great
demonstration of women. There were many meetings , at some
of which 1 met the Sub-Envoy again , so that 1 began to look for
him. 1 liked to watch him listen to our arguments. There were
those who argued that the demonstration must not be limited
to the wrongs and rights of women , for equality must be for aIl.
Others argued .that it should not depend in any way on the
support of foreigners , but should be a purely Yeowan move-

A Woman's Líberation

227

men t. Mr. Yehedarhed listened to them , but 1 got angry.'I'n1 a
foreigner ,' 1 said. ‘ Does that make me no use to you? Tha t' s
owner talk - as if yOll were better than other people!' And D r.
Yeron said , '1 will believe equality is for all when 1 see it written
in the Constitlltion of Yeowe.' F or our Constitlltion , ratified by
a world vote during the time 1 was at Hagayot, spoke of citizens
only as men. That is finally what the demonstration became , a
demand that the Constitution be amended to include women
as citizens, provide for the secret ballot, and guarantee the right
to free speech , freedom of the press and of assembly , and free
education for all children.
1 lay down on the train tracks along with seventy thousand
women ，出 at hot day. 1 sang with them. 1 heard what that
sounds like , so many women singing together , what a big , deep
sound it makes.
1 had beglln to speak in public again when we were gathering
women for the great demonstration. It was a gift 1 had , and we
made use of it. Sometimes gang boys or ignorant men w0111d
come to heckle and threaten me , shollting, ‘Bosswoman ,
Ownerwoman , black cunt, go back where you came from!'
Once when they were yelling that , go back , go back , 1 leaned
into the microphone and sa泊，‘ 1 can't go bac k. We l1 sed to sing
a song on the plantation where 1 was a slave ,' and 1 sang it,

0 , 0 , Ye-o-we
Nobody never comes back.
The singing made them be still for a momen t. They heard
that awful grief, that yearning.
Mter the great demonstration the unrest never died down ,
but there were times that the energy ßagged , the Movement
didn't move , as Dr. Yeron said. During one of those times 1
went to her and proposed that we set up a printing hO l1 se and
publish books. This had been a dream of mine , growing from
that day in Hagayot when Seugi had touched her words and
wep t.
祉，

228

Four Ways to Forgiveness

'Talk goes by,' 1 said ,‘and all the words and images in the
net go 旬， and anybody can change them. But books are there.
They las t. The y. are the body of histo句， M r. Yehedarhed says.'
‘ Inspectors ,' said D r. Yeron. ‘ Until we get the free press
amendment, the chiefs aren't going to let anybody print
anything they didn't dictate themselves.'
1 did not want to give up the idea. 1 knew that in Yotebber
Region we could not publish anything political , but 1 argued
that we might print stories and poems by women of the region.
Others thought it a waste of time. We discussed it back and
forth for a long time. Mr. Yehedarhed came back from a trip
to the Embassy , up north in the Old Capital. He listened to
our discussions , but said nothing, which disappointed me. 1
had thought that he might support my project.
One day 1 was walking home from school to my apa而ne肘，
which was in a big, old , noisy house not far from the levee. 1
liked the place because my windows opened into the branches
of trees , and through the trees 1 saw the river, four miles wide
here , easing along among sandbars and reedbeds and willow
isles in the dry season, brimming up the levees in the wet
season when the rainstorms scudded across it. That day as 1
came near the house , Mr. Yehedarhed appeared , with two
sour-faced policewomen close behind him as usual. He greeted
me and asked if we might tal k. 1 was confused and did not
know what to do but to invite him up to my room.
His guards waited in the lobby. 1 had just the one big room
on the third floo r. 1 sat on the bed and the Sub-Envoy sat in the
chair. Owner went round and round his legs , saying roo? roo?
1 had observed that the Su b-Envoy took pleasure in disappointing the expectations of the Chief and his cohorts , who
were all for pomp and fleets of cars and elaborate badges and
uniforms. He and his policewomen went all over the city, all
over Yotebber, in his government car or on foo t. People liked
him for it. They knew，的 1 knew now，出at he had been
assaulted and beaten and left for dead by a World Party gang

A Woman's Liberation

229

his first day here , when he went Ollt afoot alone. The city
people liked his courage and the way he talked with everybody ,
anywhere. They had adopted him. We in the Liberation
Movement thollght of him as ‘our Envoy: bllt he was theirs ,
and the Chie f' s too. The Chief may have hated his poplllarity,
bllt he profited from it.
‘You want to start a publishing hOllse: he said , stroking
Owner , who fell over with his paws in the ai r.
‘D r. Yeron says there's no lI se lI ntil we get the Amendments.'
‘There's one press on Yeowe not directly controlled by the
government: M r. Yehedarhed said , stroking Owner's belly.
'Look Ot哎， he'll bite: 1 said. 'Wh ere is that?'
'At the University. 1 see: M r. Yehedarhed said , looking at his
thumb. 1 apologised. He asked me if 1 was certain that Owner
was male. 1 said 1 had been told so , but never had thOllght to
look. 'My impression is that your Owner is a lady: M r.
Yehedarhed said, in such a way that 1 began to laugh helplessly.
He laughed along with me , sucked the blood off his tlmmb ,
and went on. ‘The University never amounted to much. It was
a Corporation ploy - let the assets pretend they're going to
college. During the last years of the War it was closed down.
Since Liberation Day it' s reopened and crawled along with no
one taking much notice of it. The faclllty are mostly old. They
came back to it after the Wa r. The National Government gives
it a subsidy because it sounds well to have a University of
Yeowe , but they don't pay it any aUention , because it has no
prestige. And becallse many of them are unenlightened men.'
He said this without scorn , descriptively. 'It does have a printing
house.'
‘1 know: 1 said. 1 reached out for my old book and showed it
tohim.
He looked through it for a few minutes. His face was
curiously tender as he did so. 1 could not help watching him.
It was like watching a woman with a baby, a constant, changing
play of aUention and response.

23。

Four Ways to Forgiveness

‘F l1l1 of propaganda and errors and hope ,' he said at last, and
his voice too was tende r. Wel1, 1 think this could be improved
upon. Don't yO l1? Al l tha t's needed is an editor. And some
authors.'
'Inspedors ,' 1 warned , imitating D r. Yeron.
'Academic freedom is an easy issue for the Ekumen to have
some influence upon ,' he said,‘because we invite people to
attend the Ekumenical Schools on Hain and Ve. We certainly
want to invite graduates of the University of Yeowe. But of
course , if their education is severely defective because of the
lack of books , of information . . .'
1 said ,‘Mr. Yehedarhed , are you su仲osed to subvert government policies?' The question broke out of me unawares.
He did not laugh. He paused for quite a long time before he
answered. '1 don't know,' he said. 'So far the Ambassador has
backed me. We may both get reprimanded. Or fired. What I'd
like to do. ..' His strange eyes were right on me again. He
looked down at the book he still held. ‘Wh at l'd like is to
become a Yeowan citizen ,' he said. 'But my usefulness 切
Yeowe , and to the Liberation Movement, is my position with
the Ekumen. So 1'11 go on using that, or misusing 祉， till they
te11 me to stop.'
When he left 1 had to think about what he had asked me 切
do. That was to go to the University as a teacher of history, and
once there to volunteer for the editorship of the press. That all
seemed so preposterous, for a woman of my background and
my little learning, that 1 thought 1 must be misunderstanding
him. When he convinced me that 1 had understood him , 1
thought he must have very badly misunderstood who 1 was and
what 1 was capable of. Mter we had talked about that for a little
while , he left evidently feeling that he was making me
uncomfortable , and perhaps feeling uncomfortable himself,
though in fact we laughed a good deal and 1 did not feel
uncomfortable , .onlya li tt1 e as ifI were crazy.
1 tried to think about what he had asked me to do , to step so

A Woman's Liberatíon

231

far beyond mysel f. 1 found it difficult to think abou t. It was as
if it hung over me , this huge choice 1 must make , this fixhue 1
could not imagine. But what 1 thought abollt was him ,
Yehedarhed Havzhiva. 1 kept seeing him sitting there in my
old chair, stooping down to stroke Owne r. Sllcking blood off
his thumb. Laughing. Looking at me with his white-cornered
eyes. 1 saw his red-brown face and red-brown hands , the color
of pottery. His quiet voice was in my mind.
1 picked up the kitten , halιgrown now, and looked at its
hinder end. There was no sign of any male parts. The li吐le
black silky body squirmed in my hands. 1 thought of him
saying, 'Your Owner is a lady ,' and 1 wanted to laugh again ,
and to cry. 1 stroked the kitten and set her down , and she sat
sedately beside me , washing her shoulde r.‘ Oh poor little lady,'
1 said. 1 don't know who 1 mean t. The kitten , or Lady Tazeu ,
or mysel f.
He had said to take my time thinking about his proposal , all
the time 1 wanted. But 1 had not really thOllght abollt it at all
when, the next day but one , there he was , on foot, waiting for
me as 1 came out of the school.‘Would you like to walk on the
levee?' he said.
1 looked around.
'Th ere they are; he said , indicating his cold-e yed bodyguards. ‘Everywhere 1 am , they are , three to five meters away.
Walking with me is dull , but safe. My virtue is guaranteed.'
We walked down through the streets to the levee and up
onto it in the long early evening light, warm and pink-gold ,
smelling of river and mud and reeds. The two women with
guns walked along just about four meters behind us.
‘If you do go to the University; he said after a long silence ,
Tll be there constantly.'
‘1 haven't yet-' 1 stammered.
‘If you stay here , I'll be here constantly,' he said. 'That is , if
it's all right with you.'
1 said nothing. He looked at me without huning his head. 1

23 2

FOUT Ways 的

FOTgíveness

said without intending to ,‘1 like it that 1 can see where you're
looking.'
‘1 like it that 1 can't see where you're looking,' he said ,
looking directly at me.
We walked on. A heron rose up out of a reed islet and its
great wings beat over the water, away. We were walking south ,
downriver. Al l the western sky was full of light as the sun went
down behind the city in smoke and haze.
'Rakam , 1 would like to know where you came from , what
your life on Werel was ,' he said very softly.
1 drew a long breath. ‘It's all gone: 1 said. ‘Past.'
‘We are our past. Th ough not only tha t. 1 want to know yOll.
Forgive me. 1 want very much to know you.'
After a while 1 said,‘1 want to tell you. But it's so bad. It's so
ugly. Here , now, it' s beautiful. 1 don't want to lose 祉，
'Whatever yO l1 tell me 1 will hold val l1able ,' he said , in his
q l1 iet voice that went to my heart. So 1 told him what 1 could
about Shomeke compound , and then hurried on through the
rest of my story. Sometimes he asked a question. Mos t1 y he
listened. At some time in my telling he had taken my arm , 1
scarcely noticing at the time. When he let me go , thinking
some movement 1 made meant 1 wanted to be released , 1
missed that light tO l1ch. His hand was cool. 1 c0111d feel it on
my forearm after it was gone.
‘Mr. Yehedarhed: said a voice behind us: one of the
bodyguards. The sun was down , the sky fl l1shed with gold and
red. ‘Better head back?'
'Yes ,' he said , 'thanks.' As we turned 1 took his arrn. 1 felt
him catch his breath.
1 had not desired a man or a woman - this is the truth since Shomeke. 1 had loved people , and 1 had touched them
with love , but oever with desire. My gate was locked.
Now it was open. Now 1 was so weak 血at at the touch of his
hand 1 could scarcely walk 00.
1 said ,‘It's a good thing walking with you is so safe.'

A Woman's Liberatíon

233

1 hardly knew what 1 mean t. 1 was thirty years old but 1 was
like a yOllng girl. 1 had never been that girl.
He said nothing. We walked along in silence between the
即er and the city in a glory of failing ligh t.
‘Will yOll come home with me , Rakam?' he said.
Now 1 said nothing.
'They don't come in with llS ,' he said , very low, in my ear,
so that 1 felt his breath.
‘Oon't make me lallgh!' 1 said , and began crying. 1 wept all
the way back along the levee. 1 sobbed and thought the sobs
were ceasing and then sobbed again. 1 cried for all my sorrows,
all my shames. 1 cried becallse they were with me now and
always wOllld be. 1 cried because the gate was open and 1 cOllld
go throllgh at last, go into the country on the other side, bllt 1
was afraid to.
Wh en we got into the car, up near my school , he took me
in his arms and simply held me , silen t. The two women in the
front seat never looked round.
We went into his house , which 1 had seen once before, an
old mansion of some owner of the Corporation days. He
thanked the guards and Shllt the door. ‘Oinner,' he said. 'The
cook's ou t. 1 meant to take you to a restauran t. 1 forgot.' He led
me to the kitchen , where we fOllnd cold rice and salad and
wine. After we ate he looked at me across the kitchen table and
looked down again. His hesitance made me hold still and say
nothing. After a long time he said,‘Oh , Rakam! will yOll let
me make love to yo肘，
‘1 want to make love 胎 you: 1 said. '1 never did. 1 never
made love to anyone.'
He got up smiling and took my hand. We went llpstairs
together, passing what had been the entrance to the men's side
of the hOllse. ‘1 live in the beza,' he said ,‘ in the harem. 1 live
on the woman's side. 1 like the view.'
We came to his room. There he stood still, looking at me ,
then looked away. 1 was so frightened , so bewildered, 1 thOllght

234

Four Ways to Forgiveness

1 could not go to him or tO l1 ch him. 1 made myself go to him.
1 raised my hand and touched his face , the scars by his eye and
on his mouth , and put my arms around him. Then 1 c0111d
hold him to me , closer and close r.
Some time in that night as we lay drowsing entangled 1 said ,
‘ Did you sleep with D r. Yeron?'
1 felt Havzhiva la l1 gh , a slow, soft la l1 gh in his belly, which
was against my belly. 'No ,' he said. ‘No one on Yeowe but you.
And you , no one on Yeowe b l1 t me. We were virgins , Yeowan
virgins . . . Rakam , araha . . .' He rested his head in the hollow
of my sho l1 lder and said something else in a foreign langl1age
and fell asleep. He slept deeply, silently.
Later that year 1 came up north to the University, where 1
was taken on the fac l1lty as a teacher of history. By their
standards at that time , 1 was competen t. 1 have worked there
ever since , teaching and as editor of the press.
As he had said he w0111d be , Havzhiva was there constantly,
or almos t.
The Amendments to the Constitl1 tion were voted , by secret
ballot, mostly , in the Yeowan Year of Liberty 18. Of the events
that led to this , and what has followed , you may read in the
new three-vol l1 me Hístory ofYeowe from the University Press. 1
have told the story 1 was asked to tell. 1 have closed it, as so
many stories close, with a joining of two people. Wh at is one
man's and one woman's love and desire , against the history of
two worlds , the great revolutions of our lifetimes , the hope , the
unending cruelty of our species? A little thing. Bl1 t a key is a
little thing, next to the door it opens. If yO l1 lose the key , the
door may never be l1 nlocked. It is in our bodies that we lose or
begin our freedom , in our bodies that we accept or end our
slavery. So 1 wrote this book for my friend , with whom 1 have
lived and will die free.

Notes on 叭1erel and Yeowe
1.

PRONUNCIATION OF NAMES AND WORDS

In Voe Dean (which is also the lang l1age of Yeowe) and Gatayan ,
vowels have the l1 sual ‘ European val l1 es':
a as in father (ah)
e as in hey (ay) or let (eh)
i as in machine (ee) or it (ih)
o as in go (0) or off(oh)
11 as in ruby (00)
In Voe Dean the accent is normally on the next-to-last syllable. Thus:
Arkamye - ar-KAHM-yeh
Bambur - BAHM-boor
Boeba - bo-AY-bah
Dosse - DOHS-seh
Erod - EH-rod
gareot - gah-RAY-o t
Gatay - gah-TAH-ee
gede - GHEH-deh
Ge l1 - GAY-oo
Hame - HAH-meh
Hagayot - hah-GAH-yot
Hayawa - hah-YAH-wah
Kamye - KAH加l-yeh
Keo - KAY-o
makil - MAH-kihl
Nadami - nah-DAH-mee

23 6

Four Ways to Forgiveness
Noeha - no-AY-hah
Ra
山叩ll1且y
戶
O 一 r缸
叫
m
叫
alh

rega 一 RAY-gah1

Rewe - REH-weh
San Ubattat - sahn-o o-BAHT-taht
Seugi - say-OO-ghee
ShoαIII
肘
1時
eke - shωO
Su
叫
lhaωme 一 sooφ-HAH-meh1

Tazell- tah扎
1-ZAY回吋
00
Teyeo - teh-YAY-o
Tikuli - tee-KOO-Iee
Toebawe - to -e h-BAH-weh
Tllal - too-AHL or TWAHL
veot - VAY-o t
Voe Deo - vo-e h-DAY-o
Walsu - WAHL-soo
Werel- WEH-rehl
Yeowe - yay-O-way
Yeron - YEH-rohn
Yoke 一 YO-keh

Yotebber - yo-TEHB-ber
Yowa 一 YO-wah

Nallles formed with the nallle of the deities Kamye (Kam) and Tual
tend to keep a stress on that element , thus:
Abberkam - AHB-ber-KAHM
Batikam - BAH-tih-KAHM
Rakam 一此也H-此也HM

Sezi-Tual -

SAY-zih-T叭lAHL

Tualtak 一 TWAH L-tahk

Hainish
(The extremely long lineage-names common among the Hainish are
cut down for daily use; thus Mattin-yehedarhed-dyura-ga-muruskets
becomes Yehedarhed.)
araha - ah-RAH-ha
Ekumen (升om an Ancíent Terran word) - EK-yoo-men

Notes on Werel and Yeowe

237

Esdardon Aya - ez-DAR-don-AH-ya
Havzhiva - HAHV-zhi-vah
Iyan Iyan- 帥-YAHN﹒凹-YAHN
Kathhad - KAHTH-hahd
Mezhe - MEH-zheh
Stse - STSEH (like the caþitalized letlers in English 'beST SEt')
Ti l1-1YOO
Ve-VEH
Yehedarhed - yeh-heh-DAR-hed

2. THE PLANETS WEREL AND YEOWE

FromA Handbook of the Known World~， þrinted in
Hainish Cycle 93 , Local Year 5467.

Da付anda ，

Hain ,

Ekumenical Year 2102 is counted as Present when historical dates are
given as years Before Present (B刊.
The Wèrel-Yeowe solar system consists of 16 planets orbiting a
yellow-white star (RK-tamo﹒野44-34). Life developed on the third ,
fourth , and fifth planets. The fifth , called Ra k111i in Voe Dean , has
only invertebrate life-fonns tolerant of arid cold , and has not been
exploited or colonised. The third and 且nd fourth planets , Yeowe and
Werel , are we l1 within the Hainish Nor l1l of at l1losphere , gravity ,
clil1late , etc. Werel was colonised by Hain late in the Expansion ,
within the last l1l illion years. It appe且rs that there was no native fa l1 na
to displace , as all ani l1l al life-forms fO l1 nd on Werel , as we l1 as sO l1le
flora , are of Hainish derivation. Yeowe had no ani l1l allife l1 ntil Werel
colonised it 365 years BP.

WEREL

Natural History
The fourth planet Ol1 t fro l1l its Sl1 n , Werel has seven sma l1 moons. Its
current climate is cool te l1l perate , severely cold at the poles. Its flora
is largely indigenous , its fa l1 na entirely of Hainish origin , modi自 ed
deliberately to obtain cobiosis with the native plants , and further

23 8

Four Ways to Forgíveness

modified thro l1gh genetic drift and adaptation. Human adaptations
incl l1 de a cyanotic skin coloration (from black to pale , with a bl l1 ish
cast) and eyes withollt visible whites , both evidently adjllstments to
elements in the solar radiation spectrum.
Voe Deo: Rece l1 t History: 4000-3500 years BP, aggressive, progressive
black-s kinned people fro111 south of the equator on the single great
continent (the region that is now the nation of Voe Deo) invaded
and dominated the lighter-skinned peoples of the north. These
conquerors instituted a master-slave society based on skin colo r.
Voe Deo is the largest , most numerous , wealthiest nation 011 the
planet; all other nations in both helllispheres are dependencies , client
states, or economically dependent on Voe Deo. Voe Dean econolllics
have been based on capitalism and slavery for at least 3∞o years. Voe
Dean hegemony permits the general description of Werel as if it
were all one society. As the society is in rapid change , however, this
account will be p l1 t in the past tense.

Social Classes ul1 der Slavery
Class: master (owner or gareot) and slave (asset). Your class was your
mother's class , witho l1 t exception.
Skin color ranges from bl l1e-black thro l1gh bl l1 ish or greyish beige
to an almost depigmented white. (Only albinislll affects hair and
eyes , which are dark). Ideally and in the abstract, class was skin color:
owners black, assets white. Act l1 ally , many owners were black, 1110St
were dark; S0111e assets were black , 1110St beige , S0111e white.
OWNERS were called men , WOllle l1, children.
The l1 nq l1alified word owner meant either the class as a whole or
an individ l1allfalllily owning two or 1ll0re slaves.
The owner of one slave or no slaves was a staffless owner or gareot.
The veot was a member of an hereditary warrior caste of owners;
the ranks were rega , zadyo , oga. Veot Ill en allllost invariably joined
the Army; 1110St veot families were landed proprietors; most were
owners , S0111e gareots.
Owner women formed a sl1 bclass or inferior caste. An owner
woman was legally the property of a man (father, l1 ncle, brother,
h l1 sband , son , or gl1ardian). Most observers hold that the gender

Notes on Werel and Yeowe

239

division of Werelian society was as profollnd and essential as the
master/slave division , bllt less visible , as it Cllt across it , owner wOlllen
being considered socially sllperior to assets of both sexes. Since
women were property , they cOllld not OW11 property , inclllding hlllllan
property. They cOllld , however , manage property.
ASSETS were ca l1 ed bondsmen , bondswomen , pllpS or yOllng.
Pejorative terms: slaves , dusties , chalks , whites.
Luls were work-slaves , owned by a person or a family. AI1 s1aves on
Werel were lllls , except Ill akils and asset-soldiers.
此1akils were sold to and owned by the Entertainment Corporation.
Asset-soldiers were sold to and owned by the Arllly.
‘Cutfrees' or ellnuchs were Illale slaves castrated (more or less
voluntarily , depending on age , etc.) to gain status and privilege.
Werelian histories describe a nlllllber of cutfrees who rose to great
power in various govemlllents; many held posts of influence throughout the bureaucracy. The Bosses of the bondswomen's side of the
compollnd were invariably cutfrees.
Manllrnission was extremely rare up until the 1ast centl1 ry ,
restricted to a few falllO l1 S historical /1 egen c1 ary cases of slaves whose
supemal loyalty and virtue induced their masters to give them
freedolll. Abo l1 t the tillle the War of Liberation began on Yeowe , the
practiceof lllan l1 lllissio11 becallle Ill ore frequent on Werel , led by the
owner gro l1 p The Cornmunity, which advocated the abolition of
slavery. A lllanulllÍtted asset ranked lega l1 y, though seldolll socia l1 y,
as a gareo t.
In Voe Deo at the tillle of the Liberation the proportion of assets
to owners was T l. (Abollt half these oW11ers were gareots , owners of
one or 110 assets.) In poorer countries the proportion dropped lower
or reversed; in the Eq l1且torial States the proportion of assets to owners
was 1: 多﹒ In \月lerel as a whole , the proportion was estilllated to be
about three assets to one owner.

Th e House and the Compound
Historica l1 y and in the cO l1 ntry , on the estates , farllls , and plantations ,
the assets lived in a fenced or wa l1 ed cOlllpound with a single gate.
The cOlllpo l1 nd was divided in halves by a ditch running para l1e1 to
the gate wall. The gateside was the men's qllarters , the inside was the
women's. Children lived on the inside , until boys reaching working

240

Four Ways to Forgiveness

age (8 to 10) were sent over to the longhouse. Women Ii ved in huts ,
l1l others and c1aughters , sisters or friends usually sharing a hut , two to
four women with their chilclren. The 1l1en ancl boys livecl in gateside
barracks called longhouses. Kitchen garclens were maintained by the
olcl people ancl small children who c1 icl not go out to work; the old
people generally cookecl for the working people. The grand l1l others
ruled the compound.
Cutfrees (eunuchs) Ii ved in separate houses built against the
outside wa l\, with a surveillance station on the wa lI; they served as
Compound Bosses , interlllediaries between the grandlllothers and
the Work Bosses (Ill embers of the owner family , or hired gareots , in
charge of the working assets). Work Bosses lived in houses outside
the C0 1l1 pound.
The owning family and their owner司c1ass dependents occupied the
House. The terlll House incluclecl any number of outbuilclin悸， the
Work Bosses' quarters , ancl anilllal barns , but specifically Ill eant the
falllily's large house. In conventional Houses the men's side (azade)
and the WO l1l en'S sicle (beza) were strictly c1 ivided. The degree of
restriction on the wOlllen reflected the wealth , power , and social
pretension of the family. Gareot wOlllen Ill ight have considerable
freedom of 1110Vel11 ent and occupation , but wOlllen of wealthy or
distinguished falllily were kept indoors or in the walled gardens ,
never going out without a nU l11 erous 1l1ale escort.
A number of female assets lived on the women's side as dOlllestics
and for use of the ll1 ale owners. SO ll1 e Houses kept ll1 ale domestics ,
usua Il y boys or old ll1en; sOllle kept cutfrees as servants.
In factories , mills , mines , etc. , the compound systelll was 1l1aintained with some l1l odifications. Where there was division of labor ,
a lI -male compounds were controlled entirely by hired gareots; in a Ilfelllale compounds the grandmothers were allowed to keep order as
in country compounds. Men rented to the all-male compounds had
a life expectancy of about 28 years. During the shortage of assets
caused by the slave trade to Yeowe in the early years of the Colony ,
sO l11e owners for l11 ed cooperative breeding c0 1l1pounds , where bondswomen were kept and bred annually , c1 0ing Ii ght work; S0 1l1e of these
'breeders' bore a baby annually for twenty or 1l10re years
Rentsþeoþle: On Werel , all assets were individua l1 y owned. (The

Notes on Werel and Yeowe

141

Corporatio l1S of Yeowe changed this practice; the Corporations
owned the slav郎， who had no private ll1且sters. )
In Werelian cities , assets traditionally lived in their owners' hOllsehold as domestics. Dming the last ll1i\1 enniml1 it became increasingly
common for owners of superfluous assets to rent them to businesses
and factories as skilled or unskilled labor. The owners or shareholders
of a company bought and owned individual assets individually; the
company rented the assets , controlled their use , and shared the
profits. An owner could live on the rental of two sk i\l ed assets. Thus
rentsmen and rentsW0 1l1en beca l1l e the largest group of assets in all
cities and many towns. Rentspeople lived in 'union c0 1l1pounds' apartment hO l1 ses supervised by hired gareot Bosses. They were
required to keep cmfew and check in and ou t.
(Note the difference between Werelian rentsμople ， rented out by
their owner , and the far more auton0 l1l0US Yeowan freedpeople , slaves
who paid their owner a tithe or tax on freely chosen work , called
'freedo ll1 renta l.' One of the early objectives of the Hame , the Voe
Dean underground asset liberation group , was to institute 'freedo ll1
renta l' on Werel.)
Most union compounds and all city households were genderdivided into azade and beza , but some private owners and sO l1le
companies allowed their assets or rentspeople to live as cOllples ,
though not to l1l arry. Their owners could separate them for any
reason at any ti ll1e. The mother's owner owned the children of any
such asset couple.
In the conventional compound , heterosexual access was controlled
by the owners , the Bosses , and the grandmothers. People who
'ju ll1 ped the ditch' did so at their peri l. The owner myth-ideal was of
total separation of male and fe ll1ale assets , with the Bosses l1lanaging
selective breeding, chosen stud asset ll1ales servicing the females at
opti l1lal intervals to prod l1 ce the desired number of yO l1 ng. Fe l1lale
assets were l1l ainly concerned , on exploitive fanns , to avoid lI ndesired
breeding and yearly pregnancy. In the hands of benevolent owners ,
也e grandmothers and c l1 tfrees often cO l1 ld protect girls and wO ll1 en
fro l1l rape , and even allow sO ll1 e affectional pairing. Bl1 t bonding was
discouraged both by the owners and the grandmothers; and no form
of slave 1l1arriage was ad1l1 itted by law or custom on 叭1erel.

242

FourWays 的 Forgíveness

Religions
The worship of Tual , a Kwan Yin-like l1laternal deity of peace and
forgiveness , was the state religion of Voe Deo. Philosophical秒， Tual
is seen as the most il11 portant incarnation of Ama the Increate or
Creator Spiri t. Historically, she is an al1lalgam of many local and
nature deities , and locally often refragl1lents into JIl1l1tiplicity. Natiollall比 enforcement of the national re1 igion tended to accompany Voe
Dean hegemony in other countries , although the religion is not
inherently a pros e1 ytising or aggressive one. Tualite priests can and
do hold high office in the governmen t. Class: Tualite images and
worship were maintained by the owners in all slave cO l1l pollnds , both
on Werel and Yeowe. Tualism was the owners' religion. The assets'
practice of it was en必rced， and while including aspects of Tualite
l1l yth and worship in their rituals , most assets were Kamyites. By
considering Kamye as 'the Bondsl11an' and a lesser aspect of Ama , the
Tualite priesthood included and tolerated Ka l11 yite practice (which
had no official clergy) among slaves and soldiers (most veots were
Ka l11yites).
The Arkamye or Life of Kamye the Swordsll1an (Ka l11ye is also the
Herdsman , a beastmaster deity , and the Bondsll1an , having been long
in service to Lord Nightfall): a warrior epic , adopted about 3,000
years ago by the assets , pretty ll1 uch worldwide , as the sourcebook of
their own religion. It cultivates such warriorlslave virtues as obedience, courage, patience , and se1f1 essness , as well as spiritual independence , a stoical indifference to the things of 出 is world , and a
passionate mysticism: reality is to be won only by letting the seel11 ingreal go. Assets and vents include Tual in their worship as an
incarnation of Kamye , hims e1 f an incarnation of Ama the Increate.
The ‘stages of life' and 'going into silence' are among the mystical
ideas and practices shared by Kamyites and Tualites.
Relations with the Ekumen
The First Envoy (EY 1724) was met with extreme suspicion. After a
clos e1 y guarded deputation was allowed to land from the ship Hugum ,
alliance was rejected. Aliens were forbidden to enter the solar system
by the Govern l11ent of Voe Deo and its allies. Were1, led by Voe
Deo , then entered on a rapid , competitive development of space
technology and intensification of all techno-industrial deve1 opl11en t.

Notes on Werel and Yeowe

243

For many decades , Voe Dean govenun目前， indllstry, and Ìuilitary
were driven by a paranoid expectation of the armed return of
conquering Al iens. It was this development that led within only
thirteen years to the colonisation ofYeowe.
During the next three centuries the Ekumen made contact at
intervals with Werel. An exchange of infonnation was initiated at the
insistence of the University of Bambur, joined by a consortium of
universities and research institutions. Fina l1 y, after over three
hundred y凹rs ， the Ekumen was permitted to send a few Observers.
During the War of Liberation on Yeowe , the Ekllmen was invited to
send Ambassadors to Voe Deo and Bambur, and later Envoys to
Gat旬， the Forty States , and other nations. For some time nonobservance of the Anns Convention kept Werel from joining the Ekumen ,
despite pressure from Voe Deo on the other states , which insisted on
retaining their weaponry. After the abrogation of the Arms Convention , Werel joined the Ekul1間， 359 years after first contact and 14
years after the end of the War of Liberation.
As a property of the Corporations , having no government of its
own, Yeowe Colony was considered by its Werelian owners to be
ineligible for Ekumenical membership. The Ekumen continued 切
question the right of the Four Corporations to ownership of the
planet and its people. During the last years of the War of Li beration ,
由e Freedom Party invited Ekumenical observers to Yeowe , and the
establishment of a regular Envoy there coincided with the end of the
War. The Ekumen helped Yeowe negotiate an end to the economic
control of the planet by the Corporations and the Government of
Voe Deo. The World Party nearly succeeded in driving the Aliens as
we l1 as the Werelians off the planet, but when that movement
collapsed , the Ekumen supported the Provisional Government until
e1 ections could be held. Yeowe joined the Ekumen in Year of
Liberation 11 , three years before Werel did.

YEOWE

Natural History
The third planet out from its sun , Yeowe has a warm-moderate
c1 imate with little seasonal variation.
Bacterial life is ancient and of norma l1y vast complexity and

斗4

Four Ways to Forgíveness

adaptive variety. A number of microscopic marine Yeowan species
are defined as animals; otherwise , the native biota of the planet were
plants.
On land there was a great variety of complex species , photosynthetic or saprophytic. Most were sessile , with some 'creepers ,' colonial
or individual plants capable of slow movemen t. Trees were the
principallarge life-form. South Continent was almost entire1 y tropical
jungle/temperate rain forest from 出 e coastlines up to timberline in
the Polar Ra nge and to the taiga of the Antarctic Circ1 e. Great
Continent, forested in the extreme north and south , was a steppe and
savannah landscape at the higher central altitudes , with ill1ll1 ense
areas of bog, ll1arsh , and sea ll1 arsh on the coastal plains. In the
absence of pollinating anima 1s, the plants h且 d ll1 any devices to use
wind and rain to cross-fertilise and propagate: explosive seeds , winged
seeds , seednets that catch the wind and float for hundreds of miles ,
waterproof spores , 'burrowing' seeds ,‘swimming' seeds , and plants
with mobile vanes , cilia , etc.
The seas , which are warm and relatively shallow , and the vast sea
marshes nomish a huge variety of sessile and floating plants , on the
order of plankton , algaes , seaweeds , coral-type and sponge-type plants
forming permanent constructions (mostly of silicon) , and unique
plants such as the ‘sailers' and the ‘mirrorweed.' Vast connected 叫 ly
mats' were harvested by the Corporations so efficiently as to render
the species extinct within thirty years.
Heedless introduction of Werelian plant and animal species ki1l ed
off or crowded out about 3/5 of the native species , aided by industrial
pollution and wa r. The owners brought in deer , hunting dogs ,
hunting cats , and greathorses for their hllnts. The deer thrived 且nd
destroyed a great deal of native habita t. Most introduced animal
species failed in the long run. Werelian animal survivors other than
humankind on Yeowe include:
birds (do ll1 estic fowl brollght in as game or as poultry; songbirds
were released , and a few species adapted and sllrvived)
面:>xdogs and spotted cats (pets)
cattle (domestic; many wild in abandoned dis廿icts)
deer (wild , called fendeer , adapted to the marsh regions)
hunting cats (feral , rare , in marshlands)

Notes on Werel and Yeowe

245

The introduction of some fish species in the rivers was disastro l1s
to the native plant life , and what fish survived were destroyed hy
poison. All attempts to introduce ocean fish failed.
Horses were slaughtered during the War of Liberation ，的 symbolic
possessions of the owners; none remain.

The Colony: The Settlement
Early Werelian rockets reached Yeowe 365 years BP. Exploration ,
mapping , and prospecting were eagerly pursued. The Yeowe Mines
Corporation , owned principally by Voe Dean investors , was given
sole right to prospecting. Within twenty-five years , larger and more
efficient ships ll1ade mining profitable , and the YMC began regular
shipments of slaves to Yeowe and ores and ll1 inerals to Werel.
The next major company established was the Second Planet Forest
Woods Corporation , cutting and shipping Yeowan timber to Werel ,
where industrial. and population expansion had reduced forests
drastically.
Exploit且 tion of the oceans became a major industry by the end of
the first century, the Yeowan Shippers Corporation harvesting the lily
mats with inuuense profit. Having used up that resource , the YSC
tumed to the exploitation and processing of other sea species ,
especially the oil-rich bladderweed.
During the Colony's first century, the Agricultural Plantation
Company of Yeowe began systematic culture of introduced grains
and fruits and of native species such as the oe-reed and the pini fruit.
The warm , equable climate of most of Yeowe and the absence of
insect and ani ll1al pests (maintained by scrupulous quarantine regulations) permitted an enormO l1S expansion of agriculture.
The individual enterprises of these four Corporations and the
regions where they operated , whether in nllnmg, forestry , maric111ture , or agriculture, were called ‘Plantations. '
The four great Corporations maintained absolute control over their
respective products , though there were over the decades many battles
(legal and physical) over conflicting rights to the exploitation of an
area. No rival company was able to break the C。中orations' monopoly , which had the fl1 11 , active support - military , political , and
scientific - of the Govemment of Voe Deo , a major beneficiary of
Corporation profits. The principal investment of capital in the

246

Four Ways to Forgiveness

Corporations was always from the government and capitalists of Voe
Deo. A powerful country at the time of the Settlement, after three
centuries of the Colony Voe Deo was by far the richest cOl1 ntry on
Werel , dominating and controlling all the others. Its control over the
Corporations on Yeowe, however, was nominal. It negotiated with
them as with sovereign powers.
PO戶ulation

and Slavery

For the first century only male slaves were exported to Yeowe Colony
by the Corporations , whose monopoly on slave shipment, via the
Interplanet Cartel , was complete. In the first century, a high proportion of these slaves were from the poorer nations of Werel; later，的
slave-breeding for the Yeowan market became pro自table， more of
them were sent from Bambur, the Forty States, and Voe Deo.
During ù1Ís period, the population grew to about 40 ,000 of the
owner class (80% male) and about 800,000 slaves (all male).
There were several experimental 'Emigration Towns ,' settlements
of gareots (owner-c lass people without slaves) , mostly mills and service
comm l1 nities. These settlements were first tolerated , then abolished ,
by the Corporations , who induced the Werelian govermnents to limit
emigration to Corporation personnel. The gareot settlers were
shipped back to Werel and the services they had set up were staffed
by slaves. The 'middle clas暉， of townsfolk and tradespeople on Yeowe
thus came to be composed of semi-independent slaves (freedpeople)
rather than gareots and rents-people as on Werel.
Prices on bondsmen kept going up，的 the Mining and Agricultural
Corporations in particular squandered slave life (a mine slave during
the first century was expectedωhave a 'worklife' of five years).
Individual owners increasingly often smuggled in female slaves as
sexual and domestic servants. The Corporations , under these pressures" changed their rule and pennitted the importation of bondswomen (238 BP).
At first bondswomen , considered as breeding stock, were restricted
to the compounds on the plantations. As their usefulness for all kinds
of work became evident, these restrictions were eased by the owners
on most plantations. Slave women , however , had to fit into the
century-o ld social system of slave men , which they entered as
inferiors , slaves' slaves.

Notes on Werel and Yeowe

247

On 叭1erel ， all assets were personally owned , except the makils
(bought fro ll1 their owners by the Entertain ll1ent Corporation) , and
asset-soldiers (bought fr0111 their owners by the government). 011
Yeowe , all slaves were Corporation-o wned , bought by the Corporation fro ll1 their Werelian owners. No slave on Yeowe c0111d be
private1 y owned. No slave on Yeowe could be freed. Even those
bro l1ght in as personal servants , such as maids of plantation owners'
W1V白， had their ownership transferred to the Corporation that owned
the plantation.
Though manumission was not allowed , as the slave population
increased very rapidly , causing a surplus on ll1 any plantations , the
status of 什eedþerson became increasingly COn1l110n. Freedpeople
found work for hire or independently and 'rented freedom ,' paying
one or more Corporations monthly or ann l1ally whatever fee (usually
about 50%) was levied on them as a tax on their independent work.
Most freedpeople worked as sharecroppers , shopkeepers , or mill
hands , and in service industries; during the Colony's third century a
professional class of freedpeople became well established in the cities.
By the end of the third century , when the population growth had
slowed s0 ll1ewhat, the total poplllation of Yeowe was about 450
ll1il1 ion; the proportion of owners to slaves was less than one to one
hundred. About half the slave population were freedpeople. (The
population 20 years after Liberation was again 450 million , all free.)
On the plantations , the original all-ll1 ale social structnre set the
pattern of slave society. Work gangs early developed into social groups
(called gangs) , and gangs into tribes , each with a hierarchy of power:
Tribesll1en under a slave Headman or Chief, under the Boss , under
the owner , under the Corporation. Bonding, cO ll1 petition , rivalry,
homosexual privileges , and adoptive lineages became institlltionalised
and often e1 aborately codified. The only safety for a slave was
membership in a tribe and strict adherence to its rules. Slaves sold
away from their plantation had to serve as slaves' slaves , often for
years , before they were accepted into membership of the local tribe.
As women slaves were brought in , 1110St of them became tribal , as
well as Corporate , property. The Corporations enconraged this. It
was to their advantage to have slave WO ll1en controlled by the 廿ibes，
的 the tribes were controlled by the Corporations.

248

FourWays 的 Forgiveness

Opposition and insl1 rrection , never able to organise widely, were
always crnshed with the instant and brutal finality of infinitely
sl1 perior annalllents. Headlllen and chiefs colluded with the Bosses,
who , working in the interest of owners and Corporations , exploited
the rivalries between 缸ibes and the power strl1gg1es within them ,
while Illaintaining an absolute embargo on 'ideology; by which they
meant education , information of any kind from o l1 tside the local
plantation. (On Illost plantations , well into the second centl1 ry ,
literacy was a crime. A slave cal1ght reading was blinded by dropping
acid in the eyes or scraping the eyes from the sockets. A slave caught
l1 sing a radio or network ol1 tlet was deafened by white-hot picks thrnst
through the eardrums. The 'Fit Punishment Lists' of the Corporations
and plantations were long , detailed , and explici t.)
In the second centl1 ry , as slave population shot up to the point of
surplus on most plantations , a gradual trickle of both men and
women towards the 'shop-strips' run by freedpeople grew to a steady
stream. Over the decades , the ‘shop-strips' grew into towns and the
towns into cities entirely pop111ated by freedpeople.
Although doomsayers alllong the owners began to point to the
ever-increasing size and independence of the 'Assetvil1 es' and 'Whiteytowns' and ‘Dustyburgs' as a looming threat, the Corporations
considered the cities safely under control. No large buildings were
allowed , no defensive structures of any kind; possession of a firean l1
was pl1 nished by disembowelment; no slave was allowed to operate
any flying vehicle; the Corporations kept tight gl1ard on raw materials
and industrial processes that c0111d provide w開ponry of any kind to
the slaves or freedpeople.
‘ Ideology; edl1cation , did exist in the cities. La te in the second
century of the Colony , the Corporations , while censoring，自lteril嗯，
and altering inforlllation , formally gave permission for freedpeople's
children and some tribal children to be schooled up to age 14. They
allowed slave c0 Il1Il1 11nities to set IIp schools , and sold them books
and other Illaterials. In the third century the Corporations institllted
and Ill aintained an inforlllation and entertainment network for the
cities. Edllcated workers were becoming val l1able. The limitations of
the 甘ibes had become increasingly eviden t. Ri gidly conservative,
most tribal chiefs and Bosses were unable or unw il1 ing to change any

Notes on Werel and Yeowe

249

practices ín any way, at a tíme when the abllSe of the planet's
resources called for radícal changes in methods and objectives. lt was
clear that profit on Yeowe w0111d increasíngly come not from stri pm l11l11 g, clear-cl1 tting, and monoc l1 lture, b l1 t from refined ind l1 stry,
modern plants staffed by skilled workers capable of learning new
techníques and followíng llnfamiliar orders.
On Werel , a capitalist slave socie仰， work was done by people.
Slave labor, whether simple brawnwork or highly skilled, was hand
labor , aided by an elegant but ancillary machine technology: 'T he
trained asset is the finest machíne, and the cheapest.' Prodllction , even
of very high-technology items , was essentially tradítional craft of very
high q l1 ality. Neither speed nor great vol l1 me was partic l1 larly val l1 ed.
On Yeowe , late in the third centl1 ry of the Colony，的 raw material
exports failed , slave labor was l1 sed in a new way. The assembly line
was developed , with the conscio l1 s purpose not only of speeding and
cheapening production , but also of keeping the worker ignorant of
the work process as a whole. The Second Planet Corporation ,
dropping the words Forest Woods frO I1l its na l1le , led the new
manllfacture. The SPC ql1 ickly surpassed the old giants , Mines and
Agriclllture , reaping huge profits fro l1l the sale of mass-produced
finished goods to the poorer nations of Werel. By the ti l1l e of the
Uprising, more than half the freedworkers of Yeowe were owned by
or rented to the Second Planet Corporation.
There was far more social unrest in the mills and l1l ill towns than
on the tríbal plantations. Corporation executives ascribed it to the
increase in the n l1 mber of ‘uncontrolled' freedpersons , and many
advocated closing the schools , destruction of the cities , and reinstit l1tion of sealed compounds for all slaves. The Corporations' city militia
(gareots hired and bro l1 ght from Werel , pl l1 s a police force of
unarmed freedmen) increased to a considerable standing anny , its
gareot members heavily anned. MllCh of the unrest in the citíes and
a性empts at protest centered on mills that used the assembly line.
Workers who, feeling themselves part of an intelligible process, would
tolerate very harsh conditions , found l1l eaningless work intolerable ,
even though workíng conditíons were in some ways improved.
The Liberation began, however, not in the cítíes, b l1 t in the
compo l1 nds of the plantations.

250

FOUT Ways to FOTgiveness

The Uþrising and the Liberation
The Uprising had its origin in organisations of tribal women in
plantations of Great Continent, joining together to prevent ritual
rape of girl -c hildren and to demand tribal laws against sexual
enslavement of bondswomen by bondsmen , gang rape , and the
beating and murder of women
r none of which was there any
penalty.
They acted first by educating women and children of both sexes ,
then by demanding proportional voice in the all-male tribal councils.
Their organisations , called Woman Clubs , spread across both continents throughout the third century of the Colony. The Clubs spirited
so many girls and women off the plantations into the cities that the
chiefs' and Bosses' complaints began to be heard by the Corporations.
Local tribesman and Bosses were encouraged to 'go into the cities
and get their women back.'
These incursions , often led by plantation police and aided by the
Corporation city 11lilitia , were often carried out with ex廿eme brutality.
City freedpeople , unused to the kind of violence nonnal on the
plantations, reacted with outrage. City bondsmen were drawn to
defend and 自ght with the women.
In 61 BP, in Eyu Province , in the town of Soyeso , the slaves'
successful resistance to a police raid from Nada11l i Plantation (APC)
escalated into an attack on the plantation itself. The police barracks
were stormed and burned. Some of the chiefs of Nadami joined the
uprising, opening their compounds to the rebels. Others joined in
the defense of their owners in the Plantation House. A slave woman
unlocked the doors of the plantation armory to the insurrection - the
first time in the history of Yeowe Colony that any large group of
slaves had access to powerful weapons. A massacre of owners
followed , but it was partially restrained: most of the children of the
Plantation House , and twenty women and men , were spared and put
on a train to the capita l. No adult slave who had fought against the
uprising was spared.
From Nadami the Uprising spread , by way of guns and anununition , to three neighboring plantations. Al l the tribes joined, defeating Corporation forces in the quick, fierce Battle of Nadam i. Slaves
and freedpeople fro 1ll neighboring provinces poured into Eyu. The

,“

Notes on Werel and Yeowe

25 1

chiefs , the grandmothers of the compollnds , and the leaders' of the
insurrection met at Nadami and declared Eyu Province a free state.
Within ten days , Corporation bombing raids and land 廿oops had
smashed the insurrection. Captured rebels were tortured and
exec l1 ted. Particular revenge was taken on the town of Soyeso: all the
people left there , mostly children and the old , were herded into the
town sq l1ares and trucks and tread-wheeled ore-carriers ran over and
over them. This was cal1ed 'paving with d l1 st.'
The Corporations' victory had been qllick and easy , bl1 t it was
followed by a new insurrection at a different plantation , the murder
of an owner's family here , a strike of city freedworkers there , all over
the world.
The unrest did not cease. Many attacks on plantation armories and
militia barracks were successf111; the insurrectionists now had
weapons , and learned how to make bombs and mines. Hit-and-run
圳市re in the j l1 ngles and the great marshes gave the guerrilla's
advantage to the rebels. It became clear that the Corporations needed
more armaments and more manpower. They impo此ed mercenary
soldiers fro ll1 the poorer nations of Werel. Not al1 of these were loyal
or effective troops. The Corporations soon pers l1 aded the govermnent
of Voe Deo to safegl1ard its national interest by investing 甘oops in
the defense of the Owners of Yeowe. At first the cOll1 mit l11 ent was
rel l1 ctant , bl1 t 23 years after Nada ll1 i, Voe Deo decided to pllt down
the unrest once and for al1, sending 45 ,000 troops , a l1 veots (members
of the hereditary warrior caste) or owner-volunteers.
Seven years later, at the end of the war, 300,000 soldiers from
Werel had been killed on Yeowe , 1110st of them from Voe Deo , and
1110st of 出em veots.
The Corporations began to take their people off Yeowe several
years before the end of the war , and during the final year of fighting
there were almost no civilian owners left on the planet.
Througho l1 t the thirty years of the War of Liberation , some 廿ibes
and many individual slaves sided with the Corporations , which
promised them safety and rewards and fl1 rnished them with weapons.
Even during the Li beration there were battles between rival tribes.
After the Corporations and the anny pulled Ol1 t, tribal wars
smo111dered and flared IIp all over Great Continent. No central

25 2

Four Ways to Forgiveness

govemment was ableωestablish itself until Abberkam's World Pa旬，
defeating the Freedom Party in many local e1 ections, seemed to be
on the point of setting l1 p the first World CO l1ncil e1ections. In Year
2 of Liberation the World Party collapsed abruptly l1nder accusation
of corruption. The Envoys of the Ek l1 men (invited to Yeowe by the
Freedo l1l Party during the final year of the war) Sl1 pported the
Freedol1l Party in activating their constitution and setting Up e1 ections. The First Election (Year 3 of the Liberation) , managed by the
Freedom Party, established the new Constitution on rather shaky
ground; women were not allowed to vote , many tribal votes were cast
by the chiefs alone , and some of the hierarchic tribal structures were
retained and legalised. There were several more fierce tribal wars and
years of l1 nrest and protest while the society of free Yeowe constructed
itself. Yeowe joined the Ekl1 men in Year 11 of the Liberation , 19 BP,
and the First Ambassador was sent in that year. Major amendments
to the Yeowan Constitlltion , assuring all people over 18 the vote by
secret ballot and gllaranteeing eqllal rights , were voted by free general
election in Year 18 of the Liberation.

