The End of the Matter
Alan Dean Foster
Prologue
Take a God-sized bottle of hundred-proof night, spill it across a couple of dozen lightyears, and
you have the phenomenon humanxkind called the Velvet Dam. A dark nebula so dense
that no near star
was powerful enough to excite it to glow, the Dam drew an impenetrable curtain across a
vast
portion of the stage of space. No sun shone through it to the inhabited region known as
the Humanx
Commonwealth. No broadcasts, transmissions, or birthday greetings could be sent from
beyond the
vast ebony wall.
It lay far above the burgeoning ellipsoid of the Commonwealth, and ran roughly parallel
to the
galactic equator. Yet since that which is unseeable is ever the most attractive, humanx
exploratory efforts had already begun to probe persistently at its flanks.
One mission was the same as any other to the drone. Whether it sought out new
information behind
the as- yet-unexplored Dam or above the surface of Earth's own moon made no
difference to its
tireless mind. Not that the drone was ignorant, however. The enormous distances
traveled by such
long-range sensor vehicles rendered constant monitoring impossible. So in addition to
the plethora
of precision recorders and scientific instrumentation provided for sampling the far
reaches of
space, the independent robotic drones were equipped with sophisticated electronic
brains. Of
necessity, they also possessed a certain amount of decision making ability.
Its own incredibly complex collage of minute circuitry was what changed the drone's
preprogrammed
course. In its limited mechanical fashion, the drone had determined that the new subject
was of

sufficient importance to dictate a shift in plans. So it broke from its assigned path, fired
its
tiny KK drive, and relayed its decision to the drone mother monitor station.
Though small, the tiny drive could push the unmanned vehicle at a speed no humanxoccupied craft
could attain. As it raced toward the source of the extraordinary disturbance, it continued
to
relay its readings back to the monitoring station. Before very long (drone time) it had
approached
a spot where visual recording was possible. Without judging, without evaluating, the
drone worked
hard to send a flood of information back to the station banging just at the corner of the
Velvet
Dam.
What the drone recorded and relayed was consumption on a cosmic scale. It hunted
through its
memory for records of similar phenomena, but came up empty. This was shattering,
since in its
ultraminiaturized files the drone retained some mention of every variety of astronomical
occurrence ever witnessed and noted by humanxkind.
The drone-mind worked furiously. Preliminary surveillance was complete-should it
depart now and
return to its original task or continue to study this momentous event? This was a critical
decision. The drone was aware of its own value, yet it seemed inarguable that any
additional bit
of information it could obtain here would be more valuable to its makers than everything
else it
might accomplish elsewhere. So the crucial circuits were engaged, locked with religious
fervor.
The drone moved nearer, closer, ever studying and transmitting new knowledge until,
without so
much as an electronic whimper, it too was devoured.
The drone protested electronically its own destruction, but its message was not heard or
seen.
That wasn't the drone's fault. There was, at the moment of ingestion, simply nothing to
see. But
other instruments were better equipped to tell of those last seconds, and they told the
drone
station all that was necessary.
Several months passed.
In the station's center a circuit closed. Powerful machinery was engaged. All the
information

gathered by a dozen far-ranging drones was concentrated into a tight beam for deepspace
transmission. With a violent belch of energy, the station spat the knowledge to an
occasionally
manned station on a far-distant humanx colony world. That station shunted the
transmission on to
another world, and then on to another, and finally on to Earth, one of the
Commonwealth's two
capitals. Commonwealth Science Headquarters was located there, on the outskirts of a
city on a
high mountain plain whose inhabitants had once practiced human sacrifice.
Patiently computers decoded, unraveled, and otherwise made the transmission
comprehensible. One
small portion of that information was marked for special notice. In due course it reached
the eyes
of a competent but bored human being. As she examined the information, her eyes grew
wide and her
boredom vanished. Then she alerted others-human and thranx-and initial puzzlement
became panic,
then metamorphosed into stunned resignation. The information was reprocessed,
rechecked,
reexamined. The science staff of the station became reresigned to the situation.
A meeting quickly convened on the other side of the world. The four people present-two
human, two
thranx-were very important-important enough to have passed beyond arrogance to
humility.
One of the thranx was the 'current President of the Commonwealth, the other head of all
Commonwealth- sponsored scientific research. One of the humans was the Last Resort
of the United
Church. The other would not normally be considered as important as the other three
beings
assembled in that room, but circumstances had temporarily made him so. He was the
technical
supervisor in charge of processing drone information at the Mexico City complex.
When the discussion finally had run out of new things that needed saying, the aged
President
trieint "Drusindromid folded truhands over his thorax and sighed through his spicules.
His chiton
shone violet with many years, and his antennae drooped so low they hung before his
glowing
compound eyes. He turned multicolored ornmatidia on the waiting human technician.
"The information

is accurate. There are no mistakes. This you are sure of?'
Both the human technician and the thranx science chief nodded, the human adding: "We
are running
an- other drone to the area, sir. It will move on a projected intercept path. Since by the
time
the drone reaches the region the sun which was being absorbed will have been
completely destroyed,
we will have to depend on nonvisual instrumentation to detect the wanderer. But I don't
really
think all this is necessary, sir. The first drone's report is unchallengeable."
"I know the speed of which those drones are capable," the President murmured. "Yet this
object is
so massive that it surely will have sucked an entire star into itself by the time the new
drone
arrives?"
"Yes, Honored One," the thranx science chief admitted dolefully. "The radiation that first
led our
drone to it was from the last of the sun's plasma being dravm off from the surface. That
portion
of space was full of a ginhought amount of particulate radiation, especially gamma rays.
It-'” The
science chief respectfully halted, seeing that the President was absorbed with less
technical
worries.
The old thranx shook his head slowly, a gesture the insectoids had picked up near the
beginning of
the Amalgamation, the joining of human- and thranxkind several hundred years ago.
"This course,"
he said, gesturing with a foothand toward the three-dimensional star projection floating
above the
center of the table, "how long?"
Brushing back white-brown hair, the human technician replied mechanically, "Unless for
some
unimaginable reason it alters its path, sir, the massive collapsar will emerge from the
Velvet Dam
in seventy-two point one standard Commonwealth years. Fifteen point six years
thereafter, it will
impact tangent to the projected critical distance from the sun around which the twin
Commonwealth
worlds of Carmague-Collangatta orbit. We estimate"- he paused to swallow-" that the
sun of the
twin worlds will have completely vanished down the hole within a week."

"So fast," the President whispered, "so fast."
"Twenty-seven point three years later," the technician continued remorselessly, "the
same
catastrophe will befall the star around which the world Twosky Bright circles." He
paused a
moment, then went on. "No other Commonwealth suns or worlds lie within crisis range
of the
collapsar’s projected path through our galaxy. It will continue on through the galactic
axis.
Several thousand years from now, it will leave the Milky Way, traveling in the general
direction
of RNGC 185."
"How can the collapsar move so fast?" the President asked.
The technician glanced at his superior; it was the science chief who replied. "We still do
not
fully understand all the mechanics of collapsars, Honored One. Such radical distortions
of the
stellar matrix retain many secrets. It is enough to know that it is moving at the indicated
speed,
on the predicted path."
The President nodded and touched a switch, throwing a vast semicircular map onto the
ceiling. He
studied the map, ignoring the view of sweltering jungle and marshland visible through
the window
below the ceiling screen. "What of the three worlds, then?"
Rising, the Last Resort moved to stand next to the science counselor. A tail human, be
towered
over the President-but only physically. One of the three endangered worlds was
inhabited almost
solely by thranx, yet they were as much a part of his flock, as devout and inspiring, as
was his
own family. His robes, in the aquamarine of the Church, were simple and comfortable.
Only a single
gold insignia on sleeve and collar indicated that he was the ranking member of the
Commonwealth's
major spiritual organization.
"Caimague and Collangatta are the fourth and twelfth most populous worlds in the
Commonwealth,
sir," he declared. "Twosky Bright is the twenty-third, but ranks fifteenth in real
economic
production. Together, the three endangered planets have a population of over three and a half
billion. From both a humanxistic and an economic standpoint, their destruction would be
a stunning
blow."
Great compound eyes stared expectantly up at him. The President hoped wisdom was
shining from each
of them, instead of the anxiety and helplessness he felt. "What can be done for them?"
The supreme spiritual leader of the Commonwealth turned eyes downward but found no
inspiration in
the tiled floor. "The Church's logisticians tell me ... very little, sir. Even given the nearly
ninety years left to us, actual evacuation is not practical. It would take the resources of
the
entire navy plus every Church peace- forcer to shift even a fraction of the populations
safely and
successfully to other worlds. As soon as such a movement was initiated, the reason
behind it would
be impossible to keep secret. There would be panic of the worst sort. Naturally, we
cannot
consider such action. And with the Commonwealth so weakened, there are those who
would take
advantage of our absent defense."
"I know," murmured President Drusindromid. "What is the maximum number that can
be saved with- out
weakening our forces to the point of inviting scavengers?"
"The figures are not exact ..." the Last Resort began apologetically.
Abruptly, the President's voice cut instead of soothed: "I dislike inaccuracy where
humanx lives
are concerned, Anthony,"
"Yes, sir. If we are lucky, I am told, we may hope to rescue as many as five percent."
There was silence m the tower chamber. Then the President mumbled to himself in High
Thranx. Aware
that no one had heard, he raised his voice. "Set the necessary events in motion. If it were
but
one percent, I would still consider the effort worthwhile."
"The problem of panic remains, sir," the Last Resort pointed out.
"We will think of a suitable excuse," the President assured him. "But this must be done.
Five
percent is nearly two hundred million. Saving two hundred mil- lion lives is worth the
risk of
panic. And we may be lucky and save even more."
"Science does not allow much leeway for luck," the Commonwealth -science chief
muttered, but only

to himself. The President was eyeing them each in turn.
"If there is nothing else, gentlesirs?" Silence in the room. "We have much to do, then,
and I have
another meeting in half an hour. This one is at an end."
At that signal, the Last Resort, the science chief, and the technician started from the
chamber.
The President saw them out, using foothands in addition to all four trulegs to support
himself. As
always, everything rested finally on those aged antennae, the technician thought as he
was about
to bid the President goodbye. But a truhand reached out and stopped him.
"A moment, young man." The technician was nearly seventy. The President was,
however, a good deal
older. "There is, of course, no way of stopping, turning, or destroying a collapsar?"
Remembering to whom he was talking, the physicist kept any sign of condescension
from his voice.
"Hardly, sir. Anything we could throw at it, whether a million SCCAM projectiles or
another star,
would simply be sucked in. The more we tried to destroy it, the larger it would become,
though we
wouldn't notice its growth, since it would still be only a point in space. Furthermore, we
already
know from measurements sent back by the first drone that this wanderer consists of
much more than
a single collapsed star. Much more.
Perhaps several hundred suns." He shrugged. "Some of my colleagues believe that
because of the
wanderer's speed and theoretical mass, it may be an object only guessed at by recent
mathematics:
a collaxar. A collapsed galaxy, sir, instead of a single star."
"Oh" was all the President said immediately. Upper mandibles scraped at the lower pair
as he
considered this information. "There is a political analogy, young man," he finally
ventured.
"Something like an idea whose time has come. The more insults and arguments you
throw at it, the
more powerful it becomes, until one is overwhelmed by it."
"Yes, sir," the technician agreed. "I wish all we were dealing with here was an idea, sir."
"Don't underestimate the destructive power of an idea, hatchling," the President
admonished him.
He glanced at a wrist chronometer banding a truhand. "Twenty-four minutes till my next
appointment. Good day, gentlesir."

"Good day, Mr. President," the technician said; then he left the chamber.
Each of the beings who had joined briefly for the momentous meeting returned to his
own task. Each
had much to do that did not relate to the subject of the meeting, and glad of it. Being
busy was a
blessing. It was not healthy to dwell on the unavoidable premature death of over three
billion of
one's fellow creatures.
Chapter One
"Your offer," the withered woman screamed, "is worthy of a kick in the groin!" She
lowered her
voice only slightly. "However, I am an old, weak woman. You are younger, larger,
stronger,
healthier, and wealthier." One hand curled defiantly around the hilt of a crooked blade
jutting
out from a hole in the dirty brown rag of a skirt. Her other hand held the object under
discussion. "So what am I to do?" she finished expectantly.
"Please don't get so excited," the young man standing across from her pleaded, making
quieting
motions at her with his hands as he looked nervously from side to side.
No one in the shifting mob of sidewalk vendors and buyers was paying any attention to
the
argument. But, being an outworlder, the young man was sensitive to the old lady's
accusations.
After all, he and his bride were scheduled to be on Moth for only three days be- fore
moving on to
New Paris with the rest of the tour. The last thing he wanted was to be thrown in jail, on
his
honeymoon, for fighting with one of the locals.
"Really," he explained desperately to her, adjusting his rain-soaked mustard-and-puce
weather
slicker, "thirty credits is all I can afford. Have some sympathy for me. My wife is back
in our
hotel. She's not feeling very well. The daily rain and constant cloud cover is depressing
her, I
think. I want something to cheer her up. But we have a long way to travel yet. Thirty
credits is
all I can afford for a trinket."
The old woman proudly drew herself up to her full height. Her eyes were now level with
the young
man's chest. She held the object of contention firmly in one hand as she shook it

accusingly at
him. The slim, graceful bracelet of some silvery metal was inlaid with fragments of
polished wood
and stone.
"This wristlet was worked and set by Cojones Cutler himself, infant! Do you have any
idea, any
idea, what that signifies?"
"I'm sorry," the youth tried to explain, sniffing, "but I've been trying to explain all along
that
I am only a visitor here."
Clearly the woman restrained herself only by some great inner effort. "Very well," she
said
tightly, "never mind the honored name of Cojones Cutler," She indicated the oval bulges
set in the
bracelet. "Look at these whirlwood cabochons- forget the topazes for now." As she
turned the
bracelet, the naturally hardened) polished sap facing the wood broke the dim daylight
into points
of azure-and-green fire.
"Hardly a tree in a million has the genetic deficiency necessary to produce such colors,
boy.
Hardly one in a million, and those grow only in the far north of Moth, where the nomads
hunt the
Demichin devilope. Why, it takes-"
"Oh, all right." The young man sighed, exasperated. "Anything to get this over with.
Thirty-five
credits, then." He couldn't have been more than twenty-two or twenty-three. His face
was soft and
earnest. "We'll just have to stay at a lower-class hotel on New Paris, that's all."
The old woman stared up at him and shook her head in disbelief "You talk of hotels, and
me with
three starving children and a husband long dead. You can stand there and talk of hotels,
brazen
child, while offering me thirty-live credits for the finest bracelet I've been lucky to get
on
consignment in twenty years. Twenty years!" Her voice rose to a hoarse shout again.
"Make me a
decent offer or go room with the devil, I say!" she screeched, loudly enough to turn a
few heads
in the crowd. "But don't stand there innocently and insult a poor old woman!"
"For Church's sake," the youth pleaded, "lower your voice."
Sheltered beneath a rain cape of Violet-gray charged slickertic, the young man who had

been idly
observing the noisy byplay of buyer and seller licked the last sweet traces of thisk-cake
honey
from his fingers. Then he rose and sauntered toward the quarreling pair,
Slightly under average height, with smoothly arcing cheekbones and deeply tanned skin,
he did not
present a particularly eye-catching figure. A thatch of curly red hair roofed his skull, hair
the
color of a field of fireweed on the open tundra. It tumbled over his fore- head and ears.
Only the
odd movement of something under the right side of his rain cape indicated anything out
of the
ordinary, but the object-whatever it was- was too well concealed to be identified.
"... and if there's nothing better yon can say," the old woman was raving on, "then you'd
better-"
"Excuse me," a quiet voice interrupted. "I'd say tbirty-five credits for that bracelet is a
fair
price."
Mouth agape in puzzlement, the young husband stared, uncomprehending, at the slim
youth, and
wondered why a native should interfere on his behalf. The old vendor turned a furious
gaze on the
brazen interloper.
"I don't know who you are, sir," she rumbled dangerously, "but if you don't mind your
own business
I'll-" She stopped in mid-sentence, her mouth frozen in an 0 of shock,
"You'll do what, old woman?" the youngster asked. "Send me to bed without supper?"
Sensing an.
advantage without knowing its origin, the dazed bracelet-buyer was quick to act.
"Thirty-five
credits is really a fair price, as he says."
"Yes ... I ..." The old woman, appearing a little stunned herself, hardly seemed to hear
the
offer. "Thirty-five, then, and be done with it."
"You're certain?" The outworlder, now sure of his purchase, was anxious to ingratiate
himself with
the seller. Since he was a good deal bigger than the new arrival, he took a step forward.
"If this
boy is intimidating you. I'd be glad to ..."
Something moved and partially emerged from cape folds. It was leathery, thin, and
brightly

colored. Without actually recognizing the object, the outworld tourist nonetheless had an
immediate impression of serpentine lethality. His hand proffered his credit slip instead of
closing into a fist.
"Here's your money, then."
Mesmerized by the caped figure, the old woman mechanically processed the credit slip
through her
cardmeter; she handed it back to the buyer without even troubling to check the reference
number.
"The bracelet," the young visitor urged impatiently.
"Hrnmm? Oh, yes." She handed it over. Flushed with pleasure at his imagined bargain,
the tall
tourist vanished into the milling crowd of humans and aliens.
Slowly the old woman studied the unimposing figure standing before her. Then she
abruptly threw
thin but still muscular arms around him and squeezed tightly. "Flinx!" she shouted
exuberantly.
"Flinx, boy, you've come home!" She shook the lanky youth out of sheer Joy, for the
familiar feel
of him. Jostled, Pip the mini- drag shifted uncomfortably on Flinx's shoulder and
attempted to
tolerate the roughhousing with fine reptilian indifference.
"For a little while, Mother Mastiff," the youth re- plied quietly. He grinned and nodded
in the
direction of the departed outworlder. "I see you're having as much fun as ever."
"Fun!" she snorted derisively, making an obscene gesture in the general direction of the
marketplace into which her customer had disappeared. "Pathetic, most of them. They
suck the
enjoyment from trading. Sometimes I wonder how the Commonwealth hangs together,
with cement like
that." A triangular head flanked by eyes of fire peeked out from beneath the slickertic.
The old
woman eyed it with evident distaste. "See you're still dragging that creature around with
you."
Pip responded with a nasty hiss. There had never been any love lost between Mother
Mastiff and the
minidrag.
"Many times I think it's Pip who drags me, Mother," the youth argued.
"Well, no matter perversions I can't cure you of, boy. At least you're here." She whacked
him on
the left shoulder in mock anger. "Here you are ... you good-for-nothing, forgetful,
heartless
lump of immature meat! Where have you been to? It's been over a year. A year, paragon

of ingrates!
Not a tridee tape, not a card, nothing!"
"I am sorry. Mother Mastiff," he confessed, putting his arm around her bony shoulders.
She
shrugged angrily, but not hard enough to dislodge his arm. "It wasn't that I didn't think of
you.
But I was far from modem communications."
"Ah, in trouble again?" She shook her head. "Is that the way I raised you?" He started to
reply,
but she cut him off hastily. "Never mind that now. Where were yon? Come, tell me back
at the
shop."
They started down the street. Aromatic scents and the cries of Drallar's inner
marketplace filled
the air around them. "Come, boy, tell me, where were you, that you couldn't let me know
if your
worthless carcass was still intact?"
Flinx considered his response carefully. He had good reasons for wanting to keep his
whereabouts
of the past year secret. What Mother Mastiff didn't know she could never reveal.
"I took a job, sort of," he finally explained.
She gaped at him. "You ... a job?"
"I'm not lying," he argued uncomfortably, unable to meet those disbelieving eyes. "I set
my own
hours and work pretty much as I want to."
"Now I just might, just might believe you. What kind of job?"
Again he glanced away evasively. "I can't say exactly. I'm sort of a teacher, a private
tutor."
"A teacher," she echoed, evidently impressed. "A private tutor, eh?" She let out a snicker.
"What
is it you teach? Pickpocketing, breaking and entering, or general theft?"
"Now what would I know about such things?" he countered in astonishment. "Is that
how you brought
me up?" They both chuckled. "No, I'm kind of a general-purpose instructor in basics."
"I see" was all she said this time, so he was spared the difficulty of explaining what kind
of
basics he taught) and to whom. Especially to whom; it was not time for Mother Mastiff
or anyone
else to know about the Ulru-Ujurrians, the race he had adopted and which had adopted
him. The race
that could turn this corner of creation inside out.
"Never mind me," he insisted, staring at her. "Here I take money and set you up in one

of the
fanciest shop districts of Drallar, with top-flight stock, and how do I find you? Like
this!" He
indicated her ragged clothes, torn skirt and overblouse, the ugly muffin of a hat perched
precariously on long, straggly hair. "Out in the street in the rain and damp, clad in
scraps."
Now it was Mother Mastiff's turn to glance away. They turned up a cobblestone street
and entered a
less frenetic section of the city.
"I got itchy nervous, boy, sitting in that fancy store all day. I missed the streets, the
contacts, the noise-"
"The arguments and shouting," Flinx finished for her.
"And the gossip," she went on. "Especially the gossip." She eyed him defiantly. "At my
age it's
one of the few disreputable delights I haven't grown too old for."
Flinx indicated the street ahead. "So that's why we're not headed for the shop?"
"No, not that stuffy snuffbox, not on a beautiful day like today." Flinx studied the gray,
overcast sky, blinked at the ever-present mist, but said nothing. Actually, it was a rather
nice
day for Drallar. It wasn't raining. He had been home for two weeks and had yet to see
the sun.
"Let's go to Dramuse's stall. I'll treat you to lunch."
Flinx expressed surprise. "You buy someone else lunch? Still, after the profit you made
on that
bracelet ..."
"Pfagh! I could have gotten that callow stripling up to fifty credits easy. Knew it the
second he
set eyes on that bracelet. Then you bad to come along."
"One of these days. Mother, you'll go too far with some knowledgeable offworlder and
he'll turn
you in to the Ring's police. I broke in because he seemed like a decent man on his
mating flight,
and I didn't want to see him cheated too badly."
"Shows what you know," she snapped back. "He wasn't as ignorant as he made you
think. You weren't
there to see his eyes light up when I mentioned the street my shop is on and told him
that's where
it was stolen from. He knew what he was about, all right. Did you see him shout for the
police?
No, he was cuddling his hot property like any decent good citizen. Here." She stopped
and gestured

beyond a gate to tables covered with brightly dyed canopies.
They had entered the last of the concentric rings that formed Drallar's marketplace. This
outermost ring consisted entirely of restaurants and food stalls. "They ranged from tiny
one-being
operations with primitive wood-fired stoves to expensive closed-in establishments in
which
delicacies imported from the farthest corners of the Commonwealth were served on
utensils of
faceted veridian. Here the air currents stalled, weaving languorous zephyrs of
overpowering
potency.
They entered a restaurant that used neither wood nor veridian plates and was somewhere
between the
opulent and the barely digestible in terms of menu. After taking seats, they ordered food
from a
creature who looked like a griffin with tentacles instead of legs. Then Mother Mastiff
exchanged
her gentle accusations for more serious talk.
"Now, boy, I know you went off to look for your natural parents." It was a sign of her
strength
that she could voice the subject without stumbling. "You've been gone for over a year.
You must
have learned something,"
Flinx leaned back and was silent for a moment. Pip wiggled out from beneath the cape
folds, and
Flinx scratched the flying snake under its chin. "As far as I know," he finally responded
tersely,
"they're both long dead." Pip shifted uneasily, suddenly sensitive to his master's somber
mood.
"My mother ... at least I know who she was. A Lynx, a concubine. I also found a half
sister, and
when I found her, I ended up having to kill her."
Food arrived, spicy and steaming. They ate quietly for a while. Despite the heavy spices,
the food
tasted flat to both of them.
"Mother dead, half sister dead," Mother Mastiff grunted. "No other relatives?" Flinx
shook his
head curtly. "What about your natural father?"
"Couldn't find a thing about him worth following up."
Mother Mastiff wrestled with some private demon, and finally murmured, "You've run
far and long,
boy. But there's still a possibility."

He glanced sharply at her, "Where?"
"Here. Yes, even here."
"Why," he said quietly, "didn't you ever tell me?"
Mother Mastiff shrugged once. "I saw no reason to mention it. It's an obscure chance,
boy, a waste
of time, an absurd thought."
"I've spent a year pursuing absurdities," he reminded her. "Give, Mother."
"When I bought you in the market," she began easily, as if discussing any ordinary
transaction,
"it was a perfectly ordinary sale. Still don't know what possessed me to waste good
money."
Flinx stifled a grin. "Neither do 1. I don't follow you throuh "
"Find the dealer who sold you, Flinx. Perhaps he or she is still in business. There's
always the
chance the firm kept decent records. I wasn't too concerned with your pedigree. Might
be there's
some additional in- formation in their records that wasn't provided with the bill of sale.
Not
likely, now. But all I was interested in was whether or not you were diseased. You
looked it, but
you weren't." She sipped from a mug. "Sometimes those slavers don't give out all the
information
they get. They've got their reasons."
"But how can I trace the firm that sold me?"
"City records," she snuffled, wiping liquid from her chin. "There would have been a tax
on the
business, Try the King's tax records for the year I bought you. Waste of time, though."
"I've plenty of time now," he said cryptically. "I'll try it and gladly." He reached out
across
the table and patted a cheek with the look and feel of tired suede. "But for the rest of the
day,
let's be mother and son."
She slapped the caressing hand away and fussed at him... but softly.
Chapter Two
The following day dawned well. The morning ram was light, and the cloud cover
actually snowed some
signs of clearing. Flinx was spared the shocking sight of sunlight in Drallar when the
clouds
thickened after he started toward the vast, rambling expanse of official buildings. They
clustered
like worker ants around the spines of their queen, whose body was the King's palace.

Damp, cool weather invigorated Flinx. Moist air felt familiar in his lungs; it was the air
of the
only home he had ever known. Or could remember, he corrected himself.
He stopped to chat with two side-street vendors, people he had known since childhood.
Yet at first
neither of them recognized him. Had he changed so much in one year? Was he so
different at
seventeen from what he had been at sixteen? True, he had gone through a great deal in
that year.
But when he looked in the mirror it was no stranger he saw. No fresh lines marred his
smooth brown
skin, no great tragedy welled out of cocoa eyes. Yet to others he was somehow not the
same.
Possibly the crashing kaleidoscope that was Drallar simply made people forget.
Resolutely he shut
out the shouts and excitement of the city, strode past intriguing stalls and sights while
ignoring
the implorings of hawkers and merchants. No more time to waste on such childish
diversions, he
instructed himself. He had responsibilities now. As the leader of an entire race in the
Great Game
he must put aside infantile interests.
Ah, but the child in him was still strong, and it was a hard thing to do, this growing up ...
Like a granite ocean the myriad walls of Old Drallar crashed in frozen waves against the
sprawling
bastion of bureaucracy which was the administrative center of Drallar and of the entire
planet
Moth. Modern structures piled haphazardly into medieval ones. Beyond lowered the
King's palace)
spires and minarets and domes forming a complex resembling a gigantic diatom. Like
much of the
city, the building looked as if it had been designed by a computer programmed with the
Arabian
Nights instead of up-to-date technologies.
Flinx was crossing the outermost ring of stalls when two striking figures passed in front
of him-a
man and woman, both slightly taller than Flinx but otherwise physically unimpressive.
What was
striking about them was the reaction they provoked in others. People took pains to avoid
the
couple, even to avoid looking in their direction. But they did so carefully, to be certain
of not

giving offense.
The couple were Qwarm.
Barely tolerated by the Commonwealth government, the Qwarm were a widely
dispersed clan of
professional enforcers, whose services ranged from collecting overdue debts to
assassination.
Despite being shunned socially, the clan had prospered with the growth of the
Commonwealth. Since
the beginning of time, there had always been a market for the services they chose to
provide.
Flinx knew that the two walking past him were related in some fashion to every other
Qwarm in the
Commonwealth. Both wore skin-tight jet-black jump- suits ending in black ankle boots.
Those
boots, he knew, contained many things besides feet, A decorative cape of black and rustred
streamers fluttered from each collar to the waist, like the tail of an alien bird.
Having heard of the Qwarm but never having had the opportunity to see one, Flinx
paused at a small
booth. Pretending to inspect a copper-crysacolla pitcher, he surreptitiously eyed the two
retreating strangers.
Standing behind them now, he could no longer see their faces, but he knew that the
bodies inside
the jumpsuits would be as hairless as their heads were beneath the black skullcaps. Red
foil
designs marked each cap, the only decorative touch aside from the streamers on their
clothing.
Various pouches and containers hung from each black belt-pouches and containers
which held a great
many varieties of death, Flinx knew. If he remembered correctly, each belt would be
joined in
front by a buckle cut from a single orange-red vanadium crystal, which would be inlaid
with a gold
skull-and-crossbones. Their uniform was sufficient to identify them.
The crowd parted for them without panic. To run might be to give offense. No one
desired to give
offense to a Qwarm.
Flinx took a step away from the booth-and froze. Unbidden, as it often was, his talent
had
unexpectedly given him an image. The image was of incipient murder. He hadn't sought
the

information. The most frustrating feature of his peculiar abilities was that they of- ten
functioned most effectively when he had no need of them.
Instantly he knew that the man and woman were a husband-wife team and that their
quarry was very
near. He tried for a picture of the quarry and, as he half expected, saw nothing.
Even more bewildering were the waves of curiosity and confusion that emanated from
the Qwarm
couple. Flinx bad heard that the Qwarm were never puzzled about anything, least of all
anything
related to their work. Someone was nearby whom they had to murder, and this puzzled
them. Strange.
What could so puzzle a pair of professional killers?
Flinx cast about for an explanation and found only a mental blank. He was human and
only human
once more. So he found himself torn between common sense and his damnably intense
curiosity. If
only that powerful sensation of uncertainty from the couple hadn't leaped into his mind.
Nothing
should puzzle a Qwarm so. Nothing! Cause concern, yes, because murder was still
illegal and if
caught they could be tried and punished by the authorities.
But confusion? Impossible!
Suddenly Flinx found himself walking not toward the receding solidity of the
administration center
but back into the depths of the sprawling, chaotic marketplace. The black-clad pair were
easy to
follow. They were utterly devoid of suspicion. Qwarm stalked others; no one followed a
Qwarm.
Despite Pip's nervous stirrings on his shoulder, Flinx moved closer. Still the Qwarm
gave no
indication that they were at all aware of him. At the moment he had nothing in mind
beyond
following the two killers to the source of their confusion.
A small crowd formed a bottleneck just ahead. The black-clad couple paused and talked
together in
whispers. Flinx thought he could sense muscles tensing. They ceased conversing and
seemed to be
straining to see over the heads of the cluster of beings ahead of them.
Moving forward, Flinx encountered a low section of ancient wall off to one side. Part of
it was
occupied by seated figures staring over the heads of the crowd. No one spared him a
glance as he

mounted the wall and joined them. Seated securely on the damp, slick stone, he found he
could
easily see over the heads of even the tall avians in the crowd, which consisted mostly of
local
humans sprinkled with a few warmly bundled thranx and a smattering of other alien
types. His
position afforded him a clear view of the center of attraction. He could also keep an eye
on the
Qwarm, off to his right.
In front of the crescent of laughing, appreciative creatures was a small raised stage.
Flinx
experienced a jolt of recognition. Jongleurs, magicians, and other entertainers were
using the
public stage to perform their various specialties for the entertainment of the crowd and
the
enhancement of their own empty pockets. Not much more than a year and a half ago, he
had been one
of those hopeful, enthusiastic performers. He and Pip had gone through much since
those days. He
felt the snake relax, responding to his nostalgic mood.
A juggler currently working the stage finished manipulating four brightly colored
spheres. One by
one he tossed them into the air, and one by one they vanished, to the apparent
mystification of
the performer and the appreciative oohs and ahs of the crowd. The watchers applauded;
the juggler
collected. Life advanced.
Flinx smiled. The material of which the balls were composed remained visible only
when heat was
steadily applied-such as that generated by the juggler's rapidly moving hands. When that
activating body heat was removed, even for a couple of seconds, the spheres became
invisible.
Behind the stage, Flinx knew, the juggler's assistant waited to catch the carefully thrown
invisible objects. Timing was essential to the act, since the assistant had to be in just the
right position to catch the spheres.
The juggler departed. As the next act came out on stage, Flinx felt a supple dig at his
mind. For
a brief instant he was experiencing the same feeling as the Qwarm. Looking over, he felt
that they
were straining to see a little harder.
He turned his attention to their intended victim.
A tall, robust-looking individual, the figure on stage was not as dark-skinned as Flinx.

Black
hair fell in greasy strands down his neck. He was dressed simply in sandals, loose
slickertic
pants, and a shirt opened to show a mat of thick curls on his chest. The shift sleeves
were
puffed, possibly to hide part of the act. Try as he would, Flmx could see or detect
nothing
remarkable about the man-certainly nothing that might require the attention of two
Qwarm instead
of one. Yet something here worried someone enough to engage the services of those
dread people.
Holding on to a shiny cord, the man was pulling at something still hidden behind the
stage
backdrop. The jokes and insults he alternately bestowed on whatever was at the other
end of the
cord were not particularly clever, but the crowd was well baited, anxious to see what
could absorb
such comments without responding.
It was beginning to drizzle again. The crowd, used to omnipresent precipitation, ignored
the rain.
The jokes started to wear thin, and the crowd showed signs of restlessness. Having built
the
suspense, the rope-handler vented a violent curse and gave a hard yank on the cord.
Flinx tensed
slightly, now really anxious to see what was at the other end of the tether.
When the creature finally wobbled unsteadily around the backdrop, its appearance was
so
anticlimactic, so utterly ludicrous, that Flinx found himself laughing in mixed relief and
disbelief. So did the rest of the crowd.
What emerged from behind the wall was probably the dopiest-looking creature he had
ever seen, of a
species completely unknown to him. Barely over a meter and a half tall, it was shaped
roughly like
a pear. The ovoid skull tapered unbroken into a conical neck, which in turn spread out
into a
wide, bulbous lower torso. It stumbled about on four legs ending in circular feet tipped
with toe
stubs. Where the neck began to spread into the lumpy body, four arms projected
outward, each
ending in four well-developed, jointless fingers. The thing gave the impression of being
rubbery,

boneless.
The creature was dressed in a vest with holes cut at equal intervals for the four arms.
Baggy,
comical trousers completed the attire. Four large holes were set around the top of the
head. Flinx
guessed these were hearing organs. Beneath them, four limpid eyes stared stupidly in all
directions. Occasionally one or two would blink, revealing double lids which closed like
shades
over the center of each pupil.
A single organ like an elephants flexible trunk protruded from the top of the bald skull.
It ended
in a mouth, which served, Flinx guessed, as both eating and speaking organ ... assuming
the thing
was capable of making noises.
As if this grotesque farrago of organs, limbs, and costume wasn't hysterical enough, the
creature
was colored bright sky-blue, with green vertical stripes running from neck to feet. Its
ownermanagertrainer gave the cord another sharp yank, and the apparition wobbled forward, letting out
a comical honk. Those in the front of the crowd burst into laughter again.
Flinx only winced. Although the tugs on the cord didn't seem to be injuring the creature
physically, he didn't like to see anything mistreated. Besides, no matter how hard its
owner
palled, Flinx had the feeling that the creature was moving at its own speed, in its own
time.
Then, abruptly, Flinx wondered what he was doing there. He ought to be bunting down
officials and
records, not watching an unremarkable sideshow. The training which had preserved him
as a child in
Drallar began to reassert itself. It was none of his business if the Qwarm wanted to kill
an
itinerant animal trainer. He could gain nothing by intruding himself into this affair, Flinx
reminded himself coldly. His curiosity had gotten him into trouble often enough before.
He began to slip from his perch as the man in question ran through his routine, prancing
about on
stage while the crowd laughed at his antics and at those of the poorly trained but funnylooking
creature. As the owner attempted to get the creature to execute various movements and
the thing
clumsily tried to comply, the laughter rose steadily.
Flinx was about to abandon his place when something happened to give him pause-at a
command from

the owner, the creature spoke.
It had an arresting, well-modulated, and undeniably intelligent voice, and it spoke quite
comprehensible Terrangio despite its alien vocal organs. At another command, the
creature switched
to symbospeech, the commercial and social dialect of the Commonwealth. The alien's
voice was a
high, mellifluous tenor that bordered on the girlish.
It was reciting gibberish. The words each meant something, but the way the alien was
stringing
them together made no sense. Over this rambling monologue, the trainer was speaking
to the crowd.
"Alas," the man was saying, "this strange being) who lives to delight and amuse us all,
might
possibly be as intelligent as you or I. Yet it cannot learn to speak understandably, for all
that
it could be our superior."
At this the alien produced- on cue from its trainer, Flinx suspected- another of its
hysterical
honks. The crowd, momentarily mesmerized by the trainer's spiel, collapsed with
laughter again.
"Unfortunately," the trainer went on when the roar had subsided, "poor Ab is quite
insane. Isn't
that right, Ab?" he asked the alien. It responded with more of its nonstop gibbering, only
this
time all in rhyme. "Maybe he's glad, maybe he's sad, but as the philosopher once said, he
is
undoubtedly mad," the trainer observed, and the alien honked again, beaming at the
crowd.
Flinx made an attempt to plunge into that alien mind. He achieved just what he
expected, which was
nothing. If an intelligence capable of something greater than mimicry existed there, it
was hidden
from him. More likely, there was nothing there to read.
Flinx pitied the creature and idly wondered where it bad come from as he jumped down
off the wall
and brushed at the seat of his clammy pants. No doubt the Qwarm were going to
perform their job
soon, and he had no morbid desire to stay around to discover what method they were
going to
employ.
It hit him like a hammer blow when he was halfway up the street. The imagery had

come from the
Qwarm. Turning and walking quickly back toward the crowd, he had a glimpse of them
heading for a
nearby building. The image they had unexpectedly projected explained the cause of their
confusion:
Their intended victim was not the simple animal trainer but rather his subject.
It was reputed that the Qwarm did not hire themselves out for killing cheaply or
frivolously.
Therefore, one had to assume that in utter seriousness, and at considerable expense to
someonethey
were about to murder a foolish, seemingly harmless alien.
There was no hint of worry or suspicion in the trainer's mind, and nothing at all in that of
his
muddled ward. The minds of the Qwarm held only continued confusion and a desire to
complete their
assigned task. They could not question their task aloud, but they wondered privately,
The stone-and-wood structure they vanished into was slightly over two stories tall,
backed up
against several other old, solid edifices. As if in a daze, Flinx found himself moving
toward the
same building. Listening with mind and ears, hunting with eyes, he stopped at the
threshold. No
one was standing guard inside the doorway. And why should they? Who would trail
Qwarm, especially
these Qwarm?
He stepped into the building. The old stairway at the far end of the hallway showed one
of the
Qwarm ascending out of view. It was the woman, and she had been pulling something
from a pouch.
Flinx thought the object she removed might be a very tiny, expertly machined pistol of
black
metal.
Cautioning Pip to silence, Flinx approached the railing and started upward, alert for any
movement
from above. As he mounted the rickety spiral he ran his last image of her over again in
his mind.
Probably a dart pistol, he mused. He knew of organic darts that would dissolve in a
victim's body
immediately after insertion. Both the dart and the toxin it carried would become
undetectable soon
after injection.
The staircase opened onto a second floor. Flinx turned his head slowly. Both Qwarm

were standing
by a window. One of them pulled the shade aside and peered through cautiously.
A quick glance revealed that this floor was being lived on. It was sparsely but
comfortably
appointed. In a far, dark corner an attractive but tired-looking young woman was
huddling on
cushions, cuddling a much younger girl protectively in her arms. She was staring
fearfully at the
Qwarm.
Flinx returned his attention to the assassins. While her companion held the shade back,
the woman
was readying the black pistol, her arm resting motionless on the windowsill. Without
question, she
was about to murder the alien.
He had learned everything he could here; there was no point in staying around. As he
started to
retreat back down the stairs, the woman in the dark corner saw him and drew in a
startled breath.
No normal person would have noticed it, but to the Qwarm it might just as well have
been a scream.
Both whirled from the window, startled. Pip was off Flinx's shoulder before the youth
could
restrain the minidrag.
Reaching for his boot top, Flinx beard a slight phut from the supposed dart pistol. The
explosive
shell blew apart the section of floor he bad just been leaning against. Then he rose and
threw the
knife in one smooth motion at the other Qwarm, who was fumbling at a belt pouch. It
struck the man
in the neck. He went down, trying to staunch the Sow of blood from his severed artery.
The female hesitated ever so slightly, unable to make up her mind whether to fire at
Flinx or at
the darting, leathery little nightmare above her. The hesitation was fatal. Pip spat, and
the
minidrag’s venom struck the woman in the eyes. Unbelievably, she didn't scream as she
stumbled
about the room, clawing frantically at her face. She banged into the wall, fell over the
twitching
body of the man, and began rolling on the floor.
Fifteen seconds later, she was dead.
The man continued to bleed, though he had stopped moving. Flinx entered the room and
rapidly

inspected side rooms and closets. He was safe-for the moment. The little girl in the
corner was
crying softly now, but the woman holding her merely stared wide-eyed at Flinx, still too
terrified
to scream.
"Don't tell a soul of this," Flinx admonished her as a nervous Pip coiled once more
around his
right shoulder.
"We won't ... please, don't kill us,” the woman whispered in fear. Flinx gazed into blank,
pleading eyes. The little girl stared at the two motionless bodies, trying to understand.
Flinx found himself staggering back toward the stairway. Without even bothering to
recover his
knife, he plunged down the steps. Somehow he had completely lost control of events and
as had
happened too often in the past, events had ended up controlling him.
At the bottom of the stairs he paused, regarding the open doorway as an enemy. A glance
right and
left showed that this floor was still deserted. There had to be a back way out; he went
hunting
and found a little used exit opening onto a narrow, smelly alley. The pathway appeared
empty.
After a careful search, he started down it at a brisk trot. Soon he was back on the streets.
The
moment he was convinced he wasn't being followed, he turned and angled back toward
the stage,
approaching it from a new direction.
As for the woman with the child, he suspected she would find new lodgings as quickly
and quietly
as possible. She might notify the police and she might not.
By the time be reached his destination, the show was concluding. He slipped easily into
the
protective wall of bodies. Nothing had changed: The trainer was still making jokes at the
dopey
alien's expense and the alien was bearing it all with the serenity of the softheaded. And
that
oval head did look soft, Flinx reflected. So why bad the Qwarm felt it necessary to use
such
dangerously identifiable explosive projectiles?
A respectable amount of applause and some tossed coins were awarded at the end of the
show, as
much for uniqueness as for polish, he suspected. The trainer scrambled about after the

coins
without regard for dignity.
The crowd started to disperse. Apparently the alien act was the last for the afternoon at
this
location. Flinx sauntered casually backstage, where he found the trainer counting his
money and
inspecting his few props. Almost at once, the man grew aware of Flinx's attention and
looked up
sharply. On seeing that it was only a youth, he relaxed.
"What do you want, youngling?" he inquired brusquely.
"We have something in common, sir."
"I can't imagine what."
"We both train aliens." Pip moved suddenly on Flinx's shoulder, showing bright colors in
the cloudfiltered
light. The man frowned, and squinted as he peered close.
"I don't recognize your pet, boy."
Whoever this fellow was, Flinx thought, he wasn't well traveled or informed. Minidrags
were not
common, but their reputation far exceeded their numbers. Yet this man obviously didn't
know one
when he saw one.
Flinx found his attention shifting to the alien, which stood patiently to one side,
muttering
rhythmically to itself in some unknovm language. "In any case," he explained, "I'm
curious about
your pet. I've never seen anything like him." To make conversation, he went on, "Where
did you get
its name from?"
Flint's politeness disarmed the man a little. "It came with the poor dumb monster," he
explained,
exhibiting more sympathy than Flinx would have suspected of him. "I bought it from an
animal
dealer who thought it no more than that. But the creature has some kind of intelligence.
It can
speak as well as you or I, and in many languages. But in none of ‘em does it make sense.
Oh, Ab's
quite mad, it is, but he can learn. Slowly, but enough to serve in the act." He smiled,"
now
filled with pride. "I was smart enough to recognize his uniqueness. No one else has ever
been able
to identify Ab's species either,) boy. I hope it's a long-lived one, though, since this one's
irreplaceable.

"Far as the name goes, that's kind of a funny tale. Only time he's ever made sense." He
frowned.
"I was trying to decide what to call 'im when he gave out with one of his crazy
ramblings." He
turned and eyed the alien. One egg-yolk eye watched him while the other three operated
independently, Flinx considered that a creature capable of looking in four directions at
once must
have a mind of considerable complexity, simply to monitor such a flood of neural
responses.
"What's your name, idiot," the trainer asked, pronouncing the words slow and careful.
"Name!"
"Mana, Orix, Geimp nor Panda," the liquid tones ventured promptly, "my name is
Abalamahalamatandra."
While the creature continued to mumble on in verse, the man looked back at Flinx.
"Easy to see why
I call 'im Ab, hey?" he bent over and wiped at his muddy boots. "Dealer I bought him
from had no
clue to his species. Just assured me he was docile and friendly, which he is."
"It's remarkable," Flinx observed, Battering the man as he studied the blue-and-green
lump, "that
as mad as Ab is, you've managed to teach him so much."
"Told you, boy, all I've taught Ab are the rules of the act. He's a mind of his own, of
sorts. I
said he can talk in many tongues, didn't I?" Flinx nodded. "Terrangio and symbospeech
are just two
of 'em. Every once in a while Ab gives me a start when I think he's said something
almost
sensible," He shrugged. "Then when I try to follow it up he goes on blabbin' about the
taste of
the sky or the color of air or stuff I can't make any sense of whatsoever. You're curious
about
'im, are you? Go over and say hello, then."
"You're sure it's all right?"
"I said he was friendly, boy. In any case, he's got no teeth."
Flinx approached the alien tentatively. The creature observed his approach with two
eyes, which
crossed as he neared. Flinx smiled in spite of himself. Experimentally, he extended a
hand as if
to shake the alien's.
Two eyes dipped downward. One smooth hand came up and slapped Flinx's palm. Flinx
drew his hand

back sharply, more surprised than hurt. As if in admonition, another hand came around
and slapped
at the one which bad struck Flinx. Apparently enchanted, the alien commenced slapping
its four
palms together, entirely ignoring Flinx.
The alien palm had been hard, flat, and cool to the touch.
The owner was speaking again. "Ab will eat just about anything except," he finished
with a smile,
"me and thee." Rising, he walled up to Ab and booted the creature hard. It ceased
slapping itself
and resumed mumbling steadily, like an idling engine. "C'mon, sit down for a while, you
stupid
monstrosity.”
Showing no sign of pain, Ab sat down on the ground and began cleaning its feet with all
four
hands. In that position it looked like a demented triclops trying to pull its toes off. Again
Flinx found himself grinning unintentionally.
"Have to do that when I'm not watchin' 'im," the man explained, "or he'll wander off."
"I can see why you use Ab in a comedy act," Flinx observed readily. "What I can't
understand is
why anyone, least of all a Qwarm, would want to kill it."
At the mention of the assassin clan the trainer lost his composure, his emerging
friendliness, and
most of the color in his face.
"Qwarm?" he stammered.
"Two of them," Flinx elaborated. He nearly turned and indicated the building with its
window
facing on the stage. Then he thought better of it, "I don't know why they changed their
minds," he
lied, "but I know for a fact that they want your pet dead."
"Qwarm?" the man repeated. At that moment, Ab appeared to be the more balanced of
the two. Looking
around frantically, the man grabbed a small black satchel. A couple of coins fell from a
half-open
pocket. He ignored them.
"You train aliens too?" he bloated hurriedly. "Good. He's all yours now, boy."
"Wait a minute!" Flinx protested. Things were happening too quickly again. "I don't
want to-"
" 'Bye and luck to you, boy!" the man shouted back to him. He put out a hand, vaulted a
nearby
railing, and vanished on the nm into the milling crowd nearby. "Hey, hold on'" Flinx
shouted,

rushing to the railing. "Come back, I can't take care of-"
There was a tentative honk from behind. Flinx turned and saw Ab staring blankly at him
while
mumbling steadily. When he turned back to the crowd, the trainer was out of sight,
though his
terror still lingered like the scent of cloves.
Flinx stared over and down at the striped blue alien. "Now what am I going to do with
you?" The
fix he now found himself in was his own fault, of course, if be had taken care not to
mention the
Qwarm by name ... Well, no matter now. He started to walk away. A fresh, louder honk
stopped him.
Ab had stood up and was following Flinx. At the sight of that utterly open, helpless face,
Flinx's
coldness shattered. Whatever else he did he couldn't leave the poor thing alone. It would
probably
remain where it was, cleaning itself, until someone took charge of it or it starved to
death.
Served him right. He had started the day in an at- tempt to find out something about
himself.
Instead, he'd killed two Qwarm and acquired an alien simpleton by default.
"I can't keep you,'* he told the bubbling creature, "but we'll find a place for you as
quickly as
possible." One big eye blinked disarmingly at him.
"Mur'til burtill?" he sang.
"Yeah, come on," Flinx instructed. "I'm going to finish the day the way I should have
started it."
He started off; a glance behind showed the creature following dutifully, weaving on its
four legs.
Spouting sing-song nonsense, it trailed Flinx through the crowd, apparently as happy
with its
present master as it bad been with the former one.
Flinx was not happy with the stares his strange companion drew, but there was nothing
that could
be done about it. As soon as he finished with the records department, he would get rid of
the
creature.
There was a knock at the door,
The woman sent her silent little girl into the bathroom. Then she walked over to lean
against the
door and listened with one hand on the bolt. "Yes?" she finally asked quietly.

"You have a delivery," a soft voice replied.
That was the code sentence. She glanced at the covered bodies of the black-clad man
and woman
lying beneath the window and threw the bolt sharply.
"Thank you for coming so quick," she said gratefully. "I don't care how you dispose of
them, just" She choked on the rest of the words.
The man on the other side of the doorway was not from the discreet service she had
contacted.
Dressed entirely in black, devoid of hair even to the shaved eyebrows, he was clearly a
mate to
the corpses in her chamber.
His gaze indicated that he bore her no animosity, but that he would as soon kill her as
talk with
her. Her hand went to her lips, and she slowly backed away from the door as the man
entered. He
was tall- very tall. He had to bend to fit beneath the portal.
His stare traveled across the room, lingering momentarily on the two shapes beneath the
blankets.
Embroidered red whirls on his skullcap caught the after- noon light, as did the skull
engraved
into his belt buckle. It gleamed like alien blood in the room.
"I didn't," the woman started to say, then she slumped inwardly, her hands falling limply
to her
side. "What does it matter now," she muttered, with the resignation of those who have no
hope. She
sank down on the pillows in the far corner, where she entertained business far too
frequently.
"It's a rotten life, probably hopeless for the poor child, too. Kill me if you want. This is
all
too far above me. I can't light any more."
Ignoring her, the man strode past her to kneel above the two bodies. He did not seem to
believe
these two could be dead. When he finished, he rose and turned to her. The fury in his
eyes was so
bright that in spite of her declaration she shrank back a little deeper into the cushions.
"I have no quarrel with .you or your child," he explained, with a curt nod in the direction
of the
bathroom. "Why, though, did you not notify us instead of calling for others to take away
the
dead?"
The woman laughed hollowly. "Nobody contacts the Qwarm if it can be avoided, no

matter what their
situation."
"True. I note your point," the tall specter acknowledged without humor. "I suppose it
would have
been too much to expect." Moving to the window, he leaned out and made a beckoning
motion.
Shortly, four men entered the room. They were not Qwarm. Carefully they loaded the
bodies into two
long cylinders. When they departed, the tall hunter turned his attention back to the silent
woman
in the corner. There was a soft murmur from the region of the bathroom.
"Mommy... can I come out now?"
Suddenly the woman looked frightened again. Her gaze shifted rapidly from the tall
figure to the
bathroom door and back again.
"I said I have no quarrel with yon, woman." He leaned close over her, ice-eyed, hollowcheeked.
"Our quarrel is with whoever was foolish enough to have done this thing." Reaching into
a pocket
at his belt, he brought out a fistful of metal bars.
In spite of her fear, the woman's eyes glowed. Here was more money than she had ever
seen at one
time in her life. It represented many, many weeks during which she would not have to
entertain
visitors in the room.
"Describe them," the Qwarm said tightly, extending the metal.
The woman licked her lips as she considered. She did not have to consider long. "Not
them," she
corrected. "Him."
For the first time since entering the apartment, the specter showed some emotion:
surprise. "Only
one?" he inquired in a disbelieving, warning tone. "You are certain? Might he have had
friends,
accomplices?"
"I don't know," she insisted. "I saw only one man. Boy, maybe. He was young, less than
twenty for
certain," She grimaced. "I'm good at estimating such things. No taller than myself, dark
skin, red
hair ..." She went on describing Flinx as best she could, from clothing to demeanor.
When she had finished, the man handed her the metal bars, not throwing them at her
feet, as her
visitors did. Exhibiting an unnerving politeness, he murmured a startlingly gentle

"Thank you" and
turned to leave.
"You're not ... going to kill us?" the woman wondered, still unable to comprehend her
good
fortune.
For the second time the tall figure showed surprise. "You have been only a witness to
unfortunate
events you could not affect. You have done nothing detrimental to me or mine, and you
have been
helpful. We will not see you again, and this business will be concluded satisfactorily
very soon
now." He closed the door behind him quietly.
Stunned, the woman sat on the pillows and stared at the gleaming metal in her hands.
She tried not
to think about the promise of silence she had made to the youth as he fled from her
rooms. But
what could she have done? Money or not, she eventually would have told the Qwarm
anything he
wanted to know, voluntarily or-she shuddered-otherwise. And she had the child to think
of.
She managed a slight smile. At least she might have given the boy a chance, through one
slight
oversight on her part. She had told the Qwarm the truth when she said she had seen only
one man.
But she had failed to mention the small flying dragon that had slain one of the two dead
ones. Let
the Qwarm form their own conclusions from the state of the two corpses.
The tall man had carried through on his other promises, so she assumed he had told the
truth when
he said he would never see her again. Nevertheless, after letting her frightened daughter
out of
the bathroom. She set about making preparations to find new lodgings. The money
represented by the
metal bars would permit them to leave Moth, and she was in a rush to do so.
Chapter Three
Administrative offices wove in and about one an- other like copulating squid. Though
raised on
Drallar, Fhnx still had a terrible time trying to locate the offices he wanted.
At first sight, minor bureaucrats were inclined to regard the persistent youth with
contempt. Such
bellicose thoughts, however, always brought a quivering, questioning little head out

from beneath
the folds of Flinx’s clothing. It was amazing how rapidly once-indifferent civil servants
took an
interest in Flinx's problem. Helpful as they tried to be, he still found himself shunted
from one
department to the next. Planetary Resources bounced him down to Taxation, which
kicked him up to
Resources again.
Finally he found himself in a small, dingy compartment occupied by a sixth-level
bureaucrat in the
King's government. This lowly tape-twister was a tired, withered old man who had
started life with
great expectations, only to turn around one day and discover that he had become old. He
sighed
unencouragingly when Flinx once again explained his request.
"We don't have slave records here, boy."
"I know that, sir," Flinx acknowledged, settling himself into a chair so ancient it was
actually
made of real wood instead of plastic. "But money changed hands not just between seller
and buyer,
but between seller and the government in the form of taxes. Slave sales still require more
documentation than most today. I'm assuming that hasn't changed in the past, oh, dozen
years."
"Not that I know of, boy, not that I know of. Okay, we'll give it a try. What do they call
yon,
and what is the name of the one whose sale you wish to trace?"
"I'm called Flinx. The name I wish to trace is Philip Lynx, and I have the exact date of
the
transaction.” The man noded when Flinx gave him the date.
"Couldn't do much without that," he admitted. He rose and tottered to the wall behind
him. It was
lined from wall to wall, floor to ceiling, with tiny squares. Examining the wall, he finally
touched several minute buttons. One of the squares clicked and extended itself into a
meter-long
tray. A single thin piece of dark plastic popped out of the tray.
Removing the thin square, the old man inserted it into a boxy machine on the left side of
his
desk. Then he turned it to face the left-hand wall, which was coated with a silvery-white
substance.
At that point he paused, one wrinkled hand hovering over the controls of the machine. "I
need to
know the reason and justification for showing this, boy," he announced pleasantly. Flinx

laid a
discreet but ample bribe in the hovering palm. After transferring the money to a pocket,
the hand
activated the controls on the device.
"You don't have to tell me," the old man went on, "and it's none of my business, but why
this
transaction, exactly?"
"You're correct, it's none of your business." "The old man looked resigned and,
disappointed,
turned away from Flinx. Motivated by some perverse impulse, Flinx blurted it out: "It's
myself
that was sold. I'm that same Philip Lynx."
Rheumy eyes squinted at him, but the man said nothing, merely nodded slowly. Aware
that he had
learned more than he was entitled to, he activated the projector. A series of seemingly
endless
tiny figures appeared on the wall. The oldster was experienced at his task. He scanned
the figures
and words as they flashed past on the wall faster than Flinx could follow. Abruptly, the
flash
flood of figures slowed, then began to back up, and finally it stopped,
"Here we are," the clerk declared with satisfaction, using a built-in arrow to indicate one
thin
line. "A tax of twenty-two credits paid to the municipal fund on the sale in the city of
one boy
Lynx, Philip. Selling price was," and he ran off figures and facts Flinx already knew.
Date of
transaction, time ... Flinx grinned when the name of the purchaser was read. So, Mother
Mastiff
had paid the tax under a false name.
"That's all?" he inquired when the wall unexpectedly went dark. "Nothing on the origin
of the
shipment, where it arrived from?"
"I'm truly sorry, boy," the old man confessed, sounding as if he meant it. He turned and
folded
his hands on the desk. "What did you expect? This department holds only financial
records. But
..." He hesitated, then went on. "If you want more information, if I were you I'd look up
Arcadia
Organics in the slave traders' offices. That's the firm that sold you. They might still
retain

some records themselves. They're not the largest concern of that type on Moth, but
they're not the
smallest, either. That's what I'd do if I were you, boy."
"I'd rather not," Flinx admitted. Returning to the slave market under any circumstances
was a
disquieting prospect. "But since that's where my only remaining hope leads, I suppose I
must."
Rising, he nodded thankfully to the old man. "You've been very kind, old sir." He turned
to go.
"Just a minute, boy." Flinx turned, and winced reflexively as he caught something
thrown at him.
It was a small but still substantial credit chip-the same one he had given the oldster
moments
ago. His gaze went to the aged clerk, who could expect little more in the way of
promotion or
money in his lifetime. His eyes framed an unvoiced question.
"I don't have much drive, never did, and I'm a stranger to greed. I'm afraid," he
explained
slowly. "Also, compassion- that's out of keeping with being a successful bureaucrat."
"I can see that, old sir," Flinx acknowledged, respectfully tossing the chip back. It
clattered
faintly on the table top. "That's why you're going to keep this."
"I don't take bribes," the old clerk said firmly, ignoring the chip, "from those more
unfortunate
than myself."
"Appearances can be deceiving, old man," Flinx insisted, giving the impression that he
wasn't
boasting. "Keep it." He turned and left the room, left an uncertain yet gratified human
being
staring after him.
Flinx spent the night with Mother Mastiff, regaling her with tales of his trip to Earth. He
detailed his visit to United Church headquarters on the island of Ball, told of his
eventual
discovery of who his natural mother was, and something of her death.
He told a carefully edited story, for he left out his encounter with the daughter of
Rashalleila
Nuaman, who, had turned out to be his half sister. Nor did he mention the Baron of the
AAnn, Riidi
WW, or Conda Challis, or that unfortunate merchant's mysterious off- spring,
Mahnahmi-the girl
with the angelic visage and wild talents. Most important, he left out any mention of his
journey

to Ulru-UJurr and his commitment to educate the innocent geniuses who were the UlriUjurrians
themselves.
Whether she could figure out that there was more to his tale, Flinx could not tell. With
Mother
Mastiff, one was never certain whether a lie had been believed or tolerated. In any case,
she did
not comment until he mentioned his intention of looking up the slave firm which had
originally
sold him,
"I don't know, boy," she muttered. "Do yon think it wise?"
"Why not? All they can do is refuse to talk to me."
"It's your state of mind that concerns me, Flinx. You've been throwing yourself into this
search
for a long while. I worry what you'll do if this last trail dead-ends on you."
He did not look at her. "Let's see what Arcadia Organics tells me, first."
She tapped the arm of the plush chair she sat in. "Better to leave yourself some hope.
You'll
drain it too quickly."
Now he stared at her in surprise. "Mother Mastiff, what are you afraid of? Of what I
might find?"
"I haven't stood in your way during this mad chase of yours, boy. You know that.
Though I'd rather
you spent your time looking for a fine young lady of wealth and form to settle down
with." She
leaned forward out of the chair. "It's only that I don't like to see so much of you put into
a
wild-drizer chase. By your own ad- mission, it has left you almost dead several times
now." Flinx
wondered what she would say if he told her about the encounter with the two Qwarm heand Pip-had
killed this morning.
"I'm sorry” Mother Mastiff. It seems this search is controlling me, not the other way
around. I've
got to know. My mother I found out about. Suppose . . . suppose my father is still alive?"
"Oh, what of that!" she shouted angrily. "What would that mean? Would it change you
any, boy?
Would it affect your life?"
Flinx started one reply, settled himself down, and switched to another. "I tell you what.
Mother.
If he's a fine man of wealth and form, I'll bring him back here, and maybe then I can
finally get

you to settle down."
She gaped at him momentarily, then broke into a robust cackling laugh which did not
seem to die
down until the last vestiges of daylight did. "All right, boy, you go," she finally agreed,
sniffing and blowing her nose. "But be certain you take that gargoyle with you." She
pointed to a
far corner of the room, where Abalamahalamatandra was honking and rhyming steadily
to himself. "I
will not have that monster living in my house, and I certainly can't keep him downstairs
in the
store. He'll scare away customers."
"Who, Ab?" argued Flinx desperately. He had hoped to unload the helpless tag-along on
Mother
Mastiff. "What else can I do with him? I can't let him follow me around."
"Why not?" she countered. "He seems happy enough doing so."
"I was thinking maybe you could take care of him for a while," he pleaded. "Besides, Ab
doesn't
frighten people; he makes them laugh."
"Maybe he makes you laugh," she snorted, "maybe he makes others laugh," She jabbed a
leathery
thumb at her bony sternum. "But he doesn't make me laugh. I want him out of my house
and out of my
shop, boy.'* She thought a moment, then ventured brightly, "As to what you can do with
him, well,
you're going to the slave market tomorrow. Sell him. Yes," she finished, well pleased
with
herself, "maybe you can make a profit on your inconvenience."
"I can't," he whispered.
"Why not?"
He thought rapidly. "Having once been sold myself, Mother, I can't see myself selling
another
creature. I'll let him follow me, I guess, until I can find him a kind home."
Flinx turned to eye his new ward while Mother Mastiff grunted in disgust. There was no
way he
could tell her that he was keeping Ab around because he was still curious as to why the
Qwarm
wanted him dead.
Ab honked and gazed cryptically back at him with two vacant blue eyes.
The following day dawned damp and drizzly. That was not the reason behind Fhnx's
shivers, however.
A modest walk had brought him to the outskirts of the slave market, and he was

discovering that,
despite his determination, the atmosphere was having a chilling effect on him. Pip
squirmed
anxiously on his shoulder, uncomfortable at his master's state of mind. The only member
of the
little group who remained unaffected was Ab, singsonging irrepressibly behind Flinx:
"Neutron,
neutron, who you are, why is an organ camelbar?"
"Oh, shut up," Flinx muttered, aware that his admonition would have no effect.
He made his way, frozen-eyed, through the stalls. The beautiful maidens and dancing
girls were
present, just as in the old spacers' tales and marketeers' stories, but they danced much
more
reluctantly and unenthusiastically than those stories would lead one to believe, Nor were
they as
sensuous and appealing as in those tales, neither the men nor the women.
They were here, though. That Flinx knew. Drallar was a prime market world, a
crossroads of the
Commonwealth. Whether male, female, androgynous, or alien, the prime product was
not put out on
the avenue for the common herd to gawk at. In the streets around him, such dealings
were
consummated quietly, in secret. It was better that way, for it was rumored that
sometimes there
were souls who were not sold freely or honestly.
There were various beings for sale, as the Commonwealth boasted a glut of organic
power. A few
thranx were present, though not many. The clannish insects who had amalgamated with
mankind tended
to care better for their own. He saw a thorps and some seal creatures from Largess, the
latter
looking more comfortable in the dampness of Moth than they would have on most
Commonwealth worlds,
One covered balcony provided seats for a handful of well-dressed prospective buyers.
Few if any of
them would be the ultimate owners, he knew. Most were merely intermediaries for
respectable
employers who wished not to be seen in such a place.
Presently he noticed spirited bidding on a bewildered, narcotized boy of six. For all his
blondness and differing features, the lad reminded Flinx of a similarly lonely child of
many years
ago. Himself.

For a crazy instant he thought of buying the child and setting it free. Free on whom,
though?
Mother Mastiff would certainly never take in another foundling; he'd never understood
what had
possessed her to buy him.
Ab knocked Flinx back to reality, bumping clumsily into him from behind.
"Watch where you're going, you opinionated piece of elastic insulation!"
A bulging blue orb winked at him, lids fluttering uncertainly. "To give offense in any
sense," he
began sensibly, only to finish with "lox are a very metaphysical bird, it's heard."
"No doubt about it," Flinx shot back distastefully. He forced himself to a faster walk. He
was
anxious to leave this place.
The sign over the office door in the street behind the stalls was tastefully lettered-not
flashy,
but eye catching, It bespoke a firm of moderate status, one which took a certain amount
of pride
in itself. The door was clean, polished, and made of intricately carved wood brought
down from
Moth's snow-clad northern continents. It read: ARCADIAORGAMICS.
Home to the helpless and homeless, Flinx thought. The name sounded much better than
Slave Dealer,
He reached out and touched the silent buzzer. After a brief wait, the door slid aside
silently. It
turned out to be much thicker than it looked from outside. The delicate woodwork was a
thin veneer
laid over metal.
Completely filling the portal was a massive humanoid of solemn demeanor. He glanced
down at Flinx
and addressed him in a deep, throaty voice: "Your business here, man."
"I've come to see the owner, about an earlier sale of his."
The giant paused, appearing to listen. Flinx noticed a small ghnt of metal, some sort of
transmitter, built into the left side of the humanoid's skull. The installation looked
permanent.
"The nature of the complaint?" the giant inquired, flexing muscles like pale duraplast.
"I didn't say it was a complaint," Flinx corrected cheerfully. "It's just something I'd like
cleared up." With Pip's aid, he knew, be could force his way past even this brute, but
doing so
would not help him gain the information he sought. "It's a question of pedigree."
Once more the man-mountain relayed the information to parts unseen. His response this
time was to

move aside with the same mechanical precision as the door. "You will be attended to,"
Flinx was
assured. He would have preferred the invitation to have been phrased otherwise.
Nevertheless, he stepped into the small chamber, Ab followed, his rhyming loud in the
confined
space. The room was empty of furniture.
A hand the size of a dinner plate gently touched Flinx's shoulder-not the one Pip rested
on,
fortunately, or circumstances might have become awkward. "Stand, please," Seeing no
place to go,
Flinx readily complied.
A polelike finger touched a switch. There was a hum, and Flinx felt himself dropping.
Forcing
himself to be calm, he affected an attitude of pleasant indifference as the floor and room
sank
into the ground. Before very long he found himself in a much larger room. It was
spacious and
neatly decorated, and it fit the man who moved around the table at its far end to greet
Flinx as
he stepped out of the elevator.
Twisted and braided dark ringlets cascaded over forehead and neck. The man was a little
taller
than Flinx and roughly three times his age, though he looked younger. A pointed
vandyke and curledup
mustache gave the slaver the appearance of a foppish raven with clipped wings. A very
large
star-ruby ring on the man's pinky was the only meretricious detail in the office.
After greeting Flinx politely, the man escorted him to a lavishly brocaded chair. A
proffered
drink was declined. Flinx thought the fellow looked disappointed at the youth of his
visitor, but
he tried hard not to show it. After all, Dralar was home to spoiled children as well as
spoiled
adults.
"Now, what can I do for yon, young master? My name is Char Mormis, owner and third
generation in
Arcadia Organics. Don't tell me- it's a young lady you're looking for. I knew it! I can
always
tell." While Char Mormis spoke his hands charted each sentence like a seismograph
measuring
tremors. "I can always tell when they're hunting for comforting." He winked lewdly
across the

desk. "Name your tastes, young master. Arcadia can supply you."
"Sorry, Mr. Mormis," Flinx said, "but Fm not here to buy."
"Oh." The slaver looked crestfallen. He leaned back in his chair and tugged at the point
of his
beard.
"You're here to sell?" he asked uncertainly, eyeing the rhyming Ab, who stood by the
elevator
entrance.
"Neither," Flinx informed him firmly.
Mormis let out a reluctant sigh. "Then you really are here over a question of pedigree.
Oh well.
How may I help you, young master? Is there some question of inaccuracy?" He appeared
genuinely
distressed at the prospect. "It pains me to think we might be responsible for such an
error. We
are not dealers in the highest-priced merchandise, but," he added conspiratorially, "we
have the
advantage of being honest."
"Relax," Flinx advised the slaver. "I'm not accusing you of anything. I just need some
information. It concerns a boy named Philip Lynx you sold to a woman named"-he
grinned-"it wasn't
her real name, but that doesn't matter. The boy's name is correct. He was four, five years
old at
the time of sale."
Mormis spread his hands. "I'll tell you what I know, of course. We retain permanent
records of
every one of our transactions." Faith, but he was so smooth, so polite, Flinx mused. "But
first,
young master, you must satisfy me that you have a right to such information. Slaves
have a right
to their privacy too, you know. We respect the rights of our purchased as well as those of
our
purchasers."
"Glad to hear it," admitted Flinx.
Mormis' studied the confident youth seated across from him. "Let me guess. The boy
was bought to
be a companion for you. You've grown up with him. Now you've become curious about
his original
background. Or maybe he's asked you to inquire about it to satisfy his own curiosity.
You look to
be about his age."

"I am," agreed Flinx. “I’m him."
Mormis did not appear as surprised as the elderly clerk had been at this information. He
simply
slumped into his chair and looked weary.
"I was afraid it might be something like that. You must realize, Mr. Lynx-“
"Just Flinx."
"Very well. Yon must see, Flinx, that we have clients to protect in such cases. If it is
revenge
you seek, if you are on some kind of personal vendetta ..."
Flinx shook his head impatiently. "Nothing of the sort. I give you my word, I'm only
trying to
find out what happened to my natural parents."
Now Mormis looked sad. "Such cases are known. Very persistent people who gain their
freedom often
seek such information. All such searches I know of come to naught. If the sale of the
child was
voluntary, the parents go to great pains, usually successful, to conceal their identities
forever.
If the sale was involuntary, then the seller goes to the same lengths to disguise his
identify.
Even if you were to get into the archives on Terra itself-"
"I've already done that," Flinx informed him.
Mormis's eyes widened slightly. "You've been to Earth?"
"I've been in the Church archives on Bali itself. Eventually I managed to find out who
my mother
was. She'd already been dead many years." Surprisingly, he found he could relate the
information
without pain. It was as if he were talking about someone else, not himself. There was
only a cold
emptiness in him.
Mormis looked at him with fresh respect. It was evident in his tone as well. "You are an
unusual
young man."
"So I've been fold," Flinx commented drily. "Now, about my request?"
"Yes, certainly." Mormis activated an electronic filing system rather more modern than
the one
Flinx had visited yesterday. It coughed up a tiny rectangle, which the slaver inserted in a
projector.
"Here is the original record of sale," Mormis told him, pointing to the wall screen. "Look
for
yourself."
Flinx was already doing so, raptly. His early self was spelled out on the wall, a human

being
metamorphosed into figures. Height, weight, hair and eye color, and every other vital
statistic
imaginable was shining brightly on the wall. He had to smile again when he saw the
name of his
buyer: the Grand Ladyess Fiona Florafin. Mother Mastiff was right-slavers were
concerned only
about the legitimacy of a purchaser's credit.
Once again, that which he most hoped to find was absent. Remuneration was recorded as
having gone
to the House of Nuaman, presumably to enrich the coffers of his now-deceased aunt, the
murderous
Rashalleila. That fitted with what he already knew.
Of his natural parents he found less here than he already knew; there was nothing about
his mother
to match what he had spent a year learning, nothing at all about his still-mysterious
father.
"Thank you, Char Mormis," he forced himself to say tightly, struggling to hide his
disappointment.
Finally, he had reached the dead end he'd feared. There was no place else to go, nowhere
more to
search.
The matter was finished.
"I appreciate your kindness." Flinx's hand moved in the direction of his credit cardmeter.
Mormis waved the gesture off. "No, thank you, Flinx. The pleasure was mine. It's
always heartening
to see merchandise that has done well for itself. You are an independent citizen?"
"Have been since the day I was bought, thanks to my buyer."
"You know, it's odd ... Can't I persuade you to have a brandy?"
Flinx shook his head. Despite Mormis's courtesy, the man was still of a breed for whom
human lives
were chips on a gaming table. He wanted out.
But there was something prodding at Mormis. "It's strange ... I have an excellent
memory for
people- nature of the business, you understand." Flinx nodded without speaking. "But ...
I think I
remember your sale."
Flinx sat down abruptly.
"Yes, I'm sure of it. At that time it was my father, Shan Mormis, who was running
Arcadia. I was
still learning. But your sale, your sale ... it sticks in my mind for some reason. You've
brought

the memory back to me, for two reasons. The first concerned your buyer. An old
woman?"
Flinx nodded vigorously.
"That grandiose name on the manifest"-the man gestured toward the wall-"didn't match
her
appearance. Does that make sense to you?"
"A squat, heavy woman dressed in neat rags, with a vocabulary like a spacer?"
"That description seems to fit," Mormis confessed, caught up in Flinx's excitement. "You
keep in
touch with your former owner?"
"She was never really an owner in the usual sense," Flinx explained, a pugnacious yet
affectionate
picture of Mother Mastiff forming in his mind.
"I suspected as much, considering your present status. Such a contrast between
appearance and
given name-how could one forget? The other memory concerns the one other person
who was bidding
for you." Mormis looked embarrassed. "You were not a quality item."
"My value on the scale of such things doesn't depress me," Flinx assured him.
"Self-deprecation …, a good trait in mer- in a citizen," the slaver corrected himself
hastily. "It
was the spirited bidding for your unremarkable self between two extraordinary persons
which
remains in my memory."
"What of the other bidder?" insisted Flinx eagerly.
"Well, he was human, quite human. Huge he was, built like a city wall. Would have
fetched a pretty
price on the stage. Sadly, he was on the wrong end of the business. He must have
weighed as much
as two good- sized men. Heavy-planet upbringing, no 'doubt. All white-haired he was,
though I
think it was premature. Two meters tall, easily." Mormis paused, and Flinx had to urge
him to
continue.
"There must be more."
Mormis strained at his memory. "So many over the years ... that face, though. A cross
between a
libertine's and a prophet's. And I think he wore a gold ring in one ear. Yes, I'm sure of it.
A
gold ring, or at least one of golden hue."
"A name. Char Mormis a name!"

The slaver rambled on. "You weren't sold very high, Flinx. I think the fellow had reason
to
leave the bid- ding when he did. He left in a rush, and as I recall there were an inordinate
number of soldiers milling about. But I shadow-play a scenario. I never heard him
mention a name."
"Anything else?" Flinx pressed him, refusing to be discouraged. "Why did he want to
buy me?"
Mormis looked away, as if Flinx had touched on something the slaver would have
preferred not to
discuss. "We do not inquire into the motives of our customers. Once the transaction is
completed,
subsequent events pass into the jurisdiction of the authorities. Our businesses to sell, not
to
judge."
"But he left before the bidding closed," Flinx mused. "Then it's conceivable he could
have outbid
the woman who bought me?"
"Naturally, that's possible."
"You can't remember anything else about him?"
Mormis pursed his lips in disapproval, "After twelve years? I think it's remarkable I've
remembered what I have. If you will entertain a hypothesis, I would say that,
considering the
limited bidding for you, the fellow looked on you as an investment."
Flinx didn't reply. He was thinking. A very large human, prematurely white-maned, gold
ring in one
ear ... He grimaced. It wasn't much to go on.
"I need more information." Pip, aroused from his nap, poked his head out.
Mormis started. "By the chains of the sky, there it is!”
"There what is?" a puzzled Flinx wondered.
“Your quest is impossible, young master, but I will not dissuade you. That- that is the
other
thing." He was pointing at Pip. Intrigued, the minidrag stuck a questioning tongue out at
the
slaver. Ab sang on in the background.
"It is the second one I have seen. The other ... the other rode on the shoulder of the
bidder who
ran. I swear it would be the same creature, save that I think his was smaller!"
Flinx's neatly organized thoughts collapsed like a bridge whose foundation had failed. In
their
place turmoil reigned.
So far as he knew, Pip was the only Alaspinian minidrag on Moth. If another lived on
the winged

world, he was sure be would have learned of it by now. Suppose Pip was the same
minidrag which
Mormis insisted had ridden his would-be buyer's shoulder? That implied that for Flinx to
have
ended up with the flying snake was a coincidence too extreme to be believed. Could his
unsuccessful purchaser, have planted Pip in the alley where Flinx eventually discovered
him, for
Flinx to find?
If that was what had actually happened, it indicated much more than a casual interest in
Flinx,
from a person not connected with Nuaman Enterprises. An employee of his aunt's? But
to what end,
what purpose?
I will go mad, he silently screamed.
"A name," he demanded, "give me a name, Char Mormis!"
The slaver recoiled at the youth's violence. "I told you, he never voiced one. Nor could I
tell
where he was from. I recall no distinctive accent. Beyond his size and the earring, I can
tell you
nothing."
"I understand, I understand," Flinx said carefully, trying to control himself. Words
stormed
through his brain.
Alaspin, Alaspin, old friends a-claspi'n.
"Recipe for salad dressing ... two SCCAM bars without messing." Ab rambled
nonsensically..
"Shirted on conclusion of the composition) wise not to bear a cockatrice," the alien
finished. He
continued in an unknown language.
When Flinx finally got his raging thoughts under control, he forced himself to speak
slowly.
"What would you do if you were in my place?" he asked the slaver. "I value your
advice."
"Were I in your position," Mormis instructed him through thoughtfully steepled fingers,
"I would
go to wherever home is, return to your work, and save your money and possibly your
sanity."
"Next suggestion."
"Assuming you have unlimited time and funds, young master, I would go to Alaspin.
That's where
your little beast conies from, is it not?" Mormis ex- tended a paternal hand in Pip's

direction,
but drew it back hastily when Pip hissed sharply at him. "If the creature is as rare as it is
reputed to be, and as dangerous ..."
"It is," Flinx assured him.
"... then you might have a chance of locating one other who once also kept one."
So, Flinx thought, it had come to this: a search for a man who twelve or so years ago had
appeared
on Moth with a minidrag on his shoulder. A man who might never have been to Alaspin
but who might
have acquired his lethal pet elsewhere. But a destination was better than nothing.
"Thank you again, Char Mormis." Flinx rose to leave, and saw that the elevator had
returned, along
with its hulking operator. "I just wish," he offered in parting, "that one as nice as you
were
engaged in some other business."
"The morality of it can weigh heavily at times," the slaver confessed as the lift door
closed on
Flinx and Ab. "But not," he concluded softly after the elevator was on its way
surfaceward,
"enough to make this one want to quit."
Chapter Four
It was a busy, fruitful day, and Mormis thought no more of his interesting visitor. By the
time
darkness had come and he locked up for the night, he had forgotten the incident
completely.
The modest Mormis tower home lay in a nearby inurb, one of many such restricted
enclaves in
Drallar. It was a pleasant evening, and Mormis decided to walk. His monolithic
manservant strode
comfortingly alongside.
Out of necessity, the streets were relatively well lit. Perpetual cloud cover hid any light
the
planet's bright moon. Flame, might have thrown on the pavement.
Mormis tagged his thick cloak closer about him. He was afflicted with bursitis, an
ancient
disease. Mournfully he mused that the only part of his life which was not well lubricated
involved
his aching joints. Physicians and wishans, none could help.
When he was halfway home, a strong yet gentle voice called out of shadows to him:
"We would
request of you a few minutes of your time, Char Mormis of Arcadia. We wish minimum
delay m your

homeward journey."
Despite the assurances in that voice, Mormis reacted as any man in his profession might.
Voices in
the night usually meant only one thing on Moth, where darkness was the shield of beings
with lessthancivil intentions.
Throwing aside his cloak to give himself maximum mobility, he turned, hunting for the
source of
the request. As if in response, a figure emerged from the fog around him. It approached
on four
legs, foothands and truhands all extended in a pose of insectoid placation. Vast
compound eyes
shone bright with reflected light from the street illuminators.
Mormis took in the shiny, exfoliating chiton, the deep purple coloring. But neither the
thranx's
obvious age nor his conciliatory manner served to relax him. He hadn't had any dealings
with a
thranx in some time. Not that they didn't own slaves. For all their vaunted logic, the
thranx were
still a race of individuals, some of whom were as subject to vice as their human
counterparts
were.
So he retreated from the advancing figure and ordered his manservant to take defensive
action.
When the insect was pinioned, then, perhaps, he would talk.
The massive, blue-cloaked golemite lumbered forward. The slaver was not eased in
mind when the
fragile-looking insect stood his ground. "Really, Char Mormis," he observed in the
delightfully
musical voice of the thranx, "inhospitality is hardly the mark of a successful
businessman. I am
disappointed. And this looking for a hidden weapon on my person...."
Mormis was about to interrupt to say that it was the thranx who was about to be
disappointed when
his fears were partially confirmed. A second figure emerged from the fog to intercept his
servant.
The new figure was human, somewhat taller than average but slim and unimpressive.
His advanced age
was belied by the suppleness of his movements. He looked like an ambulatory birch tree.
Gray hair,
cavernous wrinkles, and other age signs were held at bay by eyes that were coal-black

shards.
This steely-looking scarecrow blocked the advance of the servant, who reacted rapidly
and
directly. A short but furious scuffle followed in the middle of the street. The great mass
of
Mormis's servant seemed to obliterate his opponent, but when movement ceased, it was
to reveal the
tall, lanky stranger standing over the motionless bulk of the golemite.
The tall man, part Oriental, shook his left arm. There was an audible popping sound as
joints rearranged
themselves. When he spoke it was without panting, and in the same reassuring tone as
that
used by the watching thranx; "I have not injured him. He will wake soon, after we have
finished."
Mormis's left eyelid tvntched uncontrollably. His fingers quivered.
"You would not reach the beamer," the thranx told him, in a voice so confident that
Mormis lost
all hope. "Please be so kind as to refrain from such irrational hostilities and listen to
what we
have to ask."
The slaver considered. Then he slowly slid his hand away from the concealed weapon
within his
shirt. He consoled himself with the fact that this odd pair) what- ever their intentions,
looked
neither brutal nor immune to some common-sense reasoning. So he tried to calm himself
as the
elderly thranx moved toward him. The slim human, he noted with relief, remained next
to the
motionless body of his servant.
The thranx was tall for one of his kind, Mormis observed, tall enough so that the
rainbow-hued
compound eyes were nearly level with the slaver's own. The thranx was bundled tightly
against the
chill, though Mormis knew the dampness was to the insect's liking. They were hothouseworld
creatures. He could hear the soft puffing as air moved through the insect's spicules.
"You have me at a disadvantage," he declared, dropping his hands to his sides. "J can do
nothing
but what you wish." Meanwhile he searched for identifying signs. Both sets of vestigial
wings were
present, protruding from shiny wing cases on the thranx's back. A never-mated bachelor,
then.

The insect noted the slaver's gaze, "No, you do not know me. We have never met before.
Char
Mormis." An impressed Mormis realized that his questioner was speaking perfect
Terrangio instead
of the galactic lingua franca, symbospeech. Few thranx could master the smooth vowels
of mankind's
principal language. For the first time a little of the tenseness left him. Violent beings
were
usually not this well educated.
"You have the advantage of me, sir."
"We require some information," the Insect responded, showing no inclination to reveal
either his
name or that of his human associate. Mormis masked his disappointment. "We have
learned that
earlier today you had a visitor."
"I've had many visitors," Mormis countered, stalling.
"This one was a young man. Or an old boy, depending on your perceptiveness. The boy
had as
companion a small, dangerous flying reptile and an alien of peculiar type."
Since the thranx already knew this, Mormis saw no sense in denying it. "I admit to
receiving the
person. you describe."
In an oddly human gesture, the thranx cocked its valentine-shaped head to one side.
"What did the
boy want of you?"
Natural caution took over for Mormis, and he replied without hesitation. "I said I
remembered the
boy," he declared slowly, finding apparent fascination in the patterns water made on the
street.
"But I also had many other visitors. It's impossible to remember the details of every
conversation. My days are hectic, and talk tends to run together."
The tall human took several steps forward. "We are wasting time with this one." He
extended a hand
and flexed long, skilled fingers in a way Mormis didn't like. "I could always-"
"No, no complications," the thranx interrupted, much to the slaver's relief. "But, as you
say, we
waste time. Rather than debate morality ..." He reached into his thorax vest and brought
forth a
credit cube of fair size. A glance assured Mormis it was genuine.
"Still," Mormis said smoothly, "in my business it is necessary from time to time to
reconstruct
certain conversations, Odd, but suddenly I find the one you mention coming back to

me."
"A remarkable surprise," the tall man commented sardonically.
Anxious now that he had managed to turn a dangerous situation into an opportunity for
profit,
Mormis spoke freely. "It was a trivial matter, interesting for one reason. The boy was
originally
sold by Arcadia."
"What did I say?" the tall human told his companion.
"It seems the lad has done well since then," Mormis went on.
"Well enough," the thranx commented enigmatically.
. "Now the orphan is hunting diligently and foolishly for his natural sire and dame. A
harmless
but expensive obsession. He searches now for his father."
"And you were able to give him information?" the man asked.
"No, I had no such details. However, I did relate to him an intriguing anecdote involving
the
circumstances of his sale. If you wish it) I can-"
The thranx cut him off impatiently, checking a wrist chronometer as he spoke. "That is
not
necessary. We need to know only what he intends to do now, where he is going."
Mormis backed off. "Revealing that information would be unethical, sir." He glanced
significantly
in the direction from which credit cubes of impressive size came. "To reveal such would
be a
violation of confidence."
"You are neither physician nor padre," the tall man rumbled, "so don't prattle to us of
confidentialities and revelations."
"You have been paid enough," the thranx declared quietly, adding in a politely bloodcurdling way,
"we are through wasting time."
"The boy might," the slaver ventured as quickly as he could) "be traveling to Alaspin.
He seemed
anxious enough to go there. Driven, one could almost say. I would guess that at this very
minute
he is on his way to Drallarport."
"Your civility and common sense are respected," the thranx told him, finishing a touch
sarcastically, "along with your wonderfully responsive memory. We will bother you no
longer. Go
home. Char Mormis."
Turning in the way of the thranx, the insect started off into the fog at a fast jog. The tail
human followed him easily, stepping over the body of Mormis's manservant.

The slaver watched as the odd twosome was absorbed by the mist. "It's sure I won't
bother either
of you," he muttered to himself, slipping the credit cube into his shirt. His slave was
breathing
noisily now. Mormis walked over and kicked the recumbent bulk hard in the ribs. A
second kick
produced a weak groan.
Then the massive humanoid sat up. He biinked and looked up at Mormis. "I request
abjuration,
master," he muttered dully. "I no excuse) but opponent was much more than-"
Mormis kicked him again. "I know that, idiot. Get up." He found he was shivering,
though not from
the dampness. "I'm in a hurry to get home ..."
"Exalla Cadella morphine centalla, espoused lost in the woods. A time to conjure
redonjure skull
face from under the hoods," Ab hummed softly.
Flinx turned and called back to his dutifully trailing acquisition, disgust plain in his
voice,
"If you have to ramble, can't you at least say something sensible once in a while?"
Four arms made incomprehensible, meaningless gestures. The upper half of the blue
torso leaned
slightly forward. One bright-blue eye winked blankly at him, and the trunk atop the
smooth skull
weaved in time to some unspoken alien rhythm.
Flinx sighed and continued trudging up the road. Carts were scarce this late at nightearly in the
rnorning, rather. Since taking leave of Mormis's place h& bad seen none plying the
streets.
Supper still sat warm and heavy in his belly. He had eaten in a small comestabulary
partway out of
the city proper. Quda chips had come with his stew, and he had amused himself for a
while by
throwing the circular chips into the air, whereupon Pip would launch himself,
lightninglike, from
his shoulder to snatch them before they could hit the floor. The minidrag was extremely
fond of
anything heavily laced with salt. Flinx had halted the game only after the owner
approached him to
plead desperately for an end to it. It seemed that the venomous fiying snake's dives and
swoops
were unnerving the rest of his customers.
It should be light soon, Flinx mused as he neared the major route leading from. Drallar

to the
city's shuttleport. There landing craft transferred local goods to great KK-drive starships
waiting in orbit and brought outworld goods into the city. Along this broad avenue he
was sure to
encounter either a jinx driver looking for a first-morn fare or one of many huge powered
cargo
transports. The latter he could always obtain a ride on, sometimes with the knowledge
and consent
of the operator, often without. In spite of his present relative affluence, he knew, old
talents
often came in handy.
As morning neared, the mist-fog thickened. To an outworlder it presented an imposing
obstacle to
travel. To a native of Moth, it was as natural and expected as a sunrise. Drizzle ran
steadily off
Flinx's slickertic cape. At least, that was the way it appeared to an on- looker. Actually,
the
drops never touched the material itself. A steady static charge kept the rain from ever
making
contact with the always-dry cape.
Flinx noticed a huge skimmer parked close by the last warehouse bordering the busy
right-of-way.
It was stacked vrith many tons of cargo.
A bipedal figure suddenly appeared out of the fog, stumbling toward him. Pip was off
his shoulder
in an instant. Flinx started to reach for the fresh blade in his boot, then hesitated. He
sensed
no aura of danger about the figure. A shouted command brought Pip back; the anxious
minidrag
hovered in a tight spiral over Flinx's head. Pip's response assured Flinx that the weaving
form
ahead wasn't dangerous; if it had been, Pip would have ignored the command.
The figure stumbled onward, something gripped tightly in one hand. As the man neared,
he seemed
for the first time to take notice of Flinx. His glazed eyes appeared to clear slightly.
Summoning
fresh strength, the man increased his pace and steadied himself some- what. For a
minute Flinx
thought he might have to free Pip after all. Then the man's pupils filmed over again. He
tripped
on nothingness and fell sideways into the drainage ditch lining the right-hand side of the

access
road Flinx was walking on.
His body formed a dam for the running water. The runoff rose and began to flow around
the man's
arm and shoulder, the limp limb a long, slowly bleeding dike. Nor was the shoulder
wound the only
one visible on the man. He had been badly hurt in an efficient, professional manner.
Sidling cautiously up to the corpse, Flinx found he was trying to watch every direction at
once.
His erratic talent, naturally, revealed nothing at the moment. Yet no one, injured or
healthy,
charged from the darkness at him. He returned his attention to the body.
The black skullcap with its embroidered crimson insignia had fallen from the hairless
pate when
the man fell. Several portions of the tight black suit were soaked with blood. The fringed
cloak
was torn. It hung loosely from a single neck clasp.
Further examination was unnecessary. The Qwarm was dead. Yet Flinx persisted,
disbelieving. It was
known that the Qwarm were masters of many bodily functions. Imitating death was a
useful way to
lull the suspicions of an intended victim. But Flinx was positive this one was not faking,
nor
vrould he ever fake anything again.
Curious, he kneeled to examine the object clutched convulsively in the assassin's right
hand: a
short, grayish metal cylinder that looked much like pewter. A tiny red light was still
gleaming
near the cylinder's middle.
Flinx found a loose scrap of pavement and passed it carefully between the out-pointing
end of the
cylinder and the air. There was a tiny ping, and a millimeter- wide hole appeared in the
thick
section of stone.
To protect the many inquisitive children prowling the night streets of Drallar, Flinx
touched a
stud at the haft of the weapon. The red light went out. A repeat pass with the stone did
not
produce a puncture. Flinx pulled the tiny device free of its former owner's death grip.
This Qwarm toy was a phonic stiletto. It generated a thin beam of sculpted sound that
would put a
hole through just about anything. It fit neatly in a man's palm, generator and all, was

easily
concealed, and was almost impossible to detect or defend against.
Flinx rose and looked around worriedly. Having killed two Qwarm recently, he could
understand
another one with an activated weapon coming toward him. But this Qwarm had run into
something else
before he had had a chance to ambush Flinx. Or had he really been after Flinx?
Moving on four stumpy legs, a mumbling Ab walked over and bent to pick, cretinlike, at
the
clothing of the dead man. Hands and eyes moved, apparently enraptured by the
commingling of blood
and water in the ditch.
Had the killer been after Flinx, or were they still pursuing the moronic alien in his
charge? He
didn't like to consider the first possibility, because that would mean they now knew he
was
responsible for the death of two clan members back m the old house fronting the stage.
In that
case he had to move faster than he had intended. Once an enemy was known to them,
the Qwarm clan
would never rest until that enemy or every member of the clan was dead. It would help
him to know
whether they knew.
Falling mist was rapidly obliterating any hint of a trail, but drops of dissolving blood
still
showed against the pavement clearly enough for him to trace them around the prow of
the huge cargo
carrier. They led to the entrance of the warehouse. Careful examination of the personnel
door
showed that it had been keyed open, and Flinx did not think it had been done by the
building's
owner.
Every instinct, everything in him, warned against entering the blackness inside. That
was
countered, as usual, by his relentless curiosity. He slipped through the slight opening. A
dim
light shone in a near corner, near mountainous heaps of extruded plastic casings.
Treading softly,
with a dim shape fluttering nervously overhead, he moved toward the light.
Suddenly he could sense unease, even fear. Marshaled against it was a frightening
coolness. Both

were far from here and moving rapidly away from him. From the lighted region he was
approaching he
detected nothing. Very slowly, he peered around a last, four-meter-high yellow case.
Six bodies filled the space his astonished gaze en- countered. Six! They lay draped over
crates,
contorted on the metal floor, and bunched beneath overturned casings. Four were
women, two men.
All were clad in the by now too-familiar black. Several showed naked skulls, their caps
missing.
Copious amounts of blood lent murderous highlights to the devastated scene. Several of
the smaller
crates were shattered. It must have taken some unknown, awesome force to crack those
seamless
containers.
In a few hours, Flinx knew, some warehouse supervisor would arrive to open up, and get
the shock
of his or her life.
There were only dead Qwarm here, no sign of any other intruders, Flinx couldn't
conceive of anyone
or anything that would attack, let alone destroy, such a large number of professional
assassins.
He stiffened. A hint of a far-off mental scream had touched him, alerted him once more
to
something that continued to move away from this place. Whatever it was, he considered,
it might
not continue to move away.
Once again Flinx looked back at the crumpled, silent bodies, some of which were
partially
dismembered. Again he noted the cracked plastic casings strewn casually about. Some
great force
had been at work here, for reasons Flinx could not imagine. That distant mental shriek
continued
to echo in his mind as he found himself backing away slowly from the nightmarish
scene. Darkness
closed tight around him once more.
Something touched his shoulder.
His sigh of relief when he found it was only Pip, returning to his perch on his shoulder,
was
enormous. Then he was out of the structure, running steadily toward the main roadway
ahead. The
mist was no longer a friend but a deceiver, biding something terrifying and mysterious
from sight.

Moments later he reached the road. From below he heard the bellow of kinkeez and
other animalpowered
conveyances, mixed with the roar and hum of machines. A short climb, a downward
slide and
scramble, and Flinx was over the embankment and on the roadway itself. Somehow Ab
managed to keep
all four of his feet under him as he stumbled on without complaint after his new master.
The owner of the meepah-rickshaw balked at the sight of Flinx's quadrupedal
companion. Credits
overcame his uncertainty, however. Soon the two-legged meepah was racing toward the
shuttleport at
its maximum stride, Flinx getting the speed he was paying for. Happily, nothing flew out
of the
rising mist-fog from behind to strike at either owner or rider.
At the port, Flinx had the misfortune to encounter one of those many bureaucrats whose
sole
purpose in life seemed to be complicating that of others, from which they obviously
derived a
false and pitiful feeling of superiority. "Let me see your tunnel pass, boy," the man
demanded
condescendingly.
Flinx turned and glanced anxiously back the way he had come. The moving walkway
leading back into
the central terminal building was almost empty. Despite the early hour and the absence
of any
pursuit, he was expecting one or more black-clad specters to appear among the tired
businessfolk
and travelers. Drallarport operated round the clock, twenty-eight hours a day.
"I don't have a tunnel pass, sir," he responded, forcing himself to modify the sharpness
he heard
in his voice. "I ..."
That was enough to engender a wide leer of satisfaction on the other's fat face. No, he
was not
stupid, this one. His mental malady ran deeper than simple ignorance. Malice requires a
certain
amount of intelligence before its wielder qualifies as truly irritating.
"No pass, and attempting to enter a private access tunnel," he snorted through pursed
lips.
Ostentatiously, he jabbed a button on the callbox at his waist. Two large, nononsense
humans
appeared and glowered threateningly at Flinx. They were soon joined by an out-ofbreath, elderly

little man. In appearance, he was sufficiently ordinary to make Flinx's plump tormentor
look
unique.
"What is it, Belcom?" he asked the fat one curiously while eyeing Flinx.
"This child," Belcom declared, as if he had just learned the identity of a multiplemurderer, "is
trying to sneak into this restricted area without a pass." "I wasn't trying to snea-" Flinx
began
in exasperation, before the newcomer cut him off.
"This is a guarded section, boy. No visitors allowed." While tired, probably from
finishing up a
night shift, the man was at least polite. "If you want to watch the ships lift, try the cargo
landing."
"I don't have a tunnel pass," Flinx finally succeeded in explaining as he fumbled at a belt
pouch
beneath his slickertic, "because I'm not boarding as a passenger." From the pouch he
extracted a
small, virtually unbreakable slip of polyplexalloy. The information implanted in it was
unforgeable.
Blinking back fatigue, the new arrival studied the card. When he looked up at Flinx it
was without
lethargy. He turned a vicious Raze on the smug subordinate next to him. That worthy
took in his
superior's glare and reacted with the attitude of someone who has just discovered a
poisonous
insect crawling up his leg yet is afraid to swat at it for fear of being stung.
"Of course this gentleman doesn't have a pass, Belcom. Don't you ever inquire before
you make an
idiot of yourself?"
Aware that he couldn't respond without demeaning himself further, an uncomprehending
Belcom simply
gaped blankly at the little man. After allowing Belcom's embarrassment to last to the
point of
eyestrain, his superior finally continued: "He has no pass, you damn fool, because he's
not a
passenger. He's an owner. Private registry vessel."
“I-" Belcom stammered, glancing worriedly at Flinx. "He was so young- I didn't
consider, didn't
think-"
"Two reasons for not promoting you, and excellent ones at that," his supervisor snapped
venomously. Turning to Flinx, he framed sincere apologies with an officious smile.

"Terribly sorry
for the inconvenience, sir. If there is anything I can do to redress the insult suffered,
anything
at all..."
Flinx thought he saw a commotion at the far end of the moving walkway behind him.
"Just let me
through," he said crisply. Both guards moved solemnly aside; they watched as Flinx and
his odd
charge loped up the corridor. Neither turned to watch or listen as additional execration
continued
to fall on the unfortunate Belcom.
Though he had studied hard the past year and a half, Flinx was still no pilot. But most
craft were
so complex that manual operation was out of the question for all but the most skilled
individuals,
and the shuttiecraft he settled into was no exception. So it was fully fitted out with
automatic
controls. Anyone capable of delivering coherent instructions to the ship's computer
could pilot
it.
Firm pressure forced him back into the acceleration couch as the little vessel boomed
skyward,
lifting cleanly out of the reaction pit. Shortly thereafter he was curving out into free
space.
Nograv relaxed him physically; the fact that now no Owarm could slip up behind and
stick a sonic
stiletto or something equally exotic into his neck relaxed him mentally. Behind, Ab
whistled and
rhymed cheerfully.
The alien accepted nograv as readily and good- naturedly as it had the damp atmosphere
of Moth.
Approaching tangency with a particular orbit, Flinx took a moment to belch once while
admiring a
great swath of glowing gold splashed across the sky. It was one of the two remarkable
"wings" that
had given Moth its name. Whichever god had designed Flinx's home world had finished
with a
flourish of finger- painting. Each tan-shaped wing was composed of highly reflective
particulate
and gaseous matter, narrow near the surface, fanning out and diffusing as gravity
weakened away
from it.

Like a dauber wasp, the shuttlecraft nestled itself snugly into the ellipsoidal fuselage of
Flinx's ship. From that structure projected a long tube which ended in a fan-shape,
something like
a wineglass: the KK- drive posigravity-field projector.
Flinx's ship was a gift from his extraordinarily gifted pupils, the race of ursinoids who
inhabited the proscribed world of Ulru-Ujurr. They had used blueprints and scavenged
material to
construct it. In shape and capabilities it was much like the racing yacht of Flinx's
sometime
benefactor, Maxim Malaika. Only the much-less-sybaritic furnishings were significantly
different.
The Ulru-Ujurrians had christened it Teacher.
Flinx punched in the coordinates of Alaspin, added a maximum cruising speed, and then
permitted
himself to lie down. With only the most general description to go on, he had to try to
find a man
who might not ever have been to Alaspin. Added to that was the possibility that the
slaver's
memory was open to question-not to mention the fact that the Qwarm were intent on
preventing him
from locating anything ever again.
Some comfort came from Ab's antics. The alien was fascinated by the ship's workings.
Certainly Ab
had been on at least one other craft before, but slave quarters left little chance for study.
Flinx had to be careful. Automatic and foolproof as interstellar navigation had become,
the
accidental manipulations of an idiot like Ab could delay his trip seriously.
As to what he would do if he reached Alaspm and learned nothing, Flinx had no idea. At
such
moments Flinx wondered why he bothered so much. What, after all, were a mother and
father but an
accidental combination of humanity, a chance commingling of chromosomes and such
which had
produced ... himself.
Of all the myriad things he was ignorant of, one of the greatest was his own motivations.
Beside
them, stellar physics was simple child-gaming. Why try to-assuage his loneliness?
Knowledge of his
origin couldn't do that. But maybe, he mused, when he finally knew, it might keep him
from crying
quietly so often.

Traveling almost as fast as a Commonwealth peaceforcer, the Teacher sped through the
void,
carrying its small cargo of one melancholy human youth, one indifferent flying reptile,
and a
spritely alien mad poet wrapped in an enigma.
In his long and busy life, the lanky old man had undergone many security screenings.
The one he
was forced to endure today had proved as thorough as the most extensive he' could
recall.
Once cleared, he was finally admitted to a very dark office. What furniture lay within
appeared
placed haphazardly, without regard to esthetics or function. Nothing in the way of
decoration
showed anywhere. That extended to the single figure waiting to greet him. Like the
room, the
thickly hooded shape conveyed a feeling of somber staleness. It stood, rather than sat,
behind the
single heavy desk. Where a face would have been, darkness and many folds of cloth
served instead.
They disguised even their wearer's size and form. There was nothing deceptive about the
soft voice
that issued from beneath the heavy shrouds, though. It was sibilant in a way the taller
man could
almost place.
"Business has been finished?" the shrouded one asked. No casual greeting, no hopeful
hello to
waste time. No exchange of names.
From beneath his embroidered skullcap the elder Qwarm responded, "There has been
interference." A
finger rubbed at an upper lip and obliterated an itch. Hairless lids blinked once.
Beneath its many folds the other speaker appeared to twitch violently, though control of
its voice
remained unbroken. "It cannot be. Neither the Church nor the Commonwealth
government realizes
...!"
Shaking his head briskly, once, the tall Qwarm leader explained, "There has been no
evidence of
official interference, or even of interest, insofar as we can discover. Both members of the
clan
who had been as- signed the task were apparently in position and preparing to carry out
their work
when they were interrupted. Whether they were interrupted on purpose or by accident

we have been
unable to discover. It does not matter now. Both of the clan are dead."
"It matters very much to me," rumbled the hooded shape.
"You will be notified as to the identity of the fool who interfered when we gather in his
body,"
the Qwarm declared coldly. "At present we know no more than you. We thought such
knowledge,
together with the postponed completion of your assignment to us, was within our grasp.
Something
... happened." Vast unpleasantness burned back of wise old eyes. "Much outrage was felt
within the
clan at the death of our brother and sister. Such a thing has not happened in a long time.
Punishment was decreed. A large group of clan members, the largest gathered together,
in one place
in some time, was assembled to exact proper revenge." Now the Qwarm's anger gave
way to confusion.
"It was believed at first that he who interfered acted alone. Such was apparently not the
case. He
has powerful and as-yet-unidentified associates or allies. All we know is that none of
them appear
to be associated with the government. All of the assembled were murdered
mysteriously," Long,
deceptively thin fingers opened and closed slowly.
The hooded figure eyed the movements cautiously. This old man was dangerous, like a
well-used
weapon-worn and dulled on the outside, but still an efficient killer. It would not do to
push him,
especially in his present mood.
"If no official agency of Church or Commonwealth is involved," the soft voice ventured,
"then
there is still time for this business to reach a satisfactory conclusion." Then it added, as
an
afterthought: "There will be no additional money for the additional time involved, you
realize."
"That is of no import."
"Really?" Now a hint of disdain crept into the whisperer's voice. "I thought that money
was
paramount among your kind, businessfolk that you are."
"We are a clan, an extended family first," the Qwarm corrected him, "businessfolk
second. Our
reputation protects us more than our abilities. That is why anyone who kills a single
Qwarm cannot

be permitted to live to tell of it. Such a tale would impair our efficiency and place
isolated
members in danger."
'This business of killing is still a business," the figure rasped from beneath its shrouds.
"Rest assured," the Qwarm leader replied. "Whether we regard it as a matter of business
or clan
morality should not matter to you. You have hired us. We will carry out the terms of our
contract
satisfactorily for you-even if it carries us to the ends of the galaxy."
"I wish not to see you again until you can bring me word of that," the figure intoned
forcefully,
evidently unimpressed by the Qwarm's speech. "Whether you kill this interferer or his
friends is
your business. Kill however many you must, but kill foremost the creature called
Abalamahalarnatandra."
"As I have declared, it will be done." That seemed to end the meeting, except that a
touch of
human curiosity overcame the Qwarm. His professional poise lapsed briefly to reveal an
emotional
creature beneath.
"I would still like to know why you or anyone else is willing-nay, eager-to pay the
absurd sum of
one million credits for the killing of a single alien being."
"I am sure you would," replied the hooded shape, a hint of amusement in its voice.
When nothing
more was forthcoming, it was clear that the discussion was over.
As he turned to leave the room, the Qwarm saw the hooded figure move. Light poured
through the
open doorway from the hall beyond. Despite the figure's rapid movement, the shaft of
fresh light
in the dark chamber seemed to sparkle off a cornea that was not human beneath those
enfolding
shrouds.
Then again, the Qwarm elder reflected as he strolled down the hallway of the eightysecond floor,
in the brief instant he could have misinterpreted the effect of the light.
Not that it mattered anyway. The Qwarm clan had often accepted assignments from
nonhumans and
nonthranx. This present employer's desire for anonymity was hardly remarkable.
Rage boiled within him, though he didn't show it as he left the office tower. So many of
the claa

dead! People saw his set face and parted to let him pass. This" had become much more
than a simple
job for the clan. It did not matter that no one save a single woman and child-now
painlessly if
somewhat belatedly-eliminated, had learned of the Qwarm's failure on the commercial
world of Moth.
It was enough that the Owarm themselves knew. It was enough that they had been
outraged.
So it was that law-enforcement officials throughout the Commonwealth noted the
unusual activity
among black-clad, skullcapped men and women on various worlds and wondered at it.
They would have
wondered much more if they had known that all the frenzied activity was caused by- the
actions of
a single innocuous- looking young man ...
Chapter Five
The Teacher slipped into a stabilized parking orbit above Alaspin. A few preparations
and then
Flinx and Ab were dropping planetward.
Pip hissed softly as Flinx considered what he had learned during their journey to the
frontier
world they were approaching. The planet was warm, though not especially humid,
consisting mostly
of patches of jungle spotted about vast, sweeping savannas and reedy river plains.
Alaspinport was
a small city by Commonwealth standards. In fact, this little-explored globe boasted a
very modest
humanx population.
Considering that, Flinx had been surprised at the number of ships hovering above
Alaspin's
surface. There was evidently interstellar traffic disproportionate to the populace. In a
way, that
should not have surprised him. Alaspin was rich in two things: gemstones and history.
The
prospectors, mining companies, and many universities and research institutions with
interests on
the planet could account for the kind of heavy traffic to and from the surface that he
encountered.
Despite overcrowding, it was no problem to secure his shuttle at the port. Lodgings were
plentiful, and he got a room in a modest hotel in town.
Walking through the hot streets, he saw that the population was divided almost equally
between

humans and thranx. If anything, there were more of the busy, active insects than humans.
They
tolerated the dryness and thrived in the heat of midday.
The mixture of scientists and fortune hunters was a peculiar one. Flinx passed studious
individuals arguing alien sociology, then overheard a conversation dealing with the
smuggling
rates on Catchalot. Alaspin was filled with two institutions: libraries and brothels.
One of the greatest multiple-culture populations in this part of the galaxy had risen and
passed
on here before the Commonwealth was more than a dream in a few visionaries' eyes.
"It's true,
Flinx," the Junoesque, henna-haired concierge was telling him upon his return to the
hotel. "They
say that the Alaspinians explored a1 through the region of the Commonwealth and
beyond."
"Then why aren't there any left?" he asked reasonably.
She shrugged. "According to the research folks I've chatted with, the locals liked longrange
exploring, but never gave a thought to colonizin' anyplace else.' She made a show of
adjusting the
complex of straps beneath her yellow-and-silver dress as she explained the function and
operation
of the water-retrieve and other devices in his room.
"Xenohistorians I've bad stay here told fine the Alaspinians died out less than eight-y
thousand
Terran standard years ago. They think it was a gradual thing, not sudden like. Almost as
if the
Alaspinians had lived a full racial life, got tired, and decided to diffuse out." She
manipulated
the air purifier and tempioner. There was a soft hum, and cool air filled the room.
The hennaed coiffure, the garish make-up were a disguise, he suspected. There was a
vulnerability
beneath the paint that appealed to him.
"You're a damn sight younger than most of the solitaires I get in here, Flinx. You said
you're not
a miner?"
"No," he confessed, beginning to wonder if she was as vulnerable as he imagined. He
smiled in what
ha hoped was a pleasant yet neutral manner. "I tend more toward research- you might
even say
sociology."

"That's okay," the landlady declared amiably, `I like intellectuals too. If they aren't
snobbish
about it. You're not snobbish, I think."
Ab saved Flinx the necessity of commenting by chiming in with a particularly loud
rhyme.
Distracted the hotel owner gazed at the alien with distaste. Mild distaste, because no one
could
look at Ab and not be amused.
"You going to keep that thing with you?"
"If it's permissible. Ab doesn't get in the way. Ho won't trouble anyone."
"Doesn't matter to me," the woman responded evenly. "Is it clean?"
"As far as I know."
She frowned. "What's that supposed to mean?"
"Ab performs objectionable bodily functions, if by has any, out of my sight."
"That's okay then. Only thing is, I don't know whether to charge you double room rate
for two, or
single with a pet. Which is it?"
"Whatever you think appropriate," Flinx advised her.
That was the wrong thing to say. She smiled broadly at him. "Whatever I think's
appropriate? I'll
remember that." Her gaze traveled over him. Somehow he got the impression she wasn't
admiring his
attire. "Yes, you're a damn sight younger than most. If you need anything ... later ... if the
air
controls don't work right, you 1c me know." Her voice dropped an octave. "It's hot
during the day,
but it can get chilly here at night."
Flinx swallowed. "I'll be sure and let you know, ma'am."
"Mirable," she corrected him. "Mirable Dictu." She sidled toward the door. "It's nice to
find
someone who's not ... Fanatic about what they're here for. Scientists get too wrapped up
with
thinkin' and the prospectors never do. Good to have a guest who embodies a bit o' both."
His last view was of her perambulating form drifting suggestively toward the stairway.
Fie almost
called out to her. However ... He sighed. With serious business unfinished, he had no
time for
such foolery. But if Alaspin proved to be the final dead end, as he half suspected it
would, then
he might have time and need of some sympathetic company. In that event, he might
strike up a more
serious friendship with the voluptuous Mirable.

She was the first one be asked about the enormous man with the white hair and gold
earring. As
expected, Mirable had no knowledge of anyone fitting that description.
Several days of questioning around the town produced memories of numerous men with
rings in their
ears, some of the ornaments gold or gold-colored. But if the men were the right size they
didn't
wear the earring, and if they wore one they were never big enough. O they were large
enough and
beringed, but their hair was brown or red or black or blond.
A cargo loader finally told Flirts of a friend who almost fit the description. The only
thing be
was unsure of was the earring's color. In a burst of excitement, Flinx tracked the man
down and
found that he still worked in Alaspinport.
Unfortunately, he was only twenty-two years old and had never been to Moth in his life.
Nor did he
know offhand of anyone resembling himself who was older.
That disappointment had nearly caused Flinx to give up.
"Eh, my handsome young guest," Mirable bad chided him, "so many years you think on
this, and then
a couple of days and you're ready to forget it?"
He stayed on Alaspin and kept asking questions.
Various inquiries around the town the next day elicited no leads, but did bring Flinx to
the
office of a garrulous, enthusiastic clerk. He was in charge of Temporary Residences and
Flinx had
to see him to get hi permit stamped so he could legally remain on Alaspin.
"Entry to Alaspin is strictly limited and watched," the clerk rambled on. "You already
had a taste
of our rity procedures when you set down at the port." Flinx nodded. They had seemed
unusually
thorough for a frontier world. “That's because of the gems." The clerk winked. "Local
police have
to keep tabs on everyone. Claim stealing, robbery- we have our share, Adds to the spice
of life
here."
Sure, Flinx thought, when you can sit in a nice, cool office and watch the arrests and
shootings
on the tridee.
"And it's not only the gemstones," he went on. "Oh no. Constant fighting between the
research

people and the prospectors. Constant. It's not easy keeping peace between them. Each
group has
little sympathy for the other. The scientists think the miners are destructive
Neanderthals, and
the miners consider the scientists cloud-walkers each with a fat credit pipeline to some
research
group."
"I don't understand," Flinx admitted openly. "A little conflict I can see, but persistent
battlingwhat
for? Isn't each group after different things?"
The clerk shook his head at the newcomer's ignorance. "Let me give you an example.
Have you ever
heard of the Idonian Mask?"
Flinx shook his head.
"It cost the lives of sixteen people, on Alaspin and off, before the Commonwealth finally
stepped
in. Declared it a treasure of the people and appropriated it for the Pre-Commonwealth
Societies
Museum on Hivehom." He eyed Flinx. "The mask was about your height and twice your
width, Flinx and
decorated with sixty thousand carats of flawless blue diamonds set to form the face and
history of
some long- gone local god or politician or chief thug they don't know which yet. All
done on
worked, poured crysorillium."
"Now that I've heard of," Flinx interrupted.
The clerk nodded, smiling , sagely "Uh-huh … rare heavy metal that looks a little like
iridescent
azurite, only greener and much tougher. Thranx call it fonheese, or Devoriar metal. They
prize the
stuff, but it's even more valuable to men, because there's none of it on Earth, and little on
the
other explored worlds. Here they call it blue gold.
"Itinerant old dirt-grubber found the mask first, nearly forty years ago," the clerk went
on. "I
still remember the first faxes of it. Beautiful thing. The local scientists went crazy on
seeing
it. They said it held clues to a hundred missing years of Alaspinian history. Of course,
tire
miner and his buddies were only interested in how many diamonds and how many kilos
of crysorillium

they could get out of it.
"The mask went back and forth, changing hands between miners and scientists and back
again, losing
a certain amount of metal and diamonds with each transfer and replacing them with
blood. Nor were
all the deaths between contesting miners and researchers, no. I remember the story of
two thranx
scientists who published simultaneous identical interpretations of the mask's upper
writing. They
ended up in a duel and killed each other. That's why the Commonwealth government had
to step in
and take the thing over, to prevent any more deaths. Even so, the last two people the
mask
`killed' were murdered over a plot to break into the museum and steal it."
He waved a hand at the bustling street outside the office window. "From what's been
learned, they
say Alaspin once boasted several hundred different societies, united by a worldwide
system of
engineering and weights and measures, that sort of thing. But each society different.
There are
tens of thousands of mapped ruined structures out there, Flinx, and that's estimated to be
only a
small portion of the total. Each culture worshipped its own gods. So, you see, it became
kind of a
sporting competition to see whose temples could be the most lavishly decorated. Jungle
and swamp
have taken many of them over, but it's still a treasure hunter's paradise out there, for
anyone
who wants to risk the weather, the hostile flora and fauna, and the aborigines."
"Aborigines?" Flinx exclaimed. That was enough "c set the clerk to gabbing again.
"The sociologists working here aren't sure about tae abos. They don't seem to bear much
resemblance to reconstructions of what the original Alaspinians were: like. 1`1o one can
decide
for sure if they're in fact degenerate remnants of the original dominants, or simply
another
semisentient group that's evolved to take the place left by the vanished major culture."
He
fumbled with some tapes. "I've got to get back to my own work young man. Sorry if I
bored you."
"No, you've been very informative," Flinx told him honestly.
"That's Alaspin then, son. A place where fortunes and reputations can be made,
sometimes together.

And I am sorry," he added, remembering his visitor's original reason for corning, "that I
don't
know of your oversized quarry with the gold ring."
Flinx left the office, and found himself wandering in no particular direction through the
town.
Casual conversation and random questioning had gained him nothing. His best chance
for finding out
anything lay with the local arm of the Commonwealth peaceforcers. They should have
records of just
about everyone why ever set foot on this world and passed through the screenings at the
port. But
a direct inquiry would likely be met with questions. The police did not supply faxes and
biographs
to anyone who walked in off the street and asked for them. He didn't think they would
cooperate
without a few answers- answers Flinx would rather not give.
Passing a street vendor, be palmed a food stick and replaced it without being detected.
Old habits
were hard to break. But stealing the right fax tape would be hard to do, perhaps even
impossible.
The local peaceforcers would not be city-soft.
That left him with only the prospect of endless questioning ahead. Angrily he mused that
coming
here had probably been a mistake. Mother Mastiff was right-he was going to find
nothing In his an
anger he didn't notice that he was now walking through a section of town he had not
been to
before.
Besides, there were his responsibilities to the Ulru-Ujurrians. Without his supervision
their
innocent experiment could prove dangerous to themselves and to others. They needed
him to explain
the rules of civilization as they constructed their own.
What was be wasting his time for, then? Probably the man he sought had never set foot
on the soil
of Alaspin, had acquired his minidrag elsewhere, just as Flinx had. Time was passing.
Why, in a
little while he'd be twenty. Twenty! An old man.
A tightening on his shoulder caused him to look that way and speak comfortingly. "l
Know, Pip ...
don't worry." The minidrag stared back up at him with slitted, anxious eyes. "I'm just

nervous,
that's all." But it wasn't Flinx's state of mind which had caused his pet to tense. The
source lay
ahead.
A group of locals- prospectors, by the look of their clothes-were chatting in front of a
business
which managed to flourish a garish front even in the still bright light of late afternoon.
Concluding their conversation, one man and the two women miners left and walked on
up the street.
They turned to wave a goodbye, which the two men who stayed behind returned before
entering the
building.
Flinx had a good look at one, less so at his companion. The man nearest him was short,
his skin
darker than Flinx's but not black. That color was reserved for his hair, which fell straight
and
slick to just above his shoulders. Cheekbones bulged in his face like apples in a child's
pocket,
and his nose was as sharp and curved as the fins of an atmosphere flier. The other man
was not
nearly so swarthy, and was of a different ethnic background.
These details were interesting but they were only incidental to what had caused both
man and
minidrag to tense. Each man had displayed a curled form on a shoulder, one on the left,
the other
on the right. Even from a distance there was no mistaking that blue-and-pinkish-red
pattern of
interlocking diamond shapes.
Minidrags!
Tame ones, probably as domesticated as Pip. His pet was the only miniature dragon
Flinx bad ever
sec. While he had known that Pip came from here, he had no idea that the practice of
domesticating
the venomous creatures was popular. Certainly it wasn't widespread, because be bad
wandered
through mach of the town without seeing any tame flying snakes. Until now.
He increased his speed and found himself facing the entrance. If nothing else, he would
learn
something of his pet on this trip. The two men inside living as they did on the snakes'
native
planet, likely knew more about minidrags than Flinx had been able to learn on his own.
Seeing the

two men together, he suspected that the bond achieved between man and reptile led to
one between
men capable of taming such a dangerous animal, It was a suspicion compounded of
equal pares
naivete and reason. If he was right, they would greet him as a friend.
Despite his anxiety, the entrance to the structure stir gave him pause- the two men had
entered a
simiespin. Flinx was familiar with the notorious, barely tolerated simie booths. Places of
unrefined amusement often advertised such booths for use.
In a simie booth, an individual's thoughts were read, amplified, and displayed threedimensionally
in the booth user's mind. The dreamlike simulacrum was complete with all relevant
sensory
accompaniment sight, smell, touch, everything. All it took was the modest fee. .
Naturally, a simie booth was private. Intrusion into a private booth, during which the
intruder
could also partake of some private dream, was one of the most universally decried
offenses in the
Commonwealth. This because the most unassuming individual could rid him or herself
of the most
depraved, obnoxious fantasies no matter how hellish they might be, without harming
anyone.
Since booth owners didn't care what fantasies their patrons conjured up, simies were
once
considered obscene and bad been banned. The resultant great legal battle had finally
been decided
in favor of the simie manufacturers. Freedom of thought, one of the pillar principles of
the
Commonwealth, was brought to bear on the argument, and it was that which had finally
defeated the
censors. That, and the solemn testimony of a Church medical team. The team had
deplored the uses
to which the booths were sometimes put while simultaneously ruling that the booths had
therapeutic
value.
What Flinx was confronting was something at once less disreputable and more
unsettling. In effect,
a simiespin was a greatly enlarged simie booth which surrounded an entire
establishment-a
restaurant, a bar, sometimes even a travel agency. Preprogrammed, the simiespin
machinery
projected mass three-dimensional illusion. It provided an always- changing

environment, keyed by
the random thoughts of its patrons but preprogrammed with nondestructive simulacra.
The thrill was
in never knowing where a visitor might find himself next.
Simiespins vied with one another in the detail of their programming and the intensity of
their
simulations. Unwary visitors had been known to suffer from spells of madness, unable
to cope with
the rapid-fire change of environments, but these cases were insufficiently common to
close the
simiespins down. Ample warnings were posted outside to keep the unwary and uncertain
from
entering.
There was additional protection, as Flinx discovered after paying the fee and entering.
He found
himself in a long hallway, dark and lined with fluorescent murals depicting scenes from
different
worlds. It was more than a mere entranceway. He could feel a tickling at his mind.
Behind those decorative murals lay expensive, sensitive equipment, which the law had
determined
necessary. If any of them felt that Flinx's mind or that of any other prospective patron
was ill
equipped to handle the fluctuating environment of the spin, alarms would sound and
human or
mechanical attendants would appear. They would announce with regret that those so
analyzed would
have to search elsewhere for amusement.
It was interesting that although a simiespin could serve food and drink that by
themselves
produced mental effects, there was no age restriction. What has required was a firm
grasp on
reality. Children were notoriously weak in that area, and so in general were barred from
entering.
But those children whom the machines passed were welcome within, whereas certain
adults were
rejected. It could and did lead to occasional embarrassment for overconfident parents,
when they
were denied entrance and their offspring were passed on.
Flinx found himself wondering how many politicians would be refused admittance to a
simiespin. He
was not surprised when the machinery also passed Ali. His alien tag- along had no grip

on reality,
and so was freely granted admittance to the lesser madness ahead.
Before him the door pulsed with an internal ruby glow, a promise of pleasure beyond. A
sensuous
mechanical voice murmured softly, "You have paid for and have been granted
permission to sample
our palette of a thousand worlds. Your pet"-an apparent reference to Ab-"may enter with
you but
must be kept under control at all times. You will be charged ..." and the voice quoted
various
figures; the rate went downs-the length of time increased. "On your way out or in,
partake of the
invigorating refreshments we offer," the voice concluded. Flinx nodded. It was a bar, as
he had
suspected.
Smoothly the pulsing red door slid into the floor. Flinx braced himself mentally and
walked
forward. Ills initial reaction was one of letdown. The simiespin chamber was huge, a
good three
stories high inside. Though it didn't look like an ordinary gathering chamber at present.
Instead
of benches and booths and a bar, he found himself looking at a sloping beach studded
with
boulders. It was evening. A sun much pinker and hotter than either Moth's or Alaspin's
was turning
the drifting stratus clouds above the color of purple-lavender waves lapped sonorously at
the
yellow sands. A few strange plants swung lazily in the hot breeze of, the water, almost in
time to
the humming sound of unknown, source.
Nearby a man and a woman lay entwined in each other's arms. Their filthy prospectors'
clothing was
grotesquely out of place in the idyllic scene, but neither appeared to mind. They were
elsewhere
anyway, no doubt partly as a result of whatever they were sucking from a nearby boulder
through a
pair of long, sturdy plastic siphons.
"Where are we?" Flinx asked, his curiosity at the vision around him overcoming his
unease at
invading the couple's privacy,
The man didn't object. Palling the tip of the siphon from his lips, he eyed Flinx and
muttered

dreamily, "Quofum, I think. Quofum."
That was a world Flinx had heard of once. It supposedly lay far from the
Commonwealth's
boundaries, somewhere along the inner edge of the Arm. Only a few humans and thranx
had ever
succeeded in visiting it. Something was wrong with space in that region, something
which caused
Quofum to appear only occasionally at the coordinates recorded.
Fabled Quofum, where the sky was as clear as a virgin's conscience and the winecolored seas
tasted of everything from ouzo to Liebfraumilch. For the oceans of Quofum were varied,
though the
sea-stuff normally ran about nine percent alcohol. In the endless oceans of Quofum, so
the tale
ran, swam fish who were never unhappy.
Stepping off the wooden landing, he found his feet sinking slightly into warm sand.
Then he was by
the edge of the sea, which stretched endlessly to the horizon. Sunset outdid itself as he
kneeled
at the edge of the water. Purple comfort ran over his knees and extended hands. Pip
stirred
uneasily on Flux's shoulder, shook him with a start back to reality. It was the most
perfect
illusion Flinx had ever experienced.
Cupping his hands, Flinx dipped them into the sea, brought them up, and sipped a
double palmful of
ocean. The flavor of the seawater was rich, fruity, and strong, with a powerful bouquet
and a
gentle perfume caused by the warming effect of his hands.
Rising, he noticed the stains on his jumpsuit and, frowned.
Someone chuckled.
Looking behind, he saw the two minidrag tamers he had followed in, leaning up against
a wave-worn
rock. The one with the aquiline nose called to him. His accent was unplaceable.
"Join us, young dragon lord, and sit with your fellow, reptiles."
Flinx started up the beach, brushing fitfully at hi, pants.
"Don't worry," the swarthy man assured him, "the stains will disappear the moment you
leave.
They're as unreal as the sand and the drunken oceans."
Even so, Flinx could still taste the smooth wine in his mouth, feel the wetness where it
had

swirled around his wrists and knees. The sand remained hot underfoot. Yet despite the
heat, he
realized, he was comfortable. No wonder only those of stable mind were permitted entry
into such
places! One with a less solid grasp of reality could go quite mad here.
As if to test his thoughts, the sky above suddenly blurred, as did the landscape around
him. When
:he brief moment of disorientation had passed, he saw storm clouds overhead. Rain was
falling
steadily, and lightning crashed around him as electrons warred 3n the heavens.
Flinx blinked away drops that he knew weren't real, that were only the products of
machinery so
sophisticated and sensitive that few humanx really understood how they operated. But
he had to
blink, the water dimmed his vision.
Jungle and high ferns closed tightly around him, the startling climax vegetation of a
cold-weather
rain forest. He felt stifled, and looked around frantically for the simiespin entrance.
Naturally,
he could see nothing so out of keeping with the forest simulacrum. Rain continued to
pelt his head
ant shoulders, sending Pip deep into the folds of Flinx's jumpsuit material. Ab
singsonged behind
them, oblivious to the cold downpour.
Except ... Flinx wasn't cold.
"We're over here," a laughing voice called to him.
He hunted but saw nothing. "Where?"
"Behind the big tree, straight ahead. We haven't moved."
Flinx walked around a meter-thick bole which looked like a cross between a Terran
redwood and a
bundle of black lizards tied together. As he walked past, he tapped the trunk. It
responded with a
stentorian bark that made him jump.
His response prompted another laugh, nearer now. Behind the tree, the two minidrag
tamers stood as
before, only now they were leaning up against a rotting stump. Rainbow- hued fungi
formed a riot
of color on the dead wood.
"First time in a simiespin, compadre?" the small man asked with a grin.
"Yes. I had some idea of what to expect but" -he took in a deep breath- "it's still awfully
disconcerting. Especially the suddenness of the changes."
That's one of the attractions," the other man countered. "As it is with everything in life."

"Don't pay any attention to Habib," the short one advised. "One drink and he turns
morbidly
philosophical He extended an open hand. "My name's Pocomchi." A nod toward Pip,
peeking out from
beneath Flinx's shirt top. "You're the youngest I've ever seen with a tame drag."
They were already on a first-name basis-good. As. Flinx shook the proffered palm,
Pocomchi
extended Me other. It held a large, fat mushroom. At least that's what it looked like.
Flinx
reached for it. As be did so, the large triangular head cradled next to the short man's neck
lifted. A slight sneeze from that head and Flinx would be dead. But at a word from its
master, it
relaxed.
The mushroom turned out to be full of a brown liquid. It looked like gravy, but it held
the kick
of the whole bull. After a stunned taste, Flinx handed it back.
Meanwhile, Pip's head was weaving back and fords, up and down in jerky, dancing
motions. His
excitement was understandable. Since Flax had found him, this was the first time he'd
ever set
slitted eyes on another of his own kind. The two minidrags opposite were appatently
more used to
others like themselves. They regarded Pip with only mild interest.
"I'm Flinx," he replied when he had his breath back. As they sat down across from him,
Flinx made
a seat on the stump of another dead bush; the spongy mold crushed to cushion his
backside against
the hard wood.
"Tell me, is this a chair I'm sitting on, or... ?"
"You guess as well as we," the one called Habib told him languidly. "All life's an
illusion."
"There he goes again," grumbled Pocomchi goodnaturedly. He pointed behind Flinx.
"Since that's
remained constant, I assume it's not an illusion." Flinx saw that the man was gesturing at
Ab.
"He's a ward of mine. Crazy as a drive lubricator from too many fumes, but completely
harmless."
"Funny-looking creature," Pocomchi decided. he swigged his mushroom.
Flinx studied his seat. It looked exactly like a dead stump. As he regarded it, it tuned into
an
eight legged, blue-furred spider-shape which rolled bug-eyes and hearing organs at him.
It didn't

move, however, and seemed content to support him. Somehow Flinx managed not to
jump.
But his new friends noticed the irrepressible twitch. "First time in a simiespin for sure,"
Pocomcln chuckled, as the sky turned pale puce above them. Then his expression turned
curious,
although the friendliness remained in his voice. "And maybe the first time on Alaspin as
well? But
that makes no sense. Dragon lords are few, Flinx. I don't recall seeing you before."
"I'm from offworld, all right," be admitted. For some reason, he didn't hesitate to reveal
information to these men. Anyone who could tame one of the empathic telepaths called
minidrags
could employ them only for defense, never to attack or bully or cajole others. The snakes
wouldn't
do it. They would never associate with such a being in the first place.
If these men were not informative, they might at least be potential allies.
"Not only is it my first time here," he continued, "but it's Pip's as well. He was
abandoned on my
home planet when we were both much younger. In a way, I suppose," he concluded,
fondly rubbing the
minidrag under one pleated wing, "it's more of a homecoming for him than it is anything
for me."
"Your dragon is as welcome as you," Pocomchi assured him. He leaned back into the
supportive limbs
of a multitentacled creature. As Flinx watched, the alien octopus-shape became a small
tornado.
Wind whistled and howled all around them. The jungle was gone.
"Isn't that right, Balthazaar, old fellow?" Pocomchi had reached up to rub the neck
muscles back
of his snake's skull. The big minidrag was obviously as much older as it was larger than
Pip.
"How does one get a drink in here?" Flinx asked.
"If you don't want to try the mushrooms, or other decor," Habib told him, "you can
always tuck-atube."
He extended a hand downward to pull a red siphon out of the ground. "If this doesn't
appeal
to you, there's a fairly standard mechbar back there." He pointed at a giant bird, which
abruptly
turned into an emerald cactus. "I much prefer the tube, because it matches the simie."
"I don't understand," Flinx confessed, taking the tube with one hand and eyeing it
uncertainly.
Habib smiled. "The liquid changes to match the new environment. You never know what

you're going
to be sipping next." Flinx made a face, and Habib hastened to reassure him. "You can't
get sick.
This is a legitimate place. Plenty of modifiers included in the drinks to make sure no one
gets
ill. The owner's proud of his reputation. Wouldn't do to have customers puking all over
his
simulacra."
Habib retrieved the tube, stuck it in the corner of his mouth, and leaned back. "How do I
get
one?" Flinx asked studying the ground unsuccessfully.
"There's one by your right hip," Pocomehi informed him. "It was sticking out of the left
leg of
that spider thing you were sitting on a few minutes ago."
Looking down, Flinx saw the whirlwind he was sitting on change into a blue stalagmite.
Now they
were in a cave filled with chromatically colored formations: stalagtites, helicites,
flowstone,
and much more. Cool cave air hung motionless around him.
One of the helicites sticking to his seat was longer and straighter than its neighbors. It
was
also flexible, Flinx discovered when he pulled on it. Sticking it into his mouth, he
sucked
experimentally. A thin syrup flowed through the tube, with a taste redolent of overripe
pomegranate. It coated his throat. The sweetness did not make him sick.
There was, he decided, plenty of time to ask the important questions. For now, he would
enjoy the
simespin's delights and the company of these two companionable men.
Chapter Six
At least an hour passed, although within the simiespin there was no way of knowing the
exact time,
before Flinx spoke again.
"What do you two do?" Curious, he examined them, the quick-moving, enthusiastic
Pocomchi and his
lanky, mournful companion. "Surely you're not attached to one of the scientific teams
working on
Alaspin?"
"Who, us-archeologists?" gasped Pocomchi, eyes flashing in the dim light. The cave
simulacrum,
apparently proving popular, had been returned. "Fine chance you'd have, Flinx, of
finding one of
those brain-cases in a simiespin. No, they get their kicks down in the town library that

the
Commonwealth maintains for them."
"You go to extremes, Poco," Habib insisted. He ran a hand through thick, curly black
hair. "Even
the thranx among them aren't strictly mental machines. You see thranx in here too, don't
you?"
With an arm he gestured toward a cluster of sparkling aragonite crystals, delicate as
flowers. A
male and female thranx were sprawled on their stomachs, immersed in illusion and each
other. The
male was caressing his companion's ovipositors suggestively.
The cave vanished as snow started to sift down over them. Now Flinx's seat was a rough
block of
solid ice. Yet he remained comfortable, even as the breath congealed in front of his
mouth.
"We wander around a lot," explained Pocomchi.
Habib leaned back into a snowbank and sucked silver from the siphon. "What we
actually do, Flinx,
is ... not much." He noticed the youth staring at his associate. "Tell the boy where you're
from,
Poco. He's shared with us."
"I was born and raised in ..." Pocomchi hesitated. "Just say it was on Earth, near the
middle of
what teachers call the Hourglass. Near a place called Taxem." Fhnx admitted ignorance
of the name,
thou«h he knew of the Hourglass, where the two smaller continents met.
"It's an old archeological site," Pocomchi went on. "I grew up surrounded by ancient
temples. When
I was seven I was running the tiller in my family's quartomaize field when something
went clunk
and the machine stopped. I sat there and cried for hours, afraid I'd busted the damn
expensive
thing." He grinned at the memory as he watched Ab's antics.
"My mother finally heard me crying over the locator I always wore ... there were
creatures called
jaguars living in our neighborhood. When she and my uncle came out and moved the
tiller, they
found I'd hit a buried stone head about twenty-six hundred years old. It was on our land.
The
local museum paid one hundred fifty credits for it. I got ten whole credits of my own to
spend. I

bought out part of the local sweetshop and for a week I was sicker than a boa flying to
swallow a
maiden aunt." He took a swig from his tube, which now projected from the head of a
glowing fish.
They were underwater, Flinx noted with interest. Bubbles rose from his nose and mouth,
yet it fell
as if he were breathing clean air.
Its sensory apparatus was beginning to handle the extreme shifts in environment. Ab
seemed to
float in the water behind him.
"I've been trying to stumble over credit-producing heads and related stuff ever since,"
finished
Pocomchi.
"In short, he's as money-hungry as I am," Habib put in with a supple smile. "We're as
bad as a
Moth merchant."
Flinx bridled slightly at the deprecatory comment directed at his home world, then
relaxed. Why
should he take umbrage at the reference? He was no merchant. And if he had one friend
in that
trade, it was off-balanced by a dozen enemies.
"So now you know what we're bunting for," muttered Habib, after explaining that he
came from a
part of Earth called Lebanon. " What are you hunting here?"
"A man."
From nearby, Ab let out a startlingly clear bit of nonsense rhyme. Habib sat forward; he
seemed to
notice the alien for the first time.
"Why's that with you?"
"His associate," quipped Pocomchi. "Both Flinx and I share the same fate."
"I acquired Ab by default," Flinx explained yet again, as Habib threw his grinning
partner a sour
look. "I haven't the heart to abandon him, and I'm not sure I could sell him. Besides, Ab's
not
good for anything except singing madness and serving as the butt of bad jokes."
"Never seen anything like it before," Habib admitted.
"Neither have I," added Pocomchi. "The simie admitted him?"
"I don't think environment affects Ab," Flinx theorized, as the subject of the discussion
drew
lines in the snow. "Once in a while he almost makes sense. I'm afraid Ab exists in a
universe of
his own."

Ab bent over to stare with a single eye at something on the ground. Apparently the thing
was
moving, since Ab's head inclined to follow it between his legs. Slowly he tucked head
and then
neck beneath him, until he fell over on his back- if it was his back and not his front- into
the
snow. Flinx smiled sympatheticaly, while both men laughed.
"See?" Flinx said. "He's too pitiful a creature to just leave someplace."
"You sure you're not a slaver?" Pocomchi inquired with sudden sharpness. "You don't
look the-"
"No, no," Flinx corrected, shaking his head rapidly "I'm just here looking for a man."
"For what?" Habib asked with unexpected directness.
Flinx hesitated, and finally said, "Personal reasons."
"You want to kiss him or kill him?" Habib pressed disarmingly, not put off by Flinx's
disclaimer.
But then, Flinx knew, this was a frontier world, where such civilized subtleties as
obfuscation
were unknown.
"Honestly, I'm not sure, Habib," he admitted, considering for the first time what he
would do if
he actually found the person he sought. "It depends on whether he's the end of a trail or
simply
another signpost on it." Sighing, he repeated his description of the man in question, for
the
hundredth-odd time on Alas pin:
"A very big man, age uncertain but not young. Over two meters up, two hundred kilos in
between,
maybe less. Wears a gold ring in hits right ear, or used to. Ire may or may not have a
minidrag
with him. Don't tell me about the cargo handler at the port. I've already met him, and
he's not
the one I'm seeking."
"Sounds like it could be ..." Habib was murmuring thoughtfully, but his companion was
already
waving his hands with excitement.
"Sure, we know him"
Flinx started, and slid off his ice block to land in a shallow pool of thick petroleum.
They were
in a swamp again. a dark morass dominated by carboniferous plants from which swung
chittering oilblack
creatures with flaming red eyes. A red sun blasted the noon sky overhead, stabbing

through
black-white clouds.
Minx saw only Pocomchi.
"Don't look so startled, lad," the Indian urged. "It's not a common man you've described.
The one
we're both thinking of fits, even to the gold earring." He shook his head, smiling at some
secret
thought. " A character, even for Alaspin, he is."
"Could you- where is he?" Tins finally managed to stutter as he fought to untangle
himself from
his siphon tube.
Habib made an expansive gesture eastward. "Out there, doing the same things we do.
Got a claim of
sorts that he works with a partner." He leaned forward slightly. "Personally, the grabbers
I've
talked with say she's working an empty slot."
"When was the last time you saw him there, or knew for sure that he was at this place?"
"Three, maybe four months ago," Pocomchi considered, scratching the bridge of his
impressive nose.
Flinx sagged inwardly. By now the man could be anywhere, even offplanet. But it was
something! A
reason to remain.
Habib rose and sauntered toward Flinx, waving his tube. "If I were to tell you some of
the stories
about your man, dragon lord, you wouldn't ..." His mouth opened wide, and he gaped
querulously at
Flinx. Then his hands went out in front of him reflexively as he fell forward, metacarpal
bones
buckling as they hit the now- firm gravel floor of the desert under them. Three suns
burned
hellishly above; a fourth was sinking over the distant horizon.
Flinx had a glimpse of a hair-thin wire attached to a needle the size of a nail paring
protruding
from Habib's back, near the spine. A slight phut, and the needle and wire were
withdrawn. The
faint smell of ozone lingered in the air as he threw himself flat.
While Flinx crawled over the sand and gravel toward Ab, Pocomchi was moving toward
his friend
calling to him wildly.
The instant Habib hit the ground, a tawny leathery shape had left his shoulder. Now it
was joined
by Balthazaar, and then Flinx felt a familiar weight leave his own arm. Like leaves in a

dustdevil, the three winged demons circled one another in the air. Then they were
streaking as one
toward a gleaming boulder of solid cirriae off to Flinx's right. Several violent hisses
sounded
behind them, a reptilian equivalent of a sonic boom.
Flinx continued toward Ab, shouting for the alien to lie down. Two blue orbs moved,
eyeing him
quizzically. The slight puff of displaced air sounded above Flinx. Artificial desert
sunlight
reflected from a long, silvery thread. The thread ended in a sharp, tiny shape which
struck the
quadrupedal alien just under one ate its four arms. A faint crackling sounded, as if a hand
had
been dragged across a coarse wool blanket.
Ab stopped in mid-verse and appeared to quiver slightly. Then lie resumed rhyming as if
nothing
had happened. Flinx reached him, got his arms around three legs, and yanked. Ab
tumbled to the
sand. He stared at his master with a blank but almost hurt expression.
Glancing behind them and to the right, Flinx save that Pocomchi was kneeling next to
the
motionless form of Habib. Slowly, as if fearing what he would learn, he extended a
palm. It
touched his companion's back rested there a moment, then was brought away.
"Get down, Pocomchi!" Flinx yelled frantically. The Indian didn't look over at him, and
made no
move to comply. He appeared dazed. Maybe it was unconcern, Minx thought, when
muted curses and
screams began to reach him from behind the tall spire of yellow quartz.
As he waited and watched, the boulder changed into a giant diamond-bark tree, whose
brown exterior
flashed with blue sparks. Three shapes fluttered out from behind the, tree.
Pleated wings braked as Pip came in for a landing, tail extended like a hand. It curled
around
Flinx s shoulder, the body then folding itself around the youth's extended arm pleated
wings
collapsing flat against the cylindrical body. Flinx could feel the tenseness in the
miridrag; he
noted that his pet was panting nervously. Slitted eyes continued to dart watchfully from
side to
side.
A second minidrag, the constrictor-sized Balthazaar, draped itself around the back and

arms of the
grieving Pocomchi. The long, pointed tongue darted in and out worriedly, touching
cheek, touching
eyes, touching.
Flinx watched Habib's minidrag settle to a curled landing on its master's back. It lay
there
briefly, then slid forward to examine the head. After several minutes, great pleated wings
unfurled. The flying snake fluttered forward until it was hovering in front of Habib's
face.
Leathery wings beat at the air violently, sending wind into the motionless man's mouth
and
nostrils.
More minutes, until the minidrag finally settled to earth by the still head of Habib. It
coiled
itself, and they remained like that, face to face, unmoving.
Flinx finally realized he was still holding on to Ab's legs. As soon as be released him, the
alien
righted himself. Indifferent to all that had taken place, Ab proceeded to inspect a tree
root.
Keeping his eyes on the citrine boulder, Flinx crawled over to sit next to Pocomchi. He
was still
cautious, but felt less and less that any danger still hid behind the massive yellow rock.
There was no need to state the obvious. He had seen death in Habib's eyes before the
man hit the
sand.
"Look, I'm sorry," he whispered tensely. "We'd better try to get out of here."
"Why?" Pocomchi turned anguished eyes on Flinx. When he spoke again, Flinx realized
his question
had nothing to do with a reason for leaving the simiespin.
"We never stole a claim, we made no serious enemies," the little man went on. His eyes
returned to
the slim prone form below them. The sand and gravel beneath it abruptly, uncaringly,
changed and
became blue grass.
"Three years. Three years we've been grubbing and carving and stinking on this end-ofcivilization
world. Three years! Other people hit it big all around us. But not us, never us." His voice
rose.
"Why not us? Why not us?"
Flinx made calming motions. Other patrons were beginning to look in their direction.
The one thing

he didn't want now was to be asked unanswerable questions. Reaching out, he tried to
grab Pocomchi
by the shoulders, to turn him toward him.
The moment be was touched, Pocomcbi shook the hands violently from him. "Don't
touch me!" Ire
trembled; his voice was full of homicidal fury.
After a moment's hesitation, Flinx sat back on hi,, haunches. While waiting, he
occasionally eyed
the yellow massif, which had now become a cluster of sutro branchings. Pocomchi
seemed to calm
himself a little. Flinx decided to wait, despite possible danger to himself, until the
tormented
Indian regained a measure of self-control.
So be turned his attention to the corpse at his feet. There was no blood, no visible
wound.
Leaning close, he saw where the needle- tipped wire bad touched. A small hole bad been
made in the
back of Habib's shirt. It was blackened around the edges. The peculiar smell still hung
above the
spot: ozone.
At least, he reflected gratefully, the philosophical miner had not suffered. Death had
been
instantaneous, brought on at the moment of contact with the needle.
A hand touched his shoulder. He glanced up anxiously, then relaxed. Pocomchi was
standing above
him, looking down at the body of his friend. His firm, assured grip was comfort enough
for Flinx.
"I'm okay now, Flinx. It's just that- that " He fought for the words. He wanted them to be
right.
"Habib was about the only man on this world that could stand me, and be was one of the
few that I
could stomach. Three years." Abruptly, he rose and turned to face what was now a clump
of trees
long extinct on Earth but still flourishing in mind tapes.
"Come on," he instructed Flinx as he started toward the small cluster of elms, "I want to
see the
dirt."
After a last backward glance at the body, Flinx hurried to catch up with the Indian.
"What about
your friend?"
Pocomchi didn't look back at him. "He'll lie there until the place closes. First the
management

will run their drunk crew through to help out those able to walk. Then they'll come
through again
and sweep up the incapacitated.
"Habib would like that, when they find out he's more than drunk. First they'll panicprobably
think it's something toxic that's snuck into their siphon mixture. Then they'll locate the
real
source of death, electrocution, and go crazy trying to find the malfunction in their simie
machinery.
"When that doesn't turn up anything," he concluded bitterly, "a few credits will change
hands and
they'll give him a proper, if circumspect, burial. The Church will make sure of that."
They were almost around the grove of elms when the trees became a pair of enormous
mushrooms.
Flinx found himself slowing, putting out a restraining hand. "Don't you think maybe ...?"
Pocomehi shook his head curtly. "Balthazaar would never have come back if any kind of
threat
remained. Nor would your drag, I suspect."
Flinx murmured agreement. It was not the time to argue- and he settled for letting the
Indian
round the corner first. When nothing sent him reefing back in his death throes, Flinx
moved to
join him.
There were two bodies on the ground. One was clad in a yellow-green dress suit, the
other in a
casual coolall. Flinx had a bad moment, but it gave way to what he expected to feel
when Pocomchii
put a foot under one corpse and flipped it over. The dress suit fell aside, revealing a
familiar
skin-tight blackness beneath.
Barely restrained anger gave way to puzzlement as Pocomehii checked the heads. A
floppy green hat
fell aside to show a black-and-crimson skullcap beneath. "Qwarm," he muttered with a
frown. "We've
had no dealing with them. Habib and I hadn't discovered anything worth killing over,
nor have we
offended anyone that badly. Qwarm are expensive. Why would anyone want to have us
killed?"
Something clicked, and he jerked his bead up to see Flinx staring patiently back at him.
"You. Why
do the Qwarm want you dead?"

"Not me," the youth explained, pointing behind him.. "It's Ab they want. Though they
want me too
because I got too curious about why they wanted Ab."
"I'm not sure I'm following you, Flinks."
By way of an answer, Flinx pointed at the two awkwardly sprawled venom-scarred
bodies. "If two of
their members," he explained, "hadn't reacted without thinking, I might not be involved
with them
at all Habib might still be alive." He gestured loosely at the corpses. "So might they."
Pocomchi's reply was laced with contempt. "What do you care about a pair of soulless
murderers
like these?"
"They're humanx," Flinx responded quietly.
Pocomchi grunted eloquently. Then he raised one foot over the body he had overturned
and brought
it down with a hard, twisting motion. There was a cracking sound, as of shattering
plastic.
Kneeling, the Indian tore open the back of the black shirt. Several square plastic cases
were
linked together around the assassin's waist. A thin but heavily insulated cord ran from
one case
to a tiny, childish-looking plastic gun lying on tae floor.
"Supercooled dense battery pack," Pocomchi explained, examining the arrangement. He
touched a
small switch on the cord before picking up the toy gun by its insulated handgrip.
"Delivery
terminal," he declared. "Fires a small needle attached to a wire."
Flinx had heard of this weapon but had never seer one before-But then, there were many
ways of
killing, and the Qwarm undoubtedly knew most of them.
"The wire rolls onto a spool inside the handgrip," Pocomchi was telling him evenly. "It
serves two
functions: to deliver the lethal charge and to guide the needle to its target. A good man
with one
of these"-he hefted the little weapon easily-" isn't stopped by any kind of shielding. If
you're
good with the guide system, I understand, you can shoot around several corners. An
opponent
wouldn't get a shot at you, or even a clear look. Or a chance ... to fight back."
Flinx knew Habib had been electrocuted instantly. Then why…?
He found himself walking out from behind the mushrooms, to look across a newly born
brook. On the

far side, Ab had an artificial yellow-and-pink flower in one hand. A big blue eye was
bent close,
studying the petals.
"I don't understand," Flinx muttered, half to himself.
"I don't understand either," snapped Pocomchi. Then he became aware that Flinx was
staring, and
not referring to the killing that had just taken place.
"It's Ab..., my alien," Flinx told him eventually. "That needle hit him. I saw it hit him. I
heard
it. The charge went into him, and he doesn't show any sign of it. I've heard of natural
organic
grounders before, nervous systems which can shuttle enormous voltages harmlessly
through their own
bodies-but never in an animal, always in plants."
Pocomchi shrugged. "Maybe your Ab is a plant imitating an animal. Who knows? All
that should
matter to you is that he was immune to this particular kind of murder."
Fliax was looking around nervously now. "This means they know I'm on Alaspin. I've
got to move."
He started off to his right. "Are you coming, Pocomchi? I could use your help."
The Indian laughed sardonically. "You're a fine one to be asking for my help, young
dragon lord.
You're marked for dying. Why should I go anywhere with you? I can think of a dozen
simpler ways to
commit suicide."
Flinx stopped. He stared hard but unthreateningly back at Pocomchi. "I need to find the
man you
told me of, even though he's probably just another false lead. You're the only one on
Alaspin I
know who could find him for me. I don't expect you to come with me out of friendship.
I'll settle
for hiring you. Why should you go anywhere with me? Why not?" he finished, rather
heartlessly.
"You have other immediate prospects?"
"No," Pocomchi whispered blankly, "no other immediate prospects."
"But money isn't sufficient reason for you to come with me," Flinx went on relentlessly.
"So I'll
give you a better reason. I'd be very surprised if they don't try to kill Ab and me again."
Pocomchi rose and brushed at his pants to wipe off imaginary sand. "That's no reason."
"Think Pocomchi," Flinx urged him. "It means that you and Balthazaar will have a
chance to meet

some more Qwarm."
The Indian glanced up at him, uncomprehending for a moment. Then his expression
tensed with the
realization of what Flinx was telling him. "Yes. Yes, maybe we will have a chance to
meet some of
that kind again. I'd like that." He nodded slowly, forcefully. "I'll go with you and guide
you,
Flinx." Turning, he spat on the two limp bodies and started to murmur in a guttural, alien
tongue.
Flinx reached out, took Pocomchi's unresisting arm, and tugged him toward the exit. The
man
allowed himself to be led, but never ceased his muttering, which was directed at the two
corpses
they were leaving behind.
They crossed the small brook. In midstream it turned into a river of molten lava. Flinx
felt
gentle heat swirling around his legs, when they should have been burned to cinders. But
he took
only the barest notice of the effect. His mind was full of thoughts unconnected with the
sensory
gluttony provided by the simiespin machinery.
"Come on, Ab!" he shouted behind him. Blue eyes focused on him. With a good-natured
singsong
having something to do with vultures and fudge, the alien followed the two men across
the glowing
pahoehoe. By the time they reached the simiespin exit, Pocomchi had recovered enough
to pay for
his stay with his own credcard, though from time to time be would resume his muttering.
Finally they were on the street outside. Flinx started back toward his motel, Pocomchi
walking
alongside. The last remaining light of the Alaspinian evening was fading to an amber
luminescence.
Expecting a new kind of destruction to stab at them from behind every crate and barrel,
from every
rooftop and floater, Flinx found his gaze shifting constantly at imagined as well as real
movements.
A hissing cry sounded suddenly- a reptilian wail. Both men paused. Behind them, a
leathery winged
shape rose into the sky. It passed over their heads, soaring on brilliantly hued wings as it
lifted into the sunset. For a minute it paused there, above and slightly ahead of them,
circling
as it climbed. A dream-dragon out of a childhood fairy tale, its colorful diamond pattern

caught
the fading sun.
Abruptly it gave another short cry; it had reached a decision. Wings pushing air, it shot
off in
the direction of the setting sun. Light and distance combined to obscure Flinx's view of
it in a
very short while.
Both men resumed walking. "I wondered what Habib's minidrag would do," Flinx
murmured
thoughtfully. "I always wondered what a tame minidrag would do if its master died."
"Now you know-they turn wild again," Pocomchi elaborated. "Hazarez was a good
snake." He eyed the
sun, which had swallowed the last sight of the shrinking dark dot. "Balthazaar will miss
Hazarez,
too."
"We're liable to miss a lot more," Flinx assured his companion, "if we don't get off these
streets
before dark. The Qwarm prefer two sets of clothing: black cloth and night. I've got a few
little
things in my room I want to collect. Then we can rent a floater and get out of the city."
He
increased his pace, calling back over his shoulder, "Get a move on, Ab- I'm in a hurry!"
Four legs working effortlessly, the blue-green alien complied without any indication of
strain.
Darkness owned that corner of Alaspin by the time they reached the modest hotel Flinx
was staying
in. His room pass keyed the transparent doorway. Panels slid aside, admitting both men
and Ab to
the unpretentious lobby.
Flinx headed straight for the lift; his rooms were on the third floor. Pocomchi and Ab
trailed
close behind so close that when Flinx halted as if shot, the Indian nearly ran into him.
"Flinx?" Pocomchi inquired softly, alert now himself.
An,amorphous, oppressive something had fallen like a thick curse over Flinx's thoughts.
For a
moment he had difficulty classifying the source. Then he knew. The mental stench of
recent death
permeated the entire building.
He told himself it might merely be a lingering aftereffect of the simiespin experience, a
sort of
mental hangover. It could also be the result of his often-morbid imagination. But he did
not think

so. He was trying to rationalize away his fear of what must have taken place here.
Instead of taking the lift, he tried to lean in the direction where the brain-smell was
strongest.
It led him toward the opposite side of the lobby. Mirable's quarters and office were here.
When he placed his palm over the call contact, he heard a reassuring buzz within. But no
one came
to open the door or check on the caller. He repeated the action, with the same result.
He tried to tell himself she could be out of the building. That must be it. His bill was
paid for
two more days in advance, but it would only be polite to leave a message explaining his
sudden
departure.
Picking the light stylus from its holder in the wall, he inscribed his good-bye on the
electronic
message screen. Then he pushed the transcribe button. When she returned, her presence
would
activate the screen machinery. His light images would be turned into voice and played
aloud for
her.
Replacing the stylus, he turned to leave. Pocomchi caught him and nodded at the
doorway: "Listen."
Flinx obeyed. He heard something, then realized it was the message he had just left. 'that
meant
Mirable had to be in her apartment.
Why didn't she respond?
Experimentally, he placed a hand on the door and pushed. It slid back a few centimeters
into the
wall. That didn't make sense either. If she was within, surely she would have set the
lock. Even
on a relatively crime-free world-let alone a boisterous planet like Alaspin - such a device
was
standard equipment, built into the doorway of every commercial establishment.
The door continued to slide back under his pressure. He peered inward.
A voice called from behind him, "What's going on, Flinx?"
"Shut up."
Pocomchi was the sort of man who had broken limbs for less than that, but something in
Flinx's
manner induced him to comply without protest. He contented himself with watching the
hotel
entrance and the lift doors, while keeping an eye on Ab.
Shoving the door all the way into the wall, F1inx noticed a dark spot near its base. A thin

stain
indicated that a fluid-state switch had been shattered. That tied in with the broken lock
mechanism.
Slowly he walked into the room. Internal machinery detected his body heat and
brightened the
chamber in greeting. It was decorated with the sort of items one might expect to be
chosen by a
woman whose dreams were rapidly leaving her behind. The flowers, the little-girl
paraphernalia, a
few stuffed animals on a couch, all were nails desperately hammered into a door against
which time
pressed relentlessly.
Then he saw the leg sticking out from behind the couch. The trussed body of Mirable lay
naked
beyond. Most of the blood had already dried.
A vast coldness sucked at him as he kneeled over the rag-doll shape. One eye stared
blankly up
past him. He put a hand up and closed it gently. The other eye was missing. A look of
uncomprehending, innocent horror was frozen on her face. About that he could do
nothing.
Why she had shielded him, as she apparently had, he could not imagine. Whether out of
some strange
loyalty or the like, or out of pure stubbornness, she had not talked immediately. That
would
please ordinary criminal types, but not the Owarm. True sadism was not a luxury
professionals
could afford, and they had done a professional job on her. But he did not understand why
they had
killed her. It was almost as if her obstinacy bad irritated them.
Quickly he left the room and the body, surrounded by now- dead dreams. He almost
expected to see
Pocomchi and Ab lying dead across each other. But both were standing there, Ab
mumbling amiably to
himself and Pocomchi waiting silently. The Indian said nothing.
Flinx's gaze went immediately to the lift. He did not think anyone had seen them enter
the
building; if they bad, he would not be standing here now.
"They're upstairs, I think," he told the expectant miner.
"I know where we can rent a skimmer now, if you've got the money," Pocomchi told
him.
"I've got the money." Flinx took a step toward the lift. Pocomchi caught his arm, hard.
Both

minidrags stirred.
"You did me a right turn, back in the spin," the Indian said tightly. "Now it's my turn."
He
jerked his head toward the lift and the floors above. "This isn't the place or time. They've
chosen both. When the time comes, we'll be the ones who've done the planning."
Flinx stared at him for a long moment. Pocomchi stared back.
"It was the woman who owned this hotel," Flinx finally explainod flatly. Pocomchi let
go of his
arm, and they started slowly for the door. "She should have told them about me
immediately."
Both men checked the door and the street beyond. It was empty.
"Then she did tell them," Pocomchi said.
Flinx nodded. "Not right away."
"Why not?" the Indian wanted to know as they exited and turned right down the street.
Nothing fell
from above to explode between them; no one challenged them from behind a corner.
"I don't know," he admitted, unable to blot the pitiful image of her twisted form from his
mind.
"It was a ;stupid, foolish thing to do."
"She must have had some reason," pointed out Pocomchi.
"I think ..." Flinx's tongue hesitated over the words. "I think she liked me, a little. I didn't
think she liked me ... that much."
"One other thing." Dark eyes turned to Flinx in the dimness. "As soon as we started for
the
elevator, you. knew something was wrong. How?"
If nothing else, Flinx owed this little man some truth. "I can sense strong feelings
sometimes.
That's what hit me when we went in. An overwhelming sensation of recent death."
"Good," Pocomchii commented curtly. "Then you know how I feel." He increased its
speed, and
although Flinx was a fair runner and in good condition, he had trouble staying alongside
him.
"Let's travel," Pocomchi urged him, seemingly not straining at the wicked pace. "Let's
get that
skimmer."
As they ran they passed several late-evening strollers. Some examined the racing
triumvirate
curiously. A few stopped to gawk at the four-footed apparition loping along behind the
two men.
But as he panted and fought to keep up with Poeomchi, Flinx knew that no death lay
behind any o£

those staring eyes. That threat was behind, receded with every additional stride they took
into
the night. As the warm air enfolded him he wondered how much longer it would stay
behind him.
Chapter seven
In comparative silence, the skimmer drifted across the waving grassland of Alaspin.
Flinx had the feeling he was riding a bug over an unmade green bed. Neither the
topography nor the
vegetation was uniform in height or color. Here and there the familiar green gave way to
a
startlingly blue sward, and in other places to a bright yellow. Heavier growth, sections of
bush,
forest, and jungle, protruded like woody tentacles into the sea of reeds and grass.
He studied the individual seated next to him, in the pilot's chair. Pocomchi seemed to be
perfectly normal, very much in control of himself. Still, Flinx could sense the tension in
the
man, along with the anguish at his partner's death. Both had been pushed aside. To any
other
onlooker, the Indian's attention would have seemed to be wholly on the rippling savanna
beneath
them. Flinx knew otherwise.
From their position, roughly a meter above the waving stalks, he inclined his head to
squint up at
the warm buttery beacon of Alaspin's star. It was a cloudless day, too hot for human
comfort, too
cool for a thranx to really enjoy.
"I still don't know where we're going, Pocomchi."
"The last I know of your man," the Indian. replied conversationally, "he was working his
claim
near a city reputed to be of Revarn Dynasty. Place called Mimmisompo. We're three
days out of
Alaspinport- I'm hoping we'll reach the city some time this afternoon." Unexpectedly, he
smiled at
his companion. His voice changed from the uncaring monotone Flinx had gotten
accustomed to over
the past several days.
"Sorry if I've been less than good company, Flinx." His gaze turned back to the terrain
ahead.
"Habib was the type to mourn, not me. I'm kind of surprised a myself, and I certainly
didn't mean
to shunt my misery off on you."
"You haven't shunted a thing off on me," Flinx assured him firmly. "Intimate deaths have

a way of
shaking one's ideas about oneself." He wanted to say more, but something ahead caught
his
attention. Pip squirmed at the abrupt movement, while behind Ab rambled on, oblivious.
Just in front of the leisurely cruising skimmer the sea of high grass had abruptly given
way to a
winding, curved path roughly a hundred and fifty meters wide. Where the path wound,
the tall
growth bad been smoothly sliced off a couple of centimeters above the ground. Some
torn and ragged
clumps of uncut reeds pimpled the avenue, which looked to have been created by the
antics of a
berserk mowing machine.
While Flinx tried to imagine what kind of instrument had sliced away the grasses, which
grew to an
average height of several meters, Pocomchi was pointing to some gliding, bat-winged
avians armed
with formidable beaks and claws. "Vanisoars," he was saying, "scavengers prowling the
open place
for exposed grass dwellers." Even as he spoke, one of the creatures dove. It came up
with an
unlucky furry ball in its talons.
"But the path, what made it?"
"Toppers. Hexapodal ungulates," he explained, examining the path ahead. He touched a
contol, and
the skimmer rose to a height of six meters above ie topmost stalks. "This grass looks
fresh-cut. I
think we'll see them soon."
The nearly noiseless engine of the skimmer permitted them to slow to a hover above the
herd of
huge grazing animals. The largest member of the herd stood a good three meters at the
fore
shoulder. Each of the six legs was thick, pillarlike, to support the massive amored
bodies.
Hexagonal plates covered sides and back.
Massive neck muscles supported the lowered, elongated skulls. Most remarkable of all
was the
design of the snout. What appeared originally to have been 2rmored, the nostril cover
had
lengthened and broadened to form a horn in the shape of a double-bladed ax.
Flinx watched in fascination as the creatures methodically cut their way through the

green ocean.
Lour ered, ax-bladed heads swung in timed 180-degree arcs parallel to the earth,
scything the
grass, reeds, and small trees almost level with the ground. Then the lead creatures would
pause
briefly, using flexible lips to gather in the chopped vegetable matter immediately around
them.
Behind the leaders, immature males and females followed in the path of the adults. They
consumed
the cut-down fodder prepared for them by the leaders. A few small females guarded the
end of the
procession, shielding the infants from a rear assault. The younger toppers had no
difficulty
downing their share of food, which had been pounded to soft pulp by the massive
footpads of the
larger herd members in front of them.
It seemed an ideal system, though Flinx wondered at the need for a few adults to shield
the
calves. The smallest, he estimated, weighed several tons. He questioned Pocomchi about
it.
"Even a topper can be brought down, Flinx," he was told. "You don't know much of
Alaspin." He
nudged a switch, and the skimmer moved forward slightly. "See?"
Flinx looked down and saw that one of the lead bulls was standing on its rear four legs,
sniffng
the air in a northerly direction. The enormous nose horns looked quite capable of slicing
through
the metal body of the skimmer.
"Let's see what he's got," Pocomchi suggested. He headed the little craft sharply north.
Flinx had
to scramble to keep his seat.
In a few minutes they were above something winding its patient way through the reeds.
Flinx had a
brief sight of a long mouth lined with curved teeth, and glowing red eyes. It snapped at
the
skimmer and Flinx jerked reflexively.
Pocomchi grinned at his companion. "That's a lance'el." He swung the skimmer around
for another
look. They passed over a seemingly endless form laid out like a plated path in the grass.
Row upon
row of short legs, like those of a monstrous millipede, supported scaly segments. Flinx
couldn't

make an accurate estimate of its size.
"I knew it'd be well bidden," Pocomchi said easily. "That's why I kept our altitude. We'd
have
made that fellow a nice snack." A hiss-growl came from below; angry eyes stared up at
them.
Pocomclu chuckled. "We've interrupted his stalk, and he's not happy about it. It's
unusual for a
lance'el to strike at a skimmer, but it's happened." Another growl from below. "They can
jump
surprisingly well. I think we'd better leave this big one alone."
Flinx readily agreed.
Pocomchi had turned the skimmer and increased their speed. They were back on their
southwesterly
course once more. As the sun reached its zenith they were racing over bush and freelined streams
as much as grassland.
I think we're all right," Pocomchi murmured, checking a chart. "Yes." He shut off the
screen and
returned his attention forward. "Another ten minutes, I think."
The time passed. Sure enough, Flinx discovered the first reflections from stone and
metal shining
at them from between tall trees. "Mimmisompo," his companion assured him, with a nod
forward. He
slowed the skimmer, and in a minute they were winding carefully through soaring trees
hung heavy
with vines and creepers.
"We're on the edge of the Ingre," Pocomchi informed him, "one of the largest jungleforests in
this part of Alaspin. Mimmisompo is one of many temple cities the archeologists don't
consider too
important."
They were among buildings now, lengthy multistory structures flanking broad paved
avenues. Brush
and creepers grew everywhere. The fact that the city wasn't entirely overgrown was a
tribute to
the skill and precision of its engineers. An abandoned city in a similer section of Earth
would
have been all but eradicated by now.
It was a city of sparkling silence, an iridescent monument to extinction. Everywhere the
sun
struck, it was reflected by a million tiny mirrors. Mimmisompo had been constructed
primarily from

the dense gold-tinged granites Flinx had seen employed in Alaspinport. The local stone
contained a
much higher proportion of mica than the average granite. Walls built of such material
gave the
impression of having been sprinkled with broken glass.
The architecture was massive and blocky, with flying arches of metal bracing the
carefully raised
stonework. Copper, brass, and more sophisticated metalwork were employed for
decorative purposes.
It seemed as if every other wall was fronted with some intricate scrollwork or bas-relief.
Adamantine yellow-green tiles roofed many smaller structures.
As they traveled farther into the city, Flinx began to get some idea of its size. Even that,
he
knew, was an inaccurate estimate, considering how many buildings were probably
hidden by the
jungle.
"Maybe it's not an important city," he mused, "but it seems big enough to attract at least
a few
curious diggers."
"Mimmisompo's been grubbed, Flinx," his companion told him. "No one ever found a
thing. At least,
nothing I ever heard of.”
"What about all those fancy engravings and decorations on the buildings?"
"Simple relics and artifacts are throwaway items on Alaspin," Pocomchi informed him.
"This is a
relic-rich world. Now if some of those worked plates"-he gestured out the transparent
skimmer dome
at the walls sliding past them-" were done in iridium, or even good old-fashioned
industrial gold,
you wouldn't be looking at them now."
"But surely," Flinx persisted, "a metropolis of this size and state of preservation ought to
be
worthy of someone's interest. I'd expect to see at least one small survey party."
Pocomchi adjusted their course to avoid a towering golden obelisk. A broad grin split his
darkbrown
face. "I've told you, you don't know Alaspin. There're much more important diggings to
the
north, along the coast. Compared to some of the major temple-capitals, like Kommonsha
and
Danville, Mimmisompo's a hick town."
"Stomped flat, sit on that, push it down and make it fat."

"What's he drooling about now?" Pocomchi asked, with a nod back to where Ab
squatted on all four
legs.
Flinx looked back over the seat idly. Ab had been so quiet for the majority of the journey
that he
had almost forgotten the alien's presence. But instead of playing dumbly with all sixteen
fingers,
All appeared to be staring out the dome at something receding behind the skimmer.
"What is it, Ab?" he asked gently. "Did you see something?"
As always, the alien's mind told him nothing. It was as empty as a dozen-diameter orbit.
Two blue
eyes swiveled round to stare questioningly at him. Two bands gestured animatedly,
while the other
two executed incomprehensible idiot patterns in the air.
"Behind the mine the ground has stomped subutaneate residue lingers in the reschedule.
Found
itself often comatose. If you would achieve anesthesia, take two fresh eggs, beat well,
and by and
by up in the sky leptones like lemon cream will..."
"Well?" Pocomchi asked.
Flinx thought, scratching the scaly snake head, which was curled now in the hollow of
his neck.
"It's hard to tell with Ab, but I think he did see something back there. There's nothing
wrong
with his sensory input."
Even as he slowed the skimmer and brought it "c hover, Pocomchi considered. He
cocked a querulous
eye at Flinx. "You willing to waste some time to check out an idiot's information?"
"Why not," the youth responded, "since we're probably on an idiot's errand?"
"You're paying," Pocomchi replied noncommittally. The skimmer whined slightly as its
driver turned
it around. Slowly they retraced their path.
"Whatever it is has to be on the starboard side now," Fiinx declared, carefully studying
the
landscape "That's the side Ab was looking out."
Pocomchi turned his attention to the ground on his right. In order to see clearly past him,
Flinx
had to stand. His head almost bumped the top of the transparent canopy. Jungleencrusted ruins
passed by on monolithic parade.
Several meters on, both men saw it simultaneously.
"Over there," Flinx said, "under the blue overhang."

Pocomchi angled closer to the walls, then cut the power. With the soft sigh of circuits
going to
sleep, fm little vessel settled birdlike to the ground. A few shards of rock and shattered
masonry
crunched beneath the skimmer's weight.
A touch on another control caused the canopy to fold itself up and slide neatly into the
skimmer's
roof behind them. In place of the steady hum of the engine, Flinx now heard jungle and
forest
voices emerging in the silence. They were cautious at first, uncertain. But soon various
unseen
creatures were whistling, howling, cooing, bellowing, hissing, and snuffling with
increasing
confidence beneath the blue sky.
The noises fascinates Ab (didn't everything?)."There is a large depression in the
sermoid," he
began. Both men tuned out the alien versifying.
Their attention instead was focused on the massive azure overhang to their left. It
resembled blue
ferrocrete, although that was impossible- ferroerete was a modern building material. It
stuck
outward, a thrusting blue blade shading a space fifteen meters square. In the sheltered
region
beneath the overhang was a familiar, self-explanatory outline.
Pocomchi turned his gaze to the depression in the earth. Flinx, his own thoughts still on
the blue
monolith, followed the Indian out of the skimmer.
"I haven't seen that color before," he told Pocomchi.
"Hmmm?" murmured the Indian, intent on the outline pressed into the ground. "Oh, that.
The ancient
Alaspinians colored a lot of their formed stone. That overhang isn't granite, it's a
cementlike
material they also used. Probably a lot of copper sulfate in this one, to turn it that dark a
hue." He traced the outline in the ground with his feet, walking around it.
"A pretty good-sized skimmer made this mark," he announced. "Light cargo on board."
Turning, he
struggled to see through stone and jungle, wails and trees. "Somebody's been here
recently, all
right." Eyes intently focused on the ground, he walked away from the outline until he
was standing
beneath the blue overhang.

"A good place for a first camp. Here's where they unloaded their supplies," he noted,
examining
the dirt. He walked out from under the sheltering stone and looked up across dense brush
which
formed a green wave against the side of the structure. It sounded like corduroy against
his
jumpsuit.
"They've gone off through here, Flinx." Turning, he eyed his anxious young companion.
"Yes, it
might be your massive mystery man with the gold earring. Whoever it was, they've spent
some
money." He pointed to where the brush had been smashed down repeatedly to form a fair
pathway that
was only now beginning to recover from the tread of many feet. "They made a lot of
trips to
transfer their stuff deeper into the city. I thought everyone had given up on this location
years
ago."
He started back toward the skimmer. Flinx was gazing with interest at the azure
overhang,
wondering at its original purpose. A temple at least a hundred meters high towered
behind it. The
massive blue form had fallen outward, leaving a gaping hole in the temple wall. Beyond
he could
barely make out a darkened interior lined with shattered masonry, dangling strips of
punched
metal, shade-loving plants, and the emptiness of abandonment.
"What do we do now?"
Pocomchi grinned at him and shook his head. "You've hardly heard a word I've said,
have you?
There's the remnants of a service trail back here, clear enough for us to follow. Since
they felt
the need to walk it from this point, I think it's safe to assume we can't get the skimmer
through.
Hopefully your quarry will be at the other end of the trail. Anyway, I'd like to meet
anyone
foolish enough to think there's anything worth taking out of Mimmisompo. I hope
they've got easy
trigger fingers and an inviting nature."
"Let's get going, then," ventured Flinx.
"Easy, dragon lord." He indicated the sun. "Why not wait till we've a full day to hike
with? No

one's running anyplace, least of all the people we're hunting. I think they're pretty deep
into
the brush." A hand waved in the direction of jumbled stone and bushes where the trail
lay. "There
are creatures crawling around in there that I'd rather meet in daytime, if I have to meet
them at
all. I'll set up a perimeter, and we'll sleep by the skimmer tonight."
A radiant fence was quickly erected in a half circle, with the skimmer inside. Another
compartment
of the compact craft produced inflatable mattresses and sleeping material. It would have
been
safer to sleep in the skimmer, but the small cockpit was cramped enough with two men.
Two men
trying to sleep inside, together with Ab and a pair of minidrags, would have been
impossible.
Their temporary habitat was topped by an inflatable dome, which would serve as
weather shield in
the event of wind or storm. The semipermeable membrane of the dome would permit
fresh air to enter
and allow waste gases to pass out, but would shunt aside anything as thick as a raindrop.
Outside, the radiant fence would keep curious nightstalkers at bay, while Balthazaar and
Pip could
be counted on to serve as backup alarms in the event that anything really dangerous
showed up. As
for arboreal predators, the great majority of them were daylight hunters, according to
Pocomchi.
Flinx leaned back on the soft mattress and stared out the dome toward the trail site. He
was
anxious to be after whoever had made it, impatient to have this search resolved once and
for all.
But this was Pocomchi's planet. It would be wise to take his advice.
Besides, he thought with an expansive yawn, he was tired. His head went back. Through
the warm
tropical night and the thin material of the dome he could count the stars in strange
constellations. Off to the east hung a pair of round, gibbous moons, so unlike the craggy
outline
of Moth's own rarely glimpsed satellite, Flame.
The single moon of distant Ulru-Ujurr was larger than these two combined, he thought.
Memories of
his pupils, the innocent ursinoid race which lived on that world, pulled strongly at him.
He felt
guilty. His place was back there, advising them, instead of gallivanting around the

Commonwealth
in search of impossible-to learn origins.
A fetid breeze drifted through the single window, set above and to the side of his bed.
Soft
crackling noises, like foil crumpling, drifted in to him. In a little while, the alien lullaby
had
helped him fall sound asleep.
First sunlight woke Flinx. Rolling over, he stretched once and was instantly awake.
Pocomchi lay
on the mattress next to him, snoring stentorianly for so small a man. He stretched out a
hand to
wake the Indian, and frowned as be did so. Something was missing, something so
familiar that for a
long moment he couldn't figure out what was gone.
He woke Pocomchi, sat up, and thought. The motion of rising brought the absence home
to him. All
at once, Flinx was moving rapidly, searching behind the mattress by the skimmer body,
on the
opposite side of Pocomchi's bed. Nothing.
Zipping open the doorway, he plunged frantically outside and almost ran toward the
jungle before
remembering the radiant fence. Standing by the inside edge of the softly glowing barrier,
he put
cupped hands to his lips and shouted, "Pip! Where are you, Pip!"
His eyes swept the trees and temple tops, but the searching revealed only silent stone
and mocking
greenery. Though both must have seen what had become of his pet, all remained frozen
with the
silence of the inanimate.
Turning, he ran back into the dome and climbed into the skimmer. Rubbing the sleep
from his eyes
as he deflated the mattresses, Pocomchi eyed him but said nothing. Better to let the lad
find out
these things for himself.
Flinx crawled behind the two seats, back into the storage area where Ab had ridden.
"Come on out,
Pip. The game's not funny any more. Come out, Pip!"
When he finally gave up and rose, vacant-eyed, from the cockpit, he saw Pocomehi
packing away the
inflatable dome and taking down the fence. The Indian said nothing, but watched as
Flinx moved to

the edge of the brush and resumed calling. By the time the youth had shouted himself
hoarse,
Pocomchi had stowed all their supplies.
One thing remained for Flinx to try. Standing by the shadow of the azure overhang, he
closed his
eyes and thought furiously. From the skies, he imagined to himself, from the skies, a
terrible
danger! I need you, Pip, it's threatening me. Where are you, companion of childhood?
Your friend
is in danger! Can't you sense it? It's coming closer, and there's nothing I can do about it!
He kept up his performance for long minutes, until sweat began to bead on his forehead
and his
clenched fingers turned pale. Something touched him on the shoulder, and be jumped.
Pocomchi's
sympathetic eyes were staring into his.
"You're wearing yourself out for no reason, Flinx," his guide told him. "Calling won't
help." A
hand gestured toward the sweep of dense vegetation. "When something calls the
minidrag, it goes.
This is their world, you know. Or hadn't you noticed that Balthazaar is gone too?"
Flinx had been so thoroughly absorbed by Pip's disappearance that he hadn't. Sure
enough, the old
minidrag always curled about Pocomchi's neck and shoulder was nowhere to be seen.
"Since I found him at the age of five," he tried to explain to the little man, "Pip and I
have
never spent a single day completely apart from each other." His gaze roved over the
concealing
jungle. "I just can't believe he'd simply fly off and abandon me. I can't believe it,
Pocomchi!"
The Indian shrugged and spoke softly. "No minidrag is ever completely tamed. You've
never been on
Pip's home world before, either. Don't look so brokenhearted. I've had Balthazaar fly off
and
leave me for several days at a time. He always comes back.
"In case you've forgotten, we have other things to do here. There's that trail to follow,
and your
ringwearer to find. We won't be skimming out of Mimmisompo for a while yet. When
they want to,
both Pip and Balthazaar will find our thoughts."
Flinx relaxed a little.
"They're wild things, Flinx," Pocomchi reminded him, "and this is a wild place. You
can't expect

the two not to be attracted by that. Now let's make up a couple of packs and start the
hard part
of this trip."
Moving mechanically, Flinx helped his guide prepare a set of light but well-stocked
backpacks.
When Pocomchi was helping him on with his own, showing him how the strappings
worked, a sudden
thought occurred to him.
"What," he asked worriedly, "if we find what we've come for, and then when it's time for
us to
leave for Alaspinport Pip hasn't come back?"
Pocomchi stared straight at him, his eyebrows arching slightly. "There's no use in
speculating on
thai, Flinx. Balthazaar means as much or more to me as your Pip does to you. We've
been through a
lot together. But a minidrag's not a dog. It won't slaver and whimper at your feet. You
ought to
know that. Minidrags are independent and free-willed. They remain with you and me
because they
want to, not because they're in need of us. The decision to return is up to them." He
smiled
slightly. "All we can do if we come back and they're not here is wait a while for them.
Then if
they don't show ..." He hesitated. "Well, it's their world." He turned and started off
toward the
trail.
Flinx took a last look at the sky above. No familiar winged shape came diving out of it
toward his
shoulder. Setting his jaw and mind, he hefted the backpack to a more comfortable
position and
strode off after Pocomchi. Soon the skimmer was lost to sight, consumed by stone and
intervening
vegetation.
Every so often he would turn to make certain that Ab was still trailing behind them.
Then he would
turn forward again. His view consisted of tightly intertwined bushes and vines and trees,
parted
regularly by the bobbing back of Pocomchi's head. The Indian's black hair swayed as he
traced the
path through the jungle encrusted city. Sometimes the growth had recovered and grown
back over the

path, but under Pocomchi's skilled guidance they always reemerged onto a clear trail.
Although he knew better, he could think only of his missing pet. Emotions he thought he
had long
since outgrown swelled inside him. They were ready to overwhelm him when a cold
hand touched the
right side of his face with surpassing gentleness.
Angrily he glanced back, intending to take out his feelings on the owner of that chill
palm. But
how could anyone get mad at that face, with its mournful, innocent eyes and its
proboscidean mouth
where its hair ought to be, tottering after him with the stride of a quadrupedal duck?
"Worry, worry, sorry burry," ventured Ab hopefully, "key to quark, key to curry. Black
pepper
ground find in me mind" - this delivered with such solemnity that Flinx half felt it might
actually mean something. While he was pondering the cryptic verse, he tripped over a
root and went
sprawling Pocomchi heard him fall and turned. The Indian shook his head, grinned, and
resumed
walking.
Flinx climbed to his feet and hitched the pack higher on his shoulders. "You're right, All,
there's no point in tearing myself up over it. There's nothing I can do about it." His gaze
turned
heavenward, and he searched the powdery rims of scattered cumulus clouds. "If Pip
comes back, he
comes back. If not"- his voice dropped to a resigned murmur- "life goes on. A little
lonelier,
maybe, but it goes on. I'll still have things to do and people to go back to."
"Call the key, call the key," Ab agreed in singsong behind him. "To see it takes two to
tango with
an animated mango." He stared expectantly at Flinx.
"Farcical catharsis." The youth chuckled, smiling now at his ward's comical twaddle.
What a pity,
he mused, that the poetically inclined alien didn't have enough sense to make real use of
his
talent. But he had become used to tuning out Ab's ramblings, so he concentrated on the
path ahead
and ignored the alien's continued verbalizing.
"Key the key that's me," Ab sang lucidly, "I'll be whatever you want to see. Harkatrix,
matrix,
how do you run? Slew of currents and a spiced hadron."
They walked all that day and afternoon. When Pocomchi found a place suitable for night
camp, the

path still wound off into the jungle ahead. With the experience of an old trailwalker, and
maybe a
little tangle, the Indian somehow managed to concoct a meal from concentrates which
was both
flavorful and filling.
The fullness in his belly should have put Flinx rapidly to sleep. Instead, he found
himself lying
awake, listening to Pocomchi's snores and staring at the sky. The trouble was that the
weight in
his stomach wasn't matched by a more familiar weight curled next to his shoulder.
Eventually he
had to take a dose of cerebroneural depressant in order to fall into an uncomfortable
sleep.
Morning came with anxious hope that quickly faded The minidrags had not returned.
Silently they
broke camp and marched on.
Poeomchi tried to cheer his companion by pointing out interesting aspects of the flora
and fauna
they passed. Ordinarily Flinx would have listened raptly. Now he simply nodded or
grunted an
occasional comment. Even Pocomchi's description of temple engineering failed to rouse
him from his
mental lethargy.
They paused for lunch in the center of a series of concentric stone circles. Shade was
provided by
a fivemeter-high metal pillar in the center of the circles. It was supported by the familiar
metal
buttresses on four sides. The pillar itself, fluted and encrusted with petrified growths and
slime, had corroded badly in places.
"It's a fountain," Pocomchi decided while eating lunch. He gestured at the silent tower,
then at
the gradually descending stone circles surrounding them. "I expect we're sitting in the
middle of
a series of sacred pools that were once used for religious and other ceremonies by the
populace of
this city. If subterranean Mimmisompo stays true to the Alaspinian pattern, then the
water for
this was piped underground to here, probably through metal pipes by gravity." One
finger traced
the spray of ghost water. "It shot out of the fountain top and then fell down these fluted
sides
before spreading out and overflowing from one pool to the next." Leaning forward, he

took a bite
out of a concentrate bar.
"Judging from the slight incline of the pools, I'd guess the drain is right about there." He
pointed. "See the formal, carved bench? That's where a priest could sit and bless the
waters
flowing out of the cistern. On the right of the bench there should be a-" Abruptly, he
quieted and
strained forward.
Flinx felt a mental crackle from his companion and stared in the same direction. "I don't
see
anything. What's the matter?"
Pocomchi rose and gestured. "There, what's that?" Still Flinx could see nothing.
The Indian walked cautiously toward the cistern out, flow, hopping down from one level
to the
next. When he reached the region of the stone bench, he leaned over the last restraining
wall and
called back to Flinx. There was a peculiar tightness in his voice.
"Over here" he said disbelievingly, is a dead man."
Chapter Eight
The remains of his concentrate bar dangled forgotten from Flinx's hand as he peered
over the
cistern wall. Sprawled next to one another on the right side of the sacred bench were
three
bodies. Their skullcaps were missing, and their black suits were torn and ragged in
places. Two
men and a woman, all very dead.
Each body was feathered with twenty-centimeter long shafts of some highly polished
yellow-brown
wood. Five tiny fins tipped the back end of each shaft. Flinx guessed that each body
sprouted at
least sixty or seventy of the small arrows. Or they might have been large darts,
depending on the
size of their users.
"So, they followed us here," he muttered.
Pocomchi was searching the surrounding jungle with practiced eyes. "They did more
than follow,
Flinx- they preceded us. They must have watched us set down, then circled somehow to
get ahead of
us on the trail." His gaze dropped to the corpse immediately next to him. Like the other
two, it
was missing both eyes.

"They knew we'd come through here, so they set up a nice, efficient little ambush."
Water trickled
from the lowest cistern into the outflow drain, an anemic remnant of the once-substantial
volume
which had tumbled through this place ages ago. Pocomchi kicked at it and watched it
darken his
boot.
"This isn't the first time this has happened," Flip: told him. His eyes weren't as
experienced as
Pocomchi's, but he could search the witnessing jungle with his mind. "The Qwarm were
ready to
ambush Ab and myself back on Moth. Something killed them there, too."
Pocomchi threw him a surprised look. "Really? I don't know who was responsible for
saving you,
then, unless there are Otoids on Moth I haven't heard about." Bending over, he wrapped
a hand
around one of the several hundred shafts, pulled it free, and held it out to Flinx.
The point was fashioned of crudely reworked metal, with five spikes sticking out of it.
"This is
an Otoid arrow," Pocomchi explained, turning it over in his hand. "They shoot them out
of a
slkambi, a sort of blowgun affair. Only they use an elastic made from native tree sap
instead of
their own weak breath to propel these. They're not too accurate, but" -he gestured
meaningfully at
the bodies- "what they lack in marksmanship they make up for with firepower."
"You're right," Flinx informed him, "there aren't any Otoids on Moth. What are they?"
"You'd think I'd have a simple answer for that one, wouldn't you?" Pocomchi replied,
scanning the
jungle wall once again. "Well, I don't. Nobody does, for sure. They're vaguely
humanoid, run to
about half your size. Furry all over except for their tails, which are bare. They're not
very
bright, but in the absence of the temple builders they've become the dominant native
race. Manual
dexterity helps them. Each of two hands has ten fingers, with three joints to each forger.
They
can climb pretty well, but the tail's not prehensile, so they do most of their traveling on
the
ground."
"An interaction, disreaction, can't you see it's time to be, to activate the ancient key," Ab
murmured. "Peter Piper picked a peck of pickled pheromones."

The alien was waddling down the pool levels at high speed. Both men would have
laughed at Ab's
absurd. locomotion if it weren't for the three dead humans lying in front of them.
"Ab," Flinx began, intending to bawl the alien out for disturbing them. Then he heard
the rising
hoots, the sort of war cry a human baby with an unusually deep voice might make.
Ab was pointing and curiously feeling several objects sticking out of his back. The
points had
barely penetrated the outer epidermal layer. Plucking one out, he handed it to Flinx and
smiled
broadly. "Poor boy toy toy," he commented. "Tickle fickle tickle."
"Come this way, Ab," Pocomchi ordered urgently. "No boy toy. You too, Flinx," he
snapped,
wrenching at the youth's pack. Flinx did not move. He was staring at Ab, who appeared
to have
suffered no ill effects from the dozen or so arrows sticking out of him.
All hint of casualness was missing from Pocomchi's demeanor now. "Let's move it. If
they get
between us and the skimmer, we're finished. Come on, or I'll leave you and your idiot to
greet
them on your own."
Flinx found himself running back down the trail they had laboriously traced this far. Ab
kept pace
easily. Cries sounded ahead of them, and Pocomchi came to e gasping halt.
No good. They've got us cut off." He looked around wildly. "We've got to get around
them somehow."
Something made a thauking sound as it landed is the dirt barely a quarter meter from
Flinx's feet.
An Otoid arrow.
Flinx noted that Ab had acquired another dozen of the feathered shafts. If they bothered
the
alien, he gave no sign of it. Flinx decided that either the secondary skin was incredibly
dense or
else some internal mechanism was sealing off each wound as it occurred. Or perhaps
both.
Time later to study the alien's remarkable physiology. Time if they managed to escape.
Pocomchi was on his knees, using his beamer on the nearby trees. He shouted angrily at
Flinx,
"What are you waiting for, Flinx, an engraved invitation? Or do you want your eyes to
end up in an
Otoid stewpot?"

Flinx joined Pocomehi in retreating back to a cluster of broken tree trunks and tumbled
masonry.
Dimly perceived shapes moved from time to time in the trees around them. Whenever he
detected such
movement, he fired.
Pip did not magically appear to save him.
Arrows glanced with metallic pings off the stone around him, made dull thumping
sounds as they
stuck in the thick logs. Every so often Flinx risked taking an arrow to reach out and pull
Ab down
next to him. While the murmuring alien did not seem to be suffering at all from the
missiles,
Flinx had no idea when his body might suddenly lose its immunity to them. Ab rolled
over, pulling
the shafts curiously from his skin and rhyming nonstop, utterly indifferent to the battle
surrounding him.
"How many do you think there are?" Flinx asked, ducking as a brass-tipped bolt sparked
off the
rock near his head.
Pocomchi replied in between rising and firing, and ducking back under cover. "No idea.
Nobody
knows bow numerous the Otoid are. Xenoanthropologists aren't even sure how they
breed. And, as you
might suspect, they aren't kindly toward visitors."
Abruptly he snapped off a lethal burst from his beamer. Flips peered between rock and
log, had a
glimpse of a wildly gesticulating form falling through filtered sunlight and branches. He
heard a
distant crash as the native hit the ground.
While continuing to rain an impressive number of missiles on the three interlopers, the
Otoids
kept up a steady chatter among themselves. Flinx couldn't tell whether their conversation
consisted of various forms of encouragement or of insults for their enemy.
Not that it mattered. It seemed that hundreds of green eyes, gleaming like peridots
among the
trees, confronted them. Like most men, he wasn't going to be able to chose his place and
manner of
dying.
He wondered what exactly the aborigines did first with dead men's eyes. As he was
wondering, there
was a hissing sound in the air. A blue energy beam considerably thicker than the ones
put out by

their small hand beamers passed over Flinx's head. It struck with devastating force
among the
densest concentration of natives. A great yelping and screeching reached them as a
monster tree, a
cross between an evergreen and coconut palm, came smashing down among toe
concealed Otoid. Flinx
saw where the blue bolt sliced cleanly through the trunk.
A second burst of cerulean destruction flashed above them, tearing through leaves,
vegetation, and
not a few furious natives. To give them credit, the awesome display' of modern
weaponry didn't
frighten the Otoid away, although the hail of yellow-brown arrows slackened noticeably.
Flinx turned on his side and shouted in the direction from which the shots had
originated, "Who is
it, who's there?"
Both he and Pocomchi stared anxiously down the fragment of trail that remained in
view. A figure
stepped out of the bushes, cradling an energy rifle nearly as tall as Flinx. It was a heavy
military model, Flinx noted, and was probably meant to be mount: on a tripod.
Somehow its wielder
managed not only to lift the weapon, but to operate it. Makeshift stings pad most of the
weight on
the man's shoulders.
And the man was big as two men. He had a voice to match. "This way!" the figure
bellowed at them,
in voice that sounded more amused than worried. Around came the muzzle of the
massive rifle, and
another thick bolt carbonized trees and natives alike. "Hurry it up, there, you two! They
regroup
fast."
Pocomchi was up and running then. Flinx was right behind, darting around rocks and
bushes, jumping
over fallen logs. Occasionally each man would turn to snap off a shot at the arrowflingers in the
trees. Ab kept pace easily, though Flinx had to make sure sow flower or bug didn't
distract the
simple-minded creature.
While they ran, the bulky sure ahead of them stood in place atop the slight rise, firing
down into
the clusters of howling, frustrated Otoid. They had almost reached him. Flinx found
himself
scrambling up a crumbling masonry wall the last couple of meters. Pocomchi was just

ahead and to
Flinx's right. The wall seemed a million miles high.
At its top stood their rescuer. Up close he was even more massive than he had looked
from a
distance. His white hair curled and fluttered in the warm breeze, and his face was half
court
jester, half mad prophet. Obsidian eyes, brows like antipersonnel wire, a sharply pointed
chinall
were dwarfed by a nose any predatory bird would have been proud of. It rose like a spire
from
the sea of swirling features which eddied around it.
His trousers, bright mold-green, ran into boots that sealed themselves to the pants legs.
Above
the waist he wore only the rifle straps and a massive power pack for the weapon, which
crossed a
chest full of white hair like steel wool and resembled an ancient bandoleer. His arms
were covered
with a similar grizzled fur. Though those limbs were bigger around than Flinx's thighs,
the man
moved with startling agility, like a graceful gorilla.
There was a curse, and Flinx turned to his guide. A small, feathered shaft protruded from
the back
of Pocomchi's thigh. The Indian slid downward a little. His fingers dug at the rough
rock; he
trailed blood on the white stone as he fell.
Reaching out and across, Flinx caught the back of Pocomechi's shirt just in time to halt
his fall.
"Hurry up, dammit!" the rifle-wielder shouted down at them. "They're gettin' over being
scared.
Now they're mad, and there's more of them coming every minute."
"My friend's hurt!" Flinx called up to him.
"I can make it," Pocomchi said through clenched teeth. He and Flinx exchanged glances;
then both
were again moving up the uneven stone facing.
Somehow cradling the huge rifle in one arm, the giant above them reached down one
treelike forearm
and got a hand on Pocomchi's shirt top. The material held as Pocomchi all but flew the
last meter
to the too of the wall. Flinx scrambled up alongside them.
Pocomchi took one step forward, his face tightening in pain, before he stopped to yank
the shaft

from is leg.
"We've got to get back to the temple," the big man rumbled, letting loose another
recoilless blast
from the rifle. He looked squarely at Flinx. "I can't cover us with this and carry him too."
For an answer, Flinx slipped his right arm between Pocomchi's legs and hooked it
around the man's
right thigh. Then he took the Indian's right arm in his left hand, bent, heaved, and swung
the
swarthy miner onto his shoulders.
"I can manage him," Flinx assured the bigger man. Both of them ignored Pocomehi's
protests. "Just
show me the way."
Teeth formed a line of enameled foam beneath the incredible nose. "It's a right good
fight you two
made of it till I got to you, young feller-me-lad. Maybe we'll all make it back
unskewered."
With the man's powerful rifle keeping the pursuing Otoid at a respectful distance, they
started
down into seemingly impenetrable jungle. Flinx hardly felt the weight on his back.
Just when it appeared that they would run up against an impassible rampart of bushes
and vines,
the big man would gesture left or right and Flinx would find himself running down a gap
only an
experienced jungle hand would have noticed. Ab skipped along behind them, apparently
enjoying all
the excitement.
The sounds of Otoid crashing and racing through the trees alongside them grew louder,
more
perceptible. While the terrible fire from the heavy military gun cut down any aborigines
who
ventured too near, it still seemed to Flinx that they were tightening a ring around the
fugitives.
Flinx's concern wasn't alleviated by the expression on the big man's face. Sweat was
pouring down
him now, and he was breathing in long, strained gasps, despite his strength. The tripod
blaster
was beginning to sap his reserves. It was not meant to be used like a handgun, much less
to be
carried and fired while on the run.
"I don't know, young feller-me-lad," he said blinking the sweat from his eyes and talking
as they
ran. "They may cut us off yet."

They ran on, until Flinx's heart felt like a hammer on his chest and his lungs shrieked in
protest. The formerly light Pocomchi now seemed to be made of solid lead.
Then, just when he thought he couldn't move another step, he heard a shout from his
huge
companion. Wiping aside perspiration and a few soaked strands of hair, Flinx thought he
could see
a dark rectangle looming ahead of them. The ancient portal rose a good four meters high
and two
across. It formed an opening into a creeper-wrapped temple built of sparkling green
stone. The
temple appeared isolated from any other structures. Its color enabled it to blend
inconspicuously
into the surrounding forest.
The building was low, compared to many of the imposing edifices Flinx had passed in
Mimmisompo
proper-not more than two stories aboveground, flat and broken on top from the action of
persistent, prying roots.
Apprehensively he studied their apparent destination. "In there? But it's small, and
there's
nowhere to retreat to. Can't the Otoid ...?"
"You can always try to make it back to your skimmer, lad," his rescuer suggested
pleasantly.
Arrows continued to fall around them as they staggered, exhausted, toward the
catacomblike
entrance. One bolt whizzed past so close that it slit Flinx's shirt under his left arm.
Glancing
down and over, he saw that the point had nicked the skin and he was bleeding slightly.
Just ahead, several figures ducked down into tall grass. Emerald eyes glinted
malevolently at
them.
"It's no good," Flinx wheezed, defeated. "They're ahead of us now."
"'How many?" the big man asked, crouching alongside Flinx and swinging the rifle
around.
"I don't know, I don't know," Flinx panted, wondering if be would be able to stand again
with
Pocomchi's weight on his back. Next to him, Ab imitated his posture and offered a
hopeful verse.
Flinx was not comforted.
"Little devils know how to fight, how to hide themselves. If they ever get organized,
they'll run
the prospectors and the scientists off Alaspin." Flinx, in spite of his near-total

exhaustion,
found time to be curious. But the big man apparently felt he had said nothing
remarkable.
"Got to chance it, lad," the man decided.
"Chance it, fance it, dance and prance it," agreed Ab excitedly.
"We can't stay here and we can't go back." He started to rise. "I'll go first. That'll give
you a
little time ... and some shieldin', if you can stay back of me. If we can just--"
Popping sounds came from ahead of them. Several fist-sized globes of red fire emerged
from above
the dark doorway in the temple.
Glancing higher, Flinx thought he could see a figure moving about in a long, narrow gap
in the
green stone. From that position it fired a weapon which produced the energy globes.
Where each ball struck there was a small explosion. Flames leaped briefly skyward, only
to
disappear and leave a map-sized pillar of light-brown smoke in their wake. Those Otoid
blocking
the approach to the temple broke and Pied-those who were still able to. Red spheres
pursued them.
"That'd be Isili," Flinx's blocky savior declared. "I thought for sure she'd be down in the
diggin's. Lucky for us she heard the commotion." He rose to his full height. "She'll cover
us.
Come on." He started for the towering entrance, running with lumbering, pounding
strides that
reminded Flinx of the herd of toppers he had flown over only a couple of days ago.
Every muscle in his body strained, but he still found himself falling farther and farther
behind.
Any second now, he expected the sharp, exquisite pain of a metal point to penetrate his
legs or
lower back. But every time an Otoid raised itself for a clear shot at the fugitives, or
moved to
pursue, a cottony-crimson globe of energy would touch it, and both would vanish in an
impatient
gout of flame.
Then, as he was tottering down carved stone steps, he realized that he was descending
into the
temple. The steps gave way to a level rock floor. Something thundered behind him. He
experienced a
moment of panic, but it was only a makeshift wooden door slamming shut across the
temple entrance.
His eyes rapidly became accustomed to the slightly dimmer illumination in the modest

chamber.
Small, independently powered lamps were hung from the ceiling, mounted on rock
outcroppings.
They reached the end of the entrance tunnel and emerged into a brightly lit cleared
room. Here the
surrounding walls were embellished with row upon row of magnificent carvings,
mosaics of metal and
stone alternating with deeply etched friezes depicting scenes from ancient Alasninian
social and
religious life.
Flinx had little time to appreciate the sculpture as he sank, exhausted, to the floor, barely
managing to set Pocomchi down gently. Ab strolled over to a pile of excavated stone and
commenced
examining some of the pieces.
Taking the stone steps three at a time, the man who had led him to at least temporary
safety
mounted to a gallery which ran around the top level of the chamber. The ornamental
banister which
bordered the gallery was also made of carved stone. It was a good three stories above the
chamber
floor.
Flinx saw him approach another figure, indistinct in the distance, and talk briefly. Then
he
turned and shouted down to Flinx. A slight echo shadowed his words.
"Relax, feller-me-lad! They've given up for now. They'll count their losses, remove the
eyes from
their dead, and ceremony for a while. Then they'll decide what to do."
"Surely," Flinx called up to him, "they won't attack a position as well defended as this
temple?"
The thick stone walls were making him confident. "Not with the kind of weapons you
have," he
finished, with a gesture toward the rifle the man had leaned against the nearby wall.
"Don't count on being safe tomorrow," the man advised him pleasantly as be descended
the stairway.
He indicated the gun as he reached the floor. "Any reasonable humanx wouldn't want to
tangle with
a Mark Twenty, but these aren't reasonable or human or thranx, lad. They're primitives,
and
primitive folk always have more courage than brains. Resides, each of 'em probably
thinks that if
he dies in battle the gods will favor him in the afterlife. At least." he amended himself

with a
modest wink, "that's my theory."
"Are you an anthropologist?" Flinx asked him uncertainly.
A great, roaring laugh filled the room, rattled around the engraved walls, and filled each
niche
and hollow with monumental delight. While the man enjoyed Flinx's question, the youth
took the
time to note the piles of supplies stacked neatly in various spots around the room. There
was also
an oversized mattress, a cell charger, and a compact autochef complete with moisture
condenser.
All signs indicated that here was an efficient, organized, long-term camp.
"Not me, young feller-me-lad," the man finally replied after regaining control of himself.
"I'll
claim science as a hobby, not a trade." Turning, he shouted up toward the high gallery
and waved
at the figure standing by the long window there. "Come on down Isili! Sunset's on. You
know they
won't trouble us any more today!" Lowering his voice, he spoke conspiratorially to
Flinx. "Isili's
the scientist. Me, I'm just a menial ..." He stopped, frowning.
"What's the matter?" Flinx watched as the man walked over to him and continued on
past. He saw him
bend over,Pocomchi and realized that the guide had not said a word since they had
reached safety.
"He's asleep?" he inquired hopefully.
The big man rolled the slight Indian over onto his stomach. The action revealed two
broken shafts
sticking out of the narrow back. With an angry grimace, the white-hared giant plucked
both arrows
free, then gently turned the Indian over onto his back. Flinx saw blood on the small
miner's lips.
"Hey, grabber-man," the huge man inquired gently, "how do you feel?"
Pocomchi's eyelids twitched, his eyes opened. "How should I feel?" He turned his head
and looked
back up at the concerned face above him. "How did I get here?"
"The lad carried you."
Pocomchi raised his head slightly and smiled at Flinx. "Thanks, Flinx. Waste of time,
I'm afraid."
On all fours, Flinx crawled over to sit next to the limp form of the man who had brought
him this
far. Pocomchi took in the expression on the young face. He shook his head slightly, and

winced at
the pain the effort caused him.
"Not ... your fault," he assured Flinx. "My own ... carelessness. Should have sensed
them." He
forced out a smile. The gesture was nearly beyond his rapidly fading capability.
"Anything I can get you?" the big man asked gruffly.
"How about ... a shot of Tizone?" Flinx started. Tizone was so illegal that few people
even knew
it existed. The giant could only grin faintly.
"Sorry, grabber-man. Would I could."
"Thanks anywav." Pocomchi's voice was that of a ghost now, the syllables poorly
formed. Within him
life had shrunk to a soap bubble's consistency.
"I'm going to join Habib anyway," he rasped, staring across at Flinx. "I'm not religious,
but the
sanctimonious fool is there; I can feel him."
"Give him my best," Flinx choked out. "Though that's not much to give anyone, these
days."
"Not ... your fault," Pocomchi repeated. His eye, closed. His lips moved, and Flinx had
to lean
close to hear. "If ... you ever see Balthazaar again ... give his neck a scratch for me."
"Two scratches," Flinx assured him, in a torso scarcely more audible than the Indian's.
The soap bubble popped, the spirit in the small body fled, and the third person who bad
been good
enough to aid Flinx since his arrival on Alaspin was now just so much meat.
Slowly Flinx climbed to his feet, arranged his jumpsuit, and glared at the silently
watching
giant. "As soon as it gets dark, I'll make a run for the skimmer. Maybe they'll all be
ceremonying, like you said, and I'll be able to slip through. You'd better not try to stop
me.
People seem to die in my vicinity."
Pursing his lips, the big human examined Flinx appraisingly. "Well now, that's quite a
speech,
fella-me-lad. But, frankly, you don't look like much of a jinx. You're just a little bitty
feller.
And I'm about as unsuperstitious as they come. Besides, after they get through arguing
and
partying, they might just decide that they don't want any more of my Mark Twenty or
Isili's
popper."
Flinx paused. "You really believe that?"
"Nope," responded the man, turning to face the gallery above, "but it's a nice thought.

Isili," he
shouted again, "quit your gawking at the greenery and come meet our guest! Bet you the
Ots don't
even bother with us again."
A rippling, slightly brittle voice called back to thorn, "You're dreaming if you think that,
Skim." But the figure put the weapon down and descended the stairs.
Trying to force Pocomchi's death and what he thought was his responsibility for it from
his mind,
Flinx studied the woman intently as she approached.
She was about a twentieth of a meter shorter than he was. Her skin was a rich olive hue,
much like
his own, but other features pointed to a different ethnic heritage. Terran-Turkish, he
decided,
taking in the doll-like face with its amber eyes, the too-wide mouth, and the natural
waterfall of
sparkling hair that looked like pulled filaments of pure black hematite.
She returned Flinx's stare for a moment, then ignored him. "They'll be back," she
assured her
associate, in that soft voice. Yet each word had an edge to it, suggesting that every
consonant
had been filed to a fine point before being uttered. What he could sense of her mind was
as hard
as duralloy.
Pretty she was, but not in a commercial sense. It was the kind of beauty which would
appeal to the
man with a taste for the exotic. Flinx thought of her as a rare dish. It might give you an
upset
stomach or you might remember it as uniquely satisfying for the remainder of your days.
Ire suspected that, beneath the jungle suit, her body was as wiry and tough as her
thoughts. He
nodded mentally. There were blatant differences in size, sex, appearance, and much else
between
her and the giant. But mentally there was a similarity of process and purpose, and that
was
undoubtedly what had joined them together.
Of the obvious differences, one was that she did not share the big man's desire to protect
Flinx.
"You've brought us a lot of trouble," she told him candidly. "We haven't had any trouble
with the
Otoid until now."
"You're also the first visitor we've had in weeks," her huge partner countered, "and

welcome,
lad."
First visitor ... then they hadn't seen the bodies of the three Qwarm, Flinx mused. No
point in
mentioning them. He was already unpopular with the woman. The announcement that he
and Ab were
being chased by the brotherhood of assassins wouldn't exactly help change her attitude
toward him,
She noticed Flinx's live companion for the first time, and her expression became one of
distaste.
"What's that grotesque thing?" At the moment, Ab was singing something about
Usander, crystalware,
and Peter the Great.
Once again Flinx bad to explain his ward. He finished gratefully, "I can't say much
except to
thank you for my life, both of you." The woman didn't look at him as she muttered
something
inaudible. Flinx indicated the motionless form of Pocomchi. "I know my friend would
have been too.
If it hadn't been for you, Mr. Skua. ..."
"September," the white-maned giant corrected him; "Skua September."
"If not for you, I'd be dead and eyeless out there some place."
"Would have been better all around," the woman murmured, stalking over to the food
supplies and
viciously cracking the seal on a carton. She pulled a tube free, took a seat on a smooth
stone,
and sucked at the liquid inside the transparent plastic. Her gaze traveled from Flinx to
September.
"Would have been better if you'd left them. Now we'll probably all die. Oh hell," she
concluded,
not looking at either man. "I guess I'd have done the same thing, Skua. I'm going up for
another
look."
September shook his head. "Isili, I told you, the Otoids will not attack during-"
"Since when did you become an expert on the Otoid?" she snapped back. "Nobody's an
expert on the
Otoid. I don't think they'll attack at night either, but it's not completely dark out yet." She
climbed the stairway and reassumed her position at the long window above the gateway.
Her gaze was
turned outward, the pulsepopper cradled efficiently under one arm.
"Women!" September murmured softly, his expression unreadable. A hundred shades of
meaning were

encompassed by the single noun. He turned a bright smile on Flinx. "Would you like
something to
eat, feller-me-lad?"
By way of reply, Flinx indicated Pocomchi's body.
"What, not squeamish are you, lad?" wondered the giant disapprovingly.
"No, but don't you think we ought to bury him?"
"Sure," September agreed, walking over to the recently opened case of food. He
removed several
small, brightly colored cubes, dumped them into his mouth, and chewed, "You pick him
up," he
mumbled around the mouthful of organic slag, "and carry him outside. I'll toss you our
smallest
excavator through the doorway. Isili and I will do our best to cover you while you dig
him a
grave. I guess there's always a chance you'll make it back inside."
Flinx didn't reply immediately. Instead, he walked over to stand next to the food case.
"Despite
your untimely sarcasm, I'll have a couple of those concentrates."
"Sarcasm? Sarcasm!" the big man rumbled, spitting particles of food over the floor.
"There's no
such thing as sarcasm, boy. Just a few of us in this universe who accept the truth and
deal with
it accordingly. Sorry if I offended you, but outside the Alaspinport this world doesn't
take much
notice of tact."
Flinx mulled over his situation as he masticated a concentrate cube which tasted
affectionately of
beefsteak and mushrooms. He knew the concentrate bore no more relationship to a oncelive steer
than it did to a thranx vovey. But while it was artificial, it was a masterfully composed
artificiality, and his dried-out taste buds conveyed the efficacious, nutritive lie to the rest
of
his body.
"What are you doing so far from the city?" September asked.
Flinx wasn't quite ready to answer that question. Not just yet. "I might ask you the same.
You
said she's the scientist?" He gestured up to where the watchful woman continued her
sunset vigil.
"My employer, Flinx. It's stretching things a bit to say we're partners. Isili Hasboga.
We're not
too bad a team. She's as pessimistic as I am optimistic."

"Optimistic?" Flinx snorted. "On this world?"
"Ah, now who's being sarcastic, young feller-me-lad?" September inquired without
rancor. "She's
one of the most knowledgeable Alaspinian archeologists I've ever met. What's more,
she's as
avaricious as I, and that's greedy, lad. We have different reasons for wanting wealth, but
the
aim's the same. Isili wants financial independence so she can pursue the kind of research
that
interests her, instead of doing what some prissy institution wants her to. My desires, on
the
other hand are more basic."
"Why'd she choose you?"
"I'm good at what I do," September replied easily. "I don't drink, narcotize, or simiedive
on the
job, and I'm honest. Why not? It's as easy to be honest as it is to be a crook."
"You're an optimist, all right," observed Flinx.
"She decided on this particular temple after two years of research," the big man went on.
"She
needed someone to do some of the heavy work and provide cross fire when required."
Moving to the
near wall, he patted the huge weapon resting there. "This Mark Twenty, for example. It's
tough to
see an Otoid in a tree. With this toy, you just blast the tree. Never met another man who
could
use one as a hand weapon."
"So she supplies the brains and you the muscle," Flinx commented. Refusing to be
taunted,
September simply grinned back at him.
Flinx wondered if the giant could be upset. Despite his outer boisterousness, there was
much that
hinted at an inner calmness and confidence which would put him above petty arguing.
And yet,
something in the man's mind-something buried deep, hidden well-suggested some
terrible secrets.
"There's some crossover, lad," he finished. "I'm not the village idiot, and Isili's much
more than
a fragile flower, bless her curvilinear construction. What we find, we split evenly."
"If we find anything," a voice tersely called down to them. "You talk too much, Skua.
Getting
lonely?"
"Why, Grandma," September yelled back in mock surprise. "what big ears you've got."

She didn't smile back. "All the better for gathering reasons to have you discharged, and
drawn up
before a government court for violating the secrecy terms of employment," she
countered. She
glanced back out the portal at the near-blackness outside, then started down the stairs.
"Ali, the lad's no claim stealer, silly bog," September murmured coaxingly. She brushed
past him.
"What's the matter, no Otoid for you to fry?"
"One of these days," she snarled with a smile, "I hope one of those homicidal little abos
puts a
copper bolt right into your-"
"Now, silly," he chided her, "no dissension in front of our guest."
She might have had a retort ready, Flinx felt, but her attention was drawn from the
wordplay to
Ab. Walking past him, she inspected the alien closely, eyeing him up and down, walking
a complete
circle around him. For his part, Ab ignored her and continued his rhyming.
"Funny," she muttered to Flinx, "I think I recognize this fool, but from where I can't
remember.
What planet does it come from?"
"Not only don't I know Ab's world of origin," Flinx informed her, "but I wish he was
back on it.
Ab was a slave, performing in the marketplace in Drallar, back on Moth. I acquired him
accidentally," he explained, leaving out a great many awkward details of Ab's
acquisition. "He's
harmless. He also," he added with a touch of awe, "seems to be immune to Otoid arrows
and to
massive electric shock."
"I'd like to have the first ability myself," she responded. Taking a stance directly in front
of
Ab, or at least where she decided his front was, she stared straight into his eye and said,
hard
and plain, "Where do you come from ..." She glanced at Flinx. "What did you call him?"
"Abalamahalamatandra is what he calls himself, but he responds to `Ab' " was Flinx's
reply.
"Very well." She moved closer, almost standing on a green-striped blue foot. "Ab, where
do you
come from?"
A blue eye rolled at her. "Hetsels, hetsels, harmon nexus. Special nexus. Shoulder right
and up a
thousand nexus, spatial solar plexus."

Hasboga made a disgusted sound while September stifled a smirk, without much
success. "That's one
useful facility Ab has," Flinx commented, smiling himself. "He makes people laugh."
"He's more than a pet, then," the inquisitive scientist decided, studying Ab thoughtfully,
"if he
respond: directly to questions."
"Not necessarily," argued September, leaning back against a broken stone. "He might be
only a
mimic little intelligence required for that."
"His comments are not repetitions of what's been said," argued Hasboga in return.
"I had a pet once," whispered Flinx, but no one heard him.
"Pet ... scandal smith," decided Ab, promptly performing a quadruple handspring and
landing on his
hands. His trunk roved over the floor, sucking up pieces of dropped concentrate. So
absurd was the
figure of the inverted alien that both Flinx and September broke out in laughter, and
even Isili
had to smile.
"Funniest-looking creature I ever set eyes on," the giant declared. He brushed back the
hair that
had slid over his face. It fell straight down again, but not before Flinx saw what he had
almost
expected.
"The earring," he almost shouted.
"What?" September looked startled,; then his thick brows furrowed with concern. "What
are you
staring at, feller-me-lad? You all right?"
"It's the earring," Flinx finally explained, pointing to the giant's head. "When you
brushed at
your hair, I saw it. You got a gold ring in your right ear."
Reflexively, September reached up and fondled the circlet, hidden behind his flowing
white hair,
yes, I do. Why so interested, lad?"
"I just-"
"Just a minute," Hasboga interrupted, stepping tween the two men physically and
verbally. "Before
this goes any further, Skua" -she turned to confront Flinx-" we still don't know what
you're doing
here. Just because you're young doesn't make you trustworthy in my book. I'll buy your
funny
alien," and she standing on two legs and two arms, scouring the floor for crumbs.
"But what about you and your unfortunate friend?" she wanted to know. She jabbed a

thumb at
Pocomchi's body. "His kind I placed the moment I set eyes on him. Alaspin is infected
with
prospectors, like a pox. But you ..." She gave him the same thorough examination she
had bestowed
on Ab "You don't look like a grubber, and you're too young to be much of a scientist. So
what are
you doing here in Mimmisompo?"
Chapter Nine
“You two are looking for your fortune,” he finally replied, after a moments's hesitation.
"I'm
looking myself."
If it came to a fight, for any reason, he knew he would have no chance against these two.
He had
to convince them he was telling the truth. They had been friendly so far, but they had the
strength to be.
The problem lay with Isili, he felt. While not openly antagonistic, she was cautious to
the point
of paranoia. He tried to reach out mentally to her and received impression of enormous
emotion
barely held in check. Surprisingly little of it was directed toward him or September. It
was all
wrapped tightly inside her. She was like the coil of an old-time generator: on the surface;
all
was calm, but overload it slightly and wires would fly in all directions.
Taking a seat on a block of trimmed green stone, he explained about his search for his
true
parents. He censored those details which might upset or prejudice his hosts, avoided
mention of
Ulru-Ujurr and his flight from the Owarm. His mere presence was unnerving enough to
Hasboea. No
need to make it worse.
He finished with his search for a big man, one with a gold earring and a small minidrag,
who had
tried to buy him over a dozen years ago.
"Twelve years, standard time," he said, staring hard at the watching September. "I was
five years
old. Do you remember it?"
Isili's eyes widened, and she stared accusingly at September. "A five-year-old child,
Skua. Well,
well." She gave Flinx a knowing look when the giant failed to respond. "He remembers
something,

for sure. This is the first time I've ever seen him speechless."
"Yes. Yes, I remember, lad," September finally admitted, looking and sounding like a
man reliving
a dream he had forgotten. "I did have a small minidrag with me."
"Did you leave Moth with it?" inquired a tense Flinx.
"No." Something trembled inside Flinx. He felt like a person with amnesia slowly
regaining memory
of lost events. "It finally left me in a bar. I was drunk. Minidrags can be temperamental.
It
probably decided I wasn't fit to associate with any more."
"I know how temperamental they can be," Flinx assured him. He forbade mentioning
that Pip might
have been the same minidrag September had lost. "I ... used to have one myself."
"Then you do know. And you also probably know, lad, that on Moth it's a severe crime
to import
venomous creatures. So I couldn't very well march myself up to the nearest gendarmerie
and ask for
help. Not without being thrown in jail for letting a toxic alien loose on the planet. Sure,
but I
remember the slave auction." His memory of the incident appeared to grow stronger the
longer he
thought about it. "I bid on you. I was bidding on several in the same consignment."
"Several others with me?" Flinx frowned. This didn't fit. "What others?"
"I'm not sure it's a good idea to tell you that just yet, young feller-me-lad," the big man
announced softly. For some reason he appeared almost afraid of Flinx, as if the youth
were a bomb
who might explode at any second. Flinx could not understand. The dialogue was not
following the
scenario he had constructed in his imagination as to how this momentous talk would
proceed.
One way or the other, his last trail seemed to roc drawing inexorably to a dead end.
Already, one
possible link was broken. His meeting with Pip when. he was six years old appeared to
have been
accidental, A coincidence only.
"For yourself?" he asked uncertainly.
September snorted. "I wouldn't know what to do with a slave. No, lad, I was bidding for
an
organization."
The trail abruptly revealed a fresh length of itself. Perhaps the giant wasn't the end after
all.

"What organization?" he pressed the big man. "does it still exist? Could it be traced if it's
disbanded, traced to its responsible individuals?"
"Easy down, lad," September advised him, male ing calming motions with both hands.
"You've already
toil us you found out about your natural mother last year."
"Yes. She's dead. She died before I was sold." Silently he strained his erratic abilities,
trying
to see if the information sparked any response in September's mind. He was
disappointed. The big
man exhibited no reaction he could detect, mental or otherwise.
"As to my natural father, I know nothing," he continued, "I do know that my father
wasn't the man
my natural mother was married to. I'd hoped that by tracing whoever was trying to buy
me, I aright
discover some new information leading to him."
"That makes sense, feller-me-lad," agreed an approving September.
"Nothing makes sense," growled Isili, who had listened to about as much of Flinx's
problems as she
could stand. "What about us, Skua?" She was stalking magnificently back and forth, her
ebony mane
flying, her amber eyes glowing. "Nothing makes sense if all the work we've put in here
goes for
nothing, and it will if the Otoid persist after us." She stopped abruptly and whirled on
him.
"Months of planning, years of research, and we come up with nothing!" She wrung her
hands in
frustration. "I don't know why I tear myself up about it. I'm probably all wrong about
this
temple. We've been excavating for nearly two months and we haven't found anything
beyond those."
She indicated the exquisite carvings lining the chamber's interior. "And we didn't have to
move a
pebble to find them. Hieroglyphs, stores ... what a waqte."
"They seem unusually well preserved to me" was Flinx's comment. He found her
attitude peculiarly
unscientific.
She startled him by trying to read his mind. The force of her desire shocked him a little,
although he knew she had no talents of any kind. She possessed a powerful mind, did
Isili Hasboga,
but it was not a mind of Talent.
"So you think the historical and scientific aspects of our grub should interest me more,
do you?"

she eventually inquired. "My real work is back home, on Comagrave. There's a site in
the Mountains
of the Mourners that's never been dug. No foundation or museum or university thinks it's
worth
excavating." Her eyes blazed. "I know better! They're wrong, all of them!"
Fanaticism in pursuit of knowledge, Flinx reflected, was still fanaticism.
"I know what's there," she rambled on, "under the garb mounds. And I'll find it, even
though I
have to mount and finance my own expedition. But for that I need credits. All of us need
credits."
She drew herself up haughtily. "That's why we're all on Alaspin. As you are neither a
scientist
nor a researcher," she concluded with a twinge of bitterness, "I don't suppose I can
expect you to
understand that."
"Maybe I understand more than you think" was his quiet reply. "I have a good friend, a
young
thranx who was once a student archeologist in the Church, who would have symnathized
completely
with your attitude at one time. She's since found other things to do." He wondered how
Sylzenzuzex
was managing without him in teaching the ursinoids back on Ulru-Ujurr.
"It's all for nothing anyway, now." She slumped. "Damn all unreasonable, xenophobic
aborigines!
Damn this world and its endless temples!" She sucked in a resigned breath. "Nothing
now but to try
to get out and try somewhere else, Skua. Maybe they'll leave us alone if we move to the
other side
of the city. But it's got to be somewhere in Mimmisompo. It's got to be!"
Flinx had no idea what "it" might be. It wouldn't have been discreet to inquire. Such a
question
would serve only to heighten Hasboga's suspicion of him.
But, having found the man with the earring, he could not let him go. Not till every
question was
satisfied. The internal portables brightened, compensating for the vanishing illumination
outside.
"If you're finished with your grubbing," he told September, "I'll hire you."
"You, hire me?" The giant smiled condescendingly at him. "What'll you pay me with,
lad? Stories,
and entertainment provided by your poor ward?" He indicated the gallivanting Ab.
Flinx took no offense. He had come to expect such disbelief. "Whatever your cost, if it's

in
reason, I can pay it. How much?"
"That sounds like a sincere proposal," September confessed. Flinx thought the giant
threw a
mischievous glance at Hasboga. "I suppose if we are going to give up here ..."
"Then both of you can go to hell!" Hasboga exploded, the barely suppressed anger
finally erupting.
She stormed over to glare down at Flinx.
"First you bring the Otoid down on us and now you want to steal Skua. Well, my skinny
stripling,
you're in no position to buy. Only to give. You owe me. We saved your miserable, barely
begun life
because on Alaspin help is rendered without question to those who need it. Don't you
forget that."
She turned away from him to confront an amused September. "And, mercenary that you
are, Skua,
don't forget that you and I have a contract. Of course, if you want to buy out from under
me ..."
"What, from under you?" Bushy brows lifted in mock astonishment. Flinx got the
impression that
maybe the relationship between these two was something other than wholly
professional. He winced
at the slap she gave the giant, but September only rubbed at the reddening place on his
face and
grinned more widely, almost approvingly.
Stalking away from them both, she threw herself down on the huge inflated mattress and
buried her
attention in a small, self-contained reader screen. For Flinx, there followed several
moments of
embarrassed silence.
"For a scientist she can behave awfully irrationally at times, feller-me-lad," September
confided
to him. He added, somewhat reassuringly: "These spells don't last much longer than thev
take.
Watch." He winked.
Strolling over to the mattress, he sat down next to her. She ignored him. He pretended to
peer
over hex shoulder at the screen.
"Now, Isili, it's not nice to act petulant before the lad."
"Get lost!" she snapped. "I'm busy."
"I can see that," admitted a seemingly startled September, his eyes bulging as he focused
on the

tiny screen. "I can tell what the man and the woman are doing, but the two tendril cats
are-'
With an exasperated sigh, she looked up at him and spoke in a tone one would use with a
child.
"This is a perfectly plain theoretical tract, as you can easily see."
"Oh yes, I can see it, all right." Sitting back, he whistled solemnly at the ceiling. Flinx
marveled at the man's elan, considering that they might all be dead the next night.
Rolling over, Hasboga sat up straight, put her hands on her hips, and glared at the giant.
"Are
you implying that I'm watching pornography?"
"Oh no," September started. "No, no, no, no. It's
just that, in front of one so young ..." He gestured toward Flinx. "And tendril cats, too."
He
clucked disapprovingly.
"Listen, you outrageous parody of a human being, if you think you can embarrass-" She
stopped.
September was grinning down at her. She fought to remember what she was about to
say, but for the
life of her couldn't get a grip on her half- disintegrated thought. Her mouth twisted and
gradually broke into an almost shy smile.
The moment she realized what she was doing, her lips immediately clicked primly back
to a firm
set. "It's important work," she muttered lamely. She gestured weakly toward Flinx. "Go
bother our
visitor for a while and leave me alone."
Turning away, she went back to the viewer, but Flinx could sense that the dark cloud of
fury which
had been hovering over her had evaporated.
September obligingly walked back to flop down heavily in front of Flinx. "See? Silly's
not such a
bad sort. In fact, she's rather a good sort. Pity there aren't more like her." Commentary
came
from the vicinity of the viewer, but it was garbled and indistinct and not really angry any
more.
"It's you that interests me right now, feller-me-lad. You've come a great way and a hard
way to
find me. You want to know about that day a dozen years ago, on Moth. I'll try to tell you
what I
can. That way, maybe I can learn a little too." He sighed. "I suppose you know who sold
you, if
you found out about your natural mother."

"I do."
"Do you know why?"
"I think so."
September shook his head. "I don't think you do. Not all of it. I can't tell you the rest, not
yet. There are ethical questions involved."
Flinx's laugh was so harsh that he wondered at it himself. "You're talking to someone
torn from
his parents before lie can remember, and sold like a piece of meat on a world not of his
birthing."
"All right," September shifted agreeably, "call it a business confidence, then. I probably
will
tell you, in time. But I need to think on it. Remember, I didn't have to tell you I knew
anything."
"We'll let it pass for now," replied Flinx magnanimously, since he couldn't coerce the
giant
anyway. His next question he had to consider carefully. For a large part of his adult life
he had
framed it, rephrased it, turned it over and over in his mind, considered how he would
present it
to various people. He had developed and discarded a hundred different approaches. Now
the moment
to ask had come. This might be the last moment in a search that had taken him across
half the
Commonwealth and through stranger adventures than most people could imagine.
He forgot all preconceptions, leaned forward, and asked with unsophisticated innocence:
"Are you
my father?"
September took the question well. Maddeningly, he didn't venture an immediate reply.
Indecision
was the last thing Flinx had expected from the big man. September looked at the floor,
using a
landing-skid-sized foot to move rubble in meaningless patterns.
Flinx strained in the silence with all his desire, tried to bring his infrequent, awesome
talent
to focus on the man before him. The falseness or truth of September's eventual answer
could be the
most important thing in his young life. But, as so often happened, when he most wanted
his
abilities to function, they mocked him. Some days they could operate with the precision
of a
tridee beam, could pierce the nothingness between worlds. Now, even his own thoughts
were

unreadable.
When September looked up, he wore an expression of almost overwhelming
earnestness. All thoughts
of prevarication left Flinx. This man was not going to lie to him. He stared so long and
hard that
for a second Flinx wondered uncomfortably if the giant didn't possess unsuspected
mental talents
of his own. But while his gaze was intense, it was only from concentration.
"Young feller-me-lad, Flinx, believe me when I say I wish I knew."
Stunned, Flinx could only cape back at him. A yes he could have coped with. That was
an answer he
had been prepared to deal with a hundred thousand time, in his imagination. A no would
have been
harder to handle, but he would have been ready for that, too. But "I wish I knew"?
So unexpected was the indeterminate answer that the youth who had organized the UlruUiurrians,
who had outwitted the Church and baffled Conda Challis, could only say lamely: "What
do you mean,
you don't know?"
"Don't you think I wish I did?" September hall pleaded. "I am uncertain. I am indecisive,
I can't
say for sure because I don't know for sure. Positiveness of either possibility escapes me.
I can't
shade it yes or darken it no. There's no room for maybes, feller-me-lad. It's what I said
plain,
which means ... I could be."
"Let's not play," Flinx said slowly, coldly. "Did you ever sleep with my mother, who was
a Lynx of
Allahabad, India Province, Terra?"
September shook his head, looking at Flinx as if for the first time. "What an unusual
young man
you are. You've got brains and guts, Flinx-lad. You're not by chance extremely wealthy,
are you?"
"No, I'm not."
"Good," September commented with satisfaction, "because if you were, and I said I was
your father,
you'd have the natural suspicion of the wealthy and riot believe me."
"How do you know I'd have any intention of sharing any wealth with you?" countered
Flinx. "Maybe
I'm looking for my father out of feelings of anger. Maybe I'd want just to blow your
brains out."
"I wouldn't blame you," replied September. "But A never slept with your mother, of that

I am
certain. Nor have I ever been to India Province, let alone the city you mentioned. I've no
idea
who your mother was, and I doubt if I'd recognize her face or name if you confronted
nom with her
this instant."
"No chance of that," Flinx assured hire. "I told you, she's been dead since before I was
sold."
"I'm sorry for that," September said, expressing genuine-sounding sorrow for someone
he had just
claimed never to have known.
Flinx's thoughts were full of speculation and garbage. "I don't understand this, I don't
understand."
"Who does?" mused the giant philosophically.
"If you never even met my natural mother, let alone slept with her, then how could you
possibly be
my father?"
"Like most circles, it all ties together, feller-me-lad." September put both hands behind
his
shaggy head and leaned back. "Why do you think I was there on Moth that day, trying to
buy you,
and why do you think I didn't?"
"You didn't have the money to bid against Mother Mastiff," suggested Flinx. "The old
woman who
finally bought me." Then something else the slaver had mentioned came back to him.
"You left the
auction in a hurry, and there were a large number of police in the crowd."
"Very good, your sources have good memories," commented September. "I had the
money to buy you,
and the others. But I was a wanted man. Somehow the police knew I was on Moth. Since
the reward
for me was considerable, they came a-hunting. I had to leave fast. Purchasing you was
one
assignment I was never able to carry out. One of the few I've never been able to carry
out. By the
by, how much is it worth to you to find out if I really am your natural father?"
Flinx had never considered having to pay for the final word. "I don't know. I have to
think on
that one myself."
"Okay," agreed the giant, "so do I" He rolled over, pebbles scraping the floor beneath
him. "We'll

talk more tomorrow. Right now I'm feeling done in. Saving your life was an exhausting
business."
Father or not, Flinx would cheerfully have strangled the big man over the delay. But
there was
nothing to do, and he did not want to risk antagonizing September. He was not a man to
be pushed.
Besides, he told himself, he had waited this long, another evening would not make any
difference.
And he was completely worn out himself. Anyhow, he doubted that his hands would fit
around
September's enormous neck.
As it turned out, morning prevented any resumption of their conversation. Automatic
scanners
performed their function. So did the alarms they were connected to. The three sane
occupants of
the ancient temple chamber came awake to a clamorous howling.
"Otoids," said Hasboga curtly, grabbing up her pulsepopper and slipping off the safety.
She ran
for the gallery window as Flinx was still blinking sleep from his eyes. By the time he
was fully
awake, September had joined her atop the stone stairway. The two moved back and forth
along the
wide slit in the temple front, firing frequently at targets below. Dimly one could hear the
incessant chatter of the Otoid.
Flinx joined them atop the stairs. Soon arrows began pinging through the narrow gap
with
disconcerting frequency. September cursed as fast as he fired. Standing alongside and
watching the
Mark Twenty cut down trees and leave craters in the earth, Flinx felt comparatively
helpless as he
snapped off an occasional burst with his own small handbeamer.
A bolt plunged onto the stone facing, falling almost vertically by September's right hand.
He
glanced upward. "They're atop the temple now," he muttered, "probably a mob of them.
We can't hold
this gallery much longer."
"The tunnel," Isili suggested, "fast!"
Flinx stayed between them as they ran down the stairway. They raced across the
chamber floor.
Around a slight bend in the inner chamber wall were five steps which Flinx hadn't seen
before
leading downward, Ab joined them and studied the entrance curiously.

"They'll open the door we built soon enough," September grunted. "This chamber has
several back
entrances, which we blocked up, but you can be sure; they’re just waiting; for us to stick
our
heads out one of them." He indicated the low passageway at the bottom of the steps.
Portable
lights showed a dry stone floor.
September was gathering up food packets and shoving them into various pockets in the
shirt he had
donned on awakening. He pressed an armful on Flinx. "This tunnel is where we've done
most of our
digging. This is the only entrance-and exit, of course."
Several arrows pinged off the stone walls. September whirled, raising the muzzle of the
Mark
Twenty. Blue fire cleared the gallery window and left smoking stone and bodies behind.
"They might tire of this," he continued, speaking as if they hadn't been interrupted. "If
they
don't" -he ducked as a fresh bolt shot by overhead- "we'll have a choice of charging them
or
starving. But I don't think they can overpower us down in there."
Then Flinx was fighting his load of containers as he followed Hasboga down the steps
and through
the narrow, winding tunnel. September trailed, covering their retreat.
In the dim illumination he saw that the tunnel was roughly pyramidal in form, with a
narrow strip
of fat ceiling overhead. Delicate bas-reliefs ran in a single strip along each wall; a third
decorated the small roof. Underfoot were smooth, alternating slabs of blue, green, and
pure white
stone, the white shining like glazed tile, while the blue and green remained convincingly
stonelike. Ab loped along easily behind Flinx, singing querulously.
Finally they stopped. Panting, Flinx dumped his load of food containers. Hasboga settled
her
pulsepopper on a mound of recently excavated rubble while September found a resting
place for his
massive weapon slightly below and to her left.
Silence soon gave way to a deafening chatter as a horde of Otoid warriors came surging
and hopping
down the tunnel.
"Ready," September whispered expectantly.
Though the aborigine battle cries were thunderous, they were nothing compared to the
roar of the

two powerful guns as they fired away at the screaming, attacking natives. Flinx felt like
a fly
trapped in the landing bay of a cargo shuttle at the moment of touch -down.
The tunnel became a long, fiery gullet which digested stone and Otoid with equal
indifference.
With so much firepower concentrated in such a small space, Flinx's handbeamer would
have been
superfluous. He conserved it's modest charge and let Hasboga and September do the
incinerating.
Eventually it dawned on the Otoid that they had reached a point beyond which nothing
living could
pass. With much howling and cursing, they retreated around the first bend and out of
range. A deep
swath of charred, smoking corpses constituted a disquieting reminder of their presence.
Since the
slight breeze blew always inward, the four inhabitants of the tunnel's end received the
full brunt
of that noxious barbecue.
"Now what?" Flinx wondered, glancing from Hasboga to the giant. Despite the apparent
solidity of
the stone walls, he was nervous. "Could they cave in the tunnel and trap us here? Or
smoke us
out?"
"As for the last," Hasboga told him, "that's no problem, though we might have to share
tanks." She
pointed to a pile of mining equipment in a corner. It included a pair of atmosphere masks
for poorair
digging.
"The original Alaspinians built these temples well," she went on, indicating the walls
around
them. "With their primitive tools, I don't think the Otoid could break through the ancient
cement
sealing these stones. Even if they could, I doubt that they'd try it."
"Why not?"
"If they did that," September explained, "they’d never get our eyes."
"Eyes again," Flinx murmured. "What do they do with dead men's eyes?"
"Never mind, young feller-me-lad," was the grim reply. "It doesn't make pleasant
conversation."
Flinx desided not to insist on an explanation. If the subject troubled September, he
wasn't sure
he needed to know.
"Try to starve us out," the big man announced professionally, eyeing the far bend in the

tunnel.
"In any case, I don't think they'll try another mass rush like that last one for a while.
They'll
sit down and talk it over first." Leaving his rifle resting in place, he turned and slumped
down
against the wall of protective rubble.
Flinx took the opportunity to examine the section of tunnel they had retreated to. It
wasn't so
much a room or chamber here as it was a slight enlargement of the tunnel proper.
Possibly the
engravings set into the walls and ceiling were a touch more elaborate, a bit more
plentiful. Three
meters on, the tunnel assumed its normal dimensions, and a couple of meters beyond
that the smooth
walls ended in a dam of collapsed stone and rock. Despite Hasboga's assurances, it was
clear that
the Alaspinian temple was not invulnerable.
She noticed the direction of his gaze and said with a certain amount of enthusiasm,
"We've been
drilling and clearing this section, as you can see. We're trying to find out where this
tunnel
goes. I've studied thousands of temple schematics, and this tunnel has no counterpart in
any of
them that I've been able to discover. Also, those Alaspinian temples that do have
passageways or
tunnels have them laid out with sharp angles, regular and precise, all heading toward
definite
destinations. Usually they lead to other structures. This one makes no sense. It just sort
of
winds off uncertainly to no place. Compared to your usual Alaspinian road or passage,
this one's
constructed like somebody's small intestine."
"What do you expect to find at the end of it?" Flinx asked her.
She shrugged and smiled hopefully. "Storeroom, if we're lucky. Iridium temple masks,
city
treasury, anything else valuable the Mimmisompo priests wanted to hide and protect.
Maybe even a
religious scepter. They usually used crysorillium, and sapphire to decorate those
scepters. Might
even have some opalized diamonds."
"No doubt all of great scientific value," mused Flinx.
She threw him a warning look. "Don't criticize, Flinx, until you've had to spend ten years

on
useless projects presided over by pompous asses with well-connected parents.
Remember, I'd rather
be doing some worthwhile research on my home planet. For me, this is a means to an
end."
"Sorry," Flinx admitted. "I was-"
September broke in. "Apologies later, lad," he declared, rolling over to take up the
trigger of
the Mark Twenty. Angry hoots were drifting up the tunnel toward them. "Here they
come again."
But the big man's concern was premature. The hooting came no nearer, though it
continued not far
from them.
September peered over the top of the shielding wall, "Probably having a final, violent
disagreement over tactics," he theorized pleasantly. The hooting grw louder, and Flinx
thought he
heard sounds of fighting.
"Sounds lice they're plenty angry at one another, Good! A couple of the warrior-primes
are
squabbling. They might end up fighting each other. Otoids have short tempers. It's been
known to
happen."
Hasboga nodded confirmation. "A few reports of natives attacking miners and outposts
and ending up
by massacring each other have been substantiated." She looked almost excited. "The
only thing the
Otoids hate worse than themselves are human or thranx interlopers. We might have a
chance!"
"Lopers, mopers, lazy daze," came a high-pitched verse from behind them. "Moping,
moping, eating
maize ... oh say can you see the canticle me."
September glanced briefly back at Ab. The alien was amusing himself at the far end of
the
excavation by, juggling rocks with his four hands. Something struck the giant, and he
eyed Flinx
appraisingly.
"How about sending out your property as a decoy?' It would tell us if they're too busy
with each
other to bother us." He hurried on before Flinx could reply. "There's a chance the Otoid
will be
so fascinated by him that they'll take him for a prize- he's got four eyes, to our two

apiece- and
they’ll leave without risking any more dead.”
"No," an angry Flinx replied. He said it firmly, so that there would be no mistake about
it.
That did not keep September from arguing. "Why not, lad? You've admitted he's a
burden on you.
He's obviously madder than a bloodhyper and no good to anyone, and he might even slip
through,
depending on how many shafts he can take."
"Ab," Flinx responded very slowly, "is an intelligent creature."
September snorted. "It might save our lives."
"He's completely helpless," Flinx continued tightly, "totally dependent on our judgment.
Furthermore, Ab trusts me. I wouldn't send him out there" -he gestured down the
tunnel-" any more
than I would a crippled cat."
"I was afraid of that." September sighed, looking over at Hasboga.
"Our young lad is an idealist."
"Don't be too sure of yourself, September," Flinx warned him. "Idealism's an affliction I
can put
aside when I have to."
"Take it easy, lad," September cautioned him. "Isili, what say you, woman?"
Hasboga turned to stare at her associate, then looked across to Flinx. "The creature is the
boy's
responsibility and property," she declared, her gaze never wavering from Flinx's face.
"We still
don't know if the abos are fighting among themselves. Let's wait and see what they do.
I'm not
ready to vote for anything drastic until we start running out of food and water. Ab stays,
if
that's the way the youth wants it."
"Musical, musical, think time contusional," rhymed Ab, happily ignorant of the state of
his fate
and unaware that it had just been informally decided.
"We'll wait on then," September agreed, giving in gracefully. "I just don't like waiting,
that's
all." He returned his attention to the tunnel. At least the cool air would slow the process
of
putrefaction. If not, the stench of decomposing corpses could force them to use the
masks as
efficiently as smoke would.
Quite unexpectedlv, the far end of the tunnel seemed to become darker. Flinx squinted,
unsure that

his eyes were relaying the truth. September leaned over the edge of their wall and tried
to see
around the first bend. The darkness jumped a little bit nearer.
"What are they up to?" Flinx inquired anxiously. "Filling up the corridor?"
"No," murmured the big man softly, "I don't think so.”
It was Hasboga who first realized what the natives were doing. "They're taking out the
lights,"
she informed them, even as another several meters of darkness appeared. "Rather than
cover up the
reflectors, they're just taking them down and moving them out of the tunnel."
"They won't take out the last three," September said grimly, hunkering down over the
bulky stock
of his rifle and shifting a little to his left. Howling and shrieking cut off further
conversation
as another mass of tightly packed natives came surging around the turn in the tunnel.
September
kept his weapon aimed near the precious light and shattered one alien after another as
they tried
to climb up to the unbreakable, self-powered sphere. Hasboga tried to hold back the rest
of the
screaming wave, and Flinx helped as best he could with his tiny pistol.
But they were so densely packed and there were so many of them that September was
finally forced
to bring his own weapon to bear in order to drive them from the corridor. One aborigine
in the mob
was able to reach the lamp. Triumphantly he wrenched it free from its mounting.
Shouting their victory, the mob retreated up the tunnel to safety, bearing the precious
light with
them. Now there were only two spheres left, one halfway down from the just-removed
light to their
position and the other a couple of meters in front of Hasboga. Beyond that, night had
claimed the
tunnel.
"They'll be regrouping again," September decided wanly, "for another charge. Buoyed
up by their
success. Some warrior-prime is in full control now." He used a hand to indicate the
second light,
partway to the tunnel bend. "If they get that one we're going to be in big trouble."
That led him to revive the discussion of a few minutes earlier. He gestured back toward
the
singsonging Ab. "What about it?"

Hasboga eyed the alien, turned a speculative stare on Flinx, then sighted back down her
own
weapon. "Not yet. They may not get the next light."
September growled softly but did not argue. As the prospect of death grew more real,
Flinx noted,
the big man's sense of humor was suffering.
Several hours passed before the peace and quiet was shattered by a terrible screaming
and mewling.
Flinx didn't jump this time, his ears were still numb from the last attack. But although
they
waited expectantly for the anticipated charge, it did not materialize.
"Why don't they come?" muttered Hasboga tightly, trying to see around the distant bend
of a nowdark
section of tunnel.
"Trying to rattle us," suggested September coolly, apparently unaffected by the spinechilling
cacophony. "Ignore it and stay ready. The noise can't hurt us."
"Not physically" was Hasboga's response. "Primitive or not, that's mind-tingling stuff."
The bloodcurdling concert continued, unendingly. It was beginning to make Flinx
twitchy when it
started to fade. Once begun, the cessation of the shrieking and moaning accelerated
rapidly, until
all was quiet again. Almost too quiet.
"By O'Morion," ventured September in amazement, "I think they've left."
"Maybe they did start fighting among themselves,"guessed Hasboga, not daring to
believe it.
"No, someone's coming," Flinx informed them, and then instantly cursed himself for
saying it.
September's eye went back to the sight of his weapon. Several seconds passed before he
thought to
glance uncertainly over at Flinx.
"How do you know, young feller-me-lad? I can't see or hear a cursed thing."
"I have unusually good hearing," Flinx lied.
He was receiving impressions of some kind of mind up ahead. Beyond that he could
sense nothing.
His mind had been overloaded with input from emotionally wracked minds since the
previous day,
minds both advanced and aboriginal. Right now he couldn't evaluate the ones
approaching them any
more than he could separate granite from gneiss.
"I hear something, all right," Hasboga whispered, cuddling her pulsepopper tight as an
infant. In

the silence they heard the slight crunch of rock underfoot.
"Trying to slip a couple of good bowmen close to us, while we're worn out from the last
charge"
was September's decision. "One tactic that won't work." He adjusted the focus on his
sight
slightly and lowered the energy level-no sense wasting power on only a couple of the
abos.
In the silence of the tunnel, only their own soft breathing could be heard. That made the
gentle,
pedantic voice that abruptly spoke sound louder than it actually was.
"Please don't shoot," it requested, in perfect terranglo but with a slight accent. "I do hope
you
are all uninjured."
"That's certainly a tbranx voice," a wondering, confused September said firmly. He
stood up and
peered into the darkness. "Come on ahead, whoever you are!"
The crunching resumed. Soon a pair of figures emerged into the light. One was a
dignified thranx
of considerable age, evidently the one who had called out to them. His antennae
dropped, and his
chiton was turning deep 'purple. Both wing cases had been treated for the cracking of
maturation,
but the insect walked with sureness, and the shining compound eyes still held a
brightness few
young thranx possessed.
His companion was a tall, slim human of comparable age. His eyes were simple, and
there were no
ommatidia to throw back rainbows at the stupefied watchers, but they gleamed a little in
their own
way from beneath slightly slanted brows.
"As fast as we come, it's never been fast enough," the thranx announced tiredly. "None
of you are
damaged?”
"No, no," Isili Hasboga responded. She tried to see past the two figures into the darkness
of the
tunnel. "What happened to the Otoid?"
"I'd like to say," the tall human replied, in oddly stilted Terranglo, "that we landed
among them,
discussed the situation pleasantly, and convinced them to leave in peace. Unfortunately,
they are
belligerent far in excess of their intelligence." He appeared embarrassed. "Our skimmer

is just
outside the entrance to this temple. We have some heavy weapons in it."
"Frankly, it wouldn't disappoint us if you'd exterminate the little bastards completely,"
September declared, rising and brushing rock dust from his hands and clothes.
"I am sorry," responded the thranx, with frosty politeness, "we are not in the genocide
business."
For a thranx to speak such perfect Terranglo was most unusual, Flinx knew as he moved
for a better
look at their rescuers. In fact, in his whole life he had only met one thranx who spoke the
language of man like a native. That was . . .
"Truzenzuzex!" he shouted, stumbling forward past a dumfounded September. "Bran
Tse-Mallory!"
Chapter Ten
The two partners, prospector and archeologist stared blankly as their young visitor
exchanged
noisy greetings with the two peculiar saviors.
Tse?Mallory was smiling his thin little smile, whip masked more enthusiasm than it ever
revealed.
The Eint Truzenzuzex made clicking sounds in High Thranx indicative of greeting
mixed with great
pleasure, then added in Terranglo: "Again to see you is a delight, young Flinx."
September gazed open-mouthed at the evident reunion; then his brows furrowed in
concentration and
he simply watched and listened.
"I am warmed mentally and emotionally, though I cannot be physically," announced the
thranx
philosoph. "So I must ... ask you to remove your arms from ... around my b-thorax ... so
I can …
breathe."
"Oh, sorry," Flinx apologized, removing his arms from around the old insect. Once again
the eight
breathing spicules pulsed freely. "But what are you doing here, old friends? Of all the
places in
the universe, this is the last that I'd expect?"
"Everything in its proper time plane, lad," Tse-Mallory broke in, making calming
motions with both
hands. "At present, I suggest we remove ourselves from this confined place. The
aborigines who are
left may elect to return. We would not be able to properly direct our skimmer's weapons
from this
deep in the earth."
"I'm for that," grunted September, willing to accept salvation without explanation. "The

rent on
this rat hole's been paid." He gathered up his Mark Twenty.
Led by Tse-Mallory, the little party of saviors and survivors started back down the
tunnel.
Hasboga increased her stride to come up alongside Flinx. She was relieved, confused,
and wary all
at once. "You obviously know these two," she murmured accusingly.
"They're old friends, as I said," Flinx readily confessed.
"What are they doing here? Not that I'm sorry they appeared, you understand," she
added hastily,
lest she seem ungrateful, "but you told us you were here alone, except for the one dead
in the
temple."
"I told you the truth," Flinx insisted easily. "I was as surprised to see them as you and
September were." At a sudden thought, he glanced back over his shoulder. Sure enough,
Ab was still
sitting back in the alcove, playing with rocks.
"Move it, Abalamahalamatandra!" he shouted impatiently.
Ab looked up from where he was squatting near the rear of the wide place in the tunnel.
"Come
some, fly high," he murmured, perhaps to himself, maybe to Flinx, possibly to nothing
and no one
in particular.
Twelve stones were arranged in a neat circle in front of Ab. With additional stones the
addled
alien was creating an abstract and seemingly meaningless design in the center of the
circle. Ire
had found the stones in a small hollow in the floor where his foot had fallen through
during the
fighting.
At his master's urging, he rapidly pushed the stones, diamonds, tanzanites, and a couple
of
fist?sized black emeralds back into the little hole. They fell the balk' meter to the bottom
of
the hollow. One of them bounced off an Alaspinian doubledevil mask, a meter high and
wide, made of
solid platiniridium and faced entirely with faceted jewels. It lay atop a small hillock of
similar
artwork.
"Go flow," ordered Ab as he scrambled to his feet and gamboled down the corridor after
Flinx.
Emerging into the central temple chamber they had abandoned earlier, the tired

survivors were
greeted by the warmth and friendly daylight filtering in through the gallery window high
above and
through the once dark doorway. Fragments of broken wood from the shattered makeshift
door lay
strewn all over the floor.
Hasboga took one look and moaned at the sight of the supplies they had been unable to
take with
them into the tunnel. Everything edible was gone, everything nonorganic broken, torn,
battered
into uselessness. The sleeping mattress was tiny flakes of plastic drifting in the gentle
jangle
breeze. Their autochef, the sole means of synthesizing a decent meal, was scrap metal,
the smaller
sections missing. Undoubtedly the cannibalized metal would find its way into hundreds
of Otoid
arrowheads.
"That's the end of it," she sighed, bending over and picking listlessly through pieces of a
shredded dream. "I've no grant money to replace this." She probed through the rubble
and held up a
bent, half-unwound spool of study tape.
"How they hate us," she murmured. "Why?"
A hand the size of a good book covered her right: shoulder. September looked down at
her with a
mixture of paternal and nonpaternal affection. "We'll scrape up the credit somewhere,
Isili, if
you really want to come back here one day. It's only money. I've been richer and broker
than this
a couple of dozen times in my life. The scale always balances."
"Not for me it doesn't," she replied viciously, throwing the tape into the rest of the
vandalized
pile.
She sniffed loudly. "I will not cry. It's unscientific and unbecoming and solves nothing."
"Damn right," agreed September, turning away from her so she could let the tears flow
without
embarrassment. "I said we'd raise the credit from somewhere, and we will!" He studied
the Otoid
bodies which lay strewn about the chamber. Several black-lipped holes showed in the
temple walls.
Both were testimony to the effectiveness of whatever weapons the two odd newcomers
claimed to have

in their skimmer. "They paid for it," the giant finished, examining the Otoid dead.
"Our sorrows to you," Truzenzuzex clicked, making a gesture which looked much like a
sign of
blessing, "but we should hurry. Those who would return would be angrier than the ones
who lie
quietly here." The aged philosoph watched as September moved to comfort Hasboga.
"We don't know
you and you do not know us," he pointed out. "We have access to certain funds. Your
loss touches
me." The valentine head swiveled slightly; he looked up at the tall human standing
nearby. "Bran,
may we not aid these two?"
Hasboga brightened and looked uncertainly from man to insect. "Noble sirs, we'd be
forever in your
debt!"
"We are not nobles," Tse-Mallory corrected briskly. "My name you now know. My
companion"- he
touched the insect's b-thorax lightly-" is a theoretical philosopher holding the rank of
Eint
among the thranx. We were both once of the United Church and served it."
"Who do you serve now, Tse-Mallory?" asked September.
The slightly wrinkled face smiled cryptically. "Our own curiosities. Your names, sir?"
"Isili Hasboga, my boss," September responded, ignoring the disgusted look she gave
him, "and I'm
Skua September. We'd appreciate any loan you could make us, humanx."
Tse-Mallory found himself looking eye to eye with a man twice his own mass.
"September ... that
name I know from something."
The giant grinned. "Can't imagine how or where from, Tse-Mallory, sir."
"I see you are not violently opposed," Truzenzuzex told his friend. "We can discuss
matters of
money and memory later, after we have left this dangerous place. If you will all hurry,"
he once
more urged them, "our skimmer is hovering just outside."
Everyone moved ... less one.
Flinx had not heard much of the Preceding conversation. He stood off to one side,
staring down at
the: eyeless body of Pocomchi. Now he turned sharply.
"Just a minute." While the others stopped to stare at him, he moved as if he had all the
time in
the world and started brushing dirt and dust and gravel off Ab. As always, the alien
allowed

himself to be cleaned without comment.
"Everyone's in too much of a hurry," he continued. "Me, I'm not going anywhere with
anyone until I
get some things straight in my own mind." Truzenzuzex stared at him disapprovingly,
but Flinx was
firm. "Not with you or with Bran, until we ..." Something clicked and now he spoke
rapidly.
"You've both been following me. You must have been following me, or you wouldn't be
here now.
Unless you have some dealings with September or Isili, and judging from the little
exchange I just
overheard, you didn't know each other until just a few minutes ago."
September looked curious, Hasboga merely confused.
"I don't know why you've been following me," Flinx went on forcefully. "I want to
know." After a
brief pause, he added, almost indifferently, "It was you two who killed all those Qwarm
back in
the warehouse on Moth, when I was on my way to the shuttleport."
Hasboga's confusion gave way to the kind of worry and nervousness that mention of the
assassin
clan always engendered. "Qwarm? What's this about Qwarm?" She eyed Flinx as if he
had suddenly
turned into a dangerous disease.
"Quiet," instructed September. "Let them talk it out, lsili."
"Oh no," she objected, "not this lady. Credit loan or no credit loan, I don't want anything
from
anyone who's had dealings with the Qwarm." She smiled gratefully but cautiously at
Tse-Mallory.
"Thanks for your offer of aid, sir, but you can keep your money and your arguments with
the Owarm
to yourselves. We'll raise the credit elsewhere."
Tse-Mallory finished listening, then turned back to Flinx as if Hasboga had never
opened her
mouth. "Yes, we killed them before they could kill you, Flinx."
That explained the fading mental screams and sounds Flinx had sensed while fleeing
from the
warehouse. Tse-Mallory and Truzenzuzex, those aged beings, had been concluding their
grisly work.
No doubt the Qwarm had been very much surprised.
"Then you have been following me," he declared, more curious than accusing.
"All the way from Moth," Tse-Mallory replied, "but you are only partially correct,

Flinx."
Truzenzuzex raised a truhand and foothand, pointed to Flinx's left and behind him.
"Primarily,
Flinx, we've been trying to catch up with it."
For a second Flinx stood staring blankly at the philosoph. Then he turned and gazed
silently
behind him. So did September and Hasboga.
Ab noticed all the silent attention, giggled his alien giggle, and began to rhyme noisily at
his
new audience.
Flinx turned away from his charge, to eye the myriad corpses scarring the temple floor,
the ruins
of September and Hasboga's camp, and discovered that try as he might he couldn't find a
thread of
logic in anything that had happened.
September was apparently of the same mind. "You two have been chasing that crazy
four-legged
whatsis," he announced in disbelief, "and killing 0warm because of it?" He shook his
massive head
in amazement, that great proboscis cleaving the air like a fan. "You don't look like
madmen."
"Neither are the Qwarm," Flinx added dazedly. "Why is Ab's death so important to
them?"
"Abalamahalamatandra, you called to it back there in the tunnel," Tse-Mallory mused
maddeningly,
ignoring everyone's questions. "Ab for short. It has a name. Interesting."
"You're avoiding me, Bran," Flinx half snapped at the tall Oriental. "That's not the TseMallory I
know who pondered the inner workings of the Krang. Why do the Qwarm want Ab
dead?"
"Not the Qwarm," corrected Truzenzuzex quietly. "Never the Owarm. If they want
anyone dead, it's
you, Flinx, because of the trouble you've caused them. But to them Ab is only a statistic
at the
end of a voucher. They are hired by those who want others dead, in this case your
accidental
companion." The philosoph looked sad, angry. "The Qwarm clan is a lingering evil from
unenlightened, pre-Amalgamation times. Why the Church and Commonwealth tolerate
it I have never
understood. As for Ab there are impressive forces that want him extinguished. Not
simply dead, but
obliterated, disintegrated."

"But why?" Flinx pleaded, uncomprehending. "Look at him." He gestured at the
innocent, versifying
creature. "Why would anyone want such a harmless creature killed, and why take such
pains to do
it?" Turning back to face Truzenzuzex, his next question revealed how much he had
grown since they
had last seen him. "Even more interesting, why would two individuals of your abilities
want to go
to the trouble of preventing it?"
"Why did you bother to rescue him that first time, before we could do so?" Tse-Mallory
asked.
Flinx didn't look at him as he replied irritably, "I have a talent for getting my nose stuck
in
other people's business. I spend a lot of time trying to yank it out. Actually, I didn't
intend to
interfere. It was Pip who?" He broke off in mid-sentence.
"I do not see the minidrag," Truzenzuzex admitted. "Your pet is dead?"
"Not dead," Flinx corrected him. "But I don't really know. This is the planet of Pip's
birth. The
man who guided me here also had a tame minidrag, Balthazaar. Both flew away
together, in the
middle of the night. Possibly forever, although," he added hopefully, "there's always a
chance
they'll return." His tone grew firm. "You're both trying to distract me. I'm not setting foot
in
any kind of skimmer with you two devious old men" -Truzenzuzex made a clacking
noise- "until I
find out why someone wants poor Ab killed and why you both want him alive." He
shook his head in
puzzlement. "It doesn't seem to me that either Ab or myself is worth all the attention
that's been
given to us."
Bran Tse-Mallory responded by glancing impatiently from Flinx to the rubble-and-bodylittered
temple entrance. "This isn't the place or time, Minx."
Flinx folded his arms and took a seat on a nearby stone. "I disagree."
Isili Hasboga was picking sadly through the remnants of her scientific equipment. As she
spoke,
she brushed strands of hair from her face. "I have to agree with your friends, Flinx. The
Otoid
will come back, twice as many the next time. When they do return, I don't want to be
here."

"Sorry, silly," said September. "I have to side with the boy." He flashed Flinx a look of
support.
"You've got some interesting friends for one your age, feller-me-lad. Stay obstinate. I'll
stay,
too."
"Very well then," whistled Truzenzuzex exasperatedly. "Bran?"
Tse-Mallory made a negative sound. He eyed September, who was rocking on his heels,
humming to
himself and supremely indifferent to the possibly imminent arrival of several thousand
rampaging
aborigines. "If you'll pick up that formidable-looking Mark Twenty, Mr. September, and
come
outside with me, we'll keep watch while these two chatter." September nodded his
acquiescence and
moved to shoulder the rifle. "Try to be brief, will you, Tru?" Tse-Mallory asked his
companion.
"If there is one among us who is guilty of persistent loquacity," came the reply smoothly,
"it is
not I"
"Debatable" was Tse-Mallory's simple retort, as he followed September up the steps
leading out of
the temple.
"Not without being guilty of the crime of debating!" shouted Truzenzuzex, but by that
time TseMallory and September were out of hearing range.
On the grass outside, both men took up positions on board the skimmer. "The lad
indicated the
thranx is an Eint and philosoph," September said conversationally. "What of you?"
"I mentioned we were at one time both in the service of the Church. I was a Chancellor
Second."
September appeared impressed, though not awed. "Pretty high. Wouldn't have guessed
it. Myself, I
never had much use for the Church."
"Nor did Tru and I, after a while. That's why we left it." Jungle sounds drifted innocently
out of
the green wave, helped them relax a little. "And you, sir?"
"Oh, I've done a little bit of everything," September replied modestly, "and had a little
bit of
everything done to me." He did not elaborate, and Tse-Mallory did not pry.
Settling himself down on his four trulegs, Truzenzuzex folded truhands and gestured
with foothands

as he talked. Behind Flinx, Ab was arranging stones in a circle (ordinary stones, this
time) and
singsonging softly to himself.
"Flinx, what do you know of the double-world system Carmague-Collangatta and the
planet Twosky
Bright?"
Flinx thought a moment, then looked blank. "Little more than what you've just told me,
their
names. I've never been to either. I think they're all well-populated, highly developed
worlds."
"Correct," said Truzenzuzex, nodding. "All three are important contributors to the
Commonwealth
economy; stable, advanced worlds. They're all going to die ... or at least most of the
people on
them are probably the worlds themselves, also."
"Their suns are going nova," Flinx guessed. He frowned. "That would be quite a
coincidence."
"I would expect you to be an expert on coincidences, boy. Your assumption is incorrect.
The
situation is this. Many years ago, but not too many, a Commonwealth science probe
mapping behind
the dark nebula called the Velvet Dam discovered a sun disappearing into nothingness.
Of course,
it wasn't disappearing into nothingness, only into something that partook of the aspect of
nothingness."
"I don't think I understand," Flinx admitted.
"You will. Your Lewis Carroll would have. He was a physicist himself, I think? No
matter. The star
in question was being smashed down into a rogue black hole. Such an object has been
theorized, but
this is the first one detected. Its course has been determined. We know enough to predict
that
only a small percentage of the populations of all three worlds could be rescued before
their
respective suns vanish into the rogue."
Flinx's own problems were forgotten as he tried to conceive of disaster on the scale
Truzenzuzex
was describing to him. He sat quietly, thinking, before it occurred to him to ask, "But
why tell
me this? What does it have to do with your being here?"
Truzenzuzex shifted his stance slightly, his claws making tiny scratching sounds on the
tunnel.

"Because your acquisition, your acquaintance, your ward, or whatever you wish to call
him"?he
pointed with a truhand at the rhyming Ab? "may be the one possible chance for those
worlds'
salvation."
Having nothing intelligent to respond to that incredible bit of information with, Flinx
kept
silent.
"A black hole is the ultimate state of collapsed matter, usually a star which has fallen in
on
itself," the philosoph explained. "In the case of the rogue, we believe that it may consist
of not
one but many collapsed stars. Dozens, perhaps hundreds. We do not have
instrumentation capable of
telling us by direct measurement, but we can approximate from the speed with which the
star
detected by the probe was absorbed. For a collapsar, the mass of the rogue is immense."
"How could anyone, especially Ab, least of all the creatures in the galaxy, help you?
Nothing can
turn or destroy a collapsar. At least," he added quickly, "nothing I ever heard of. I see no
connection, Tru, sir." For a moment he displayed the attitude of a schoolboy ignorant of
the
answer to a teacher's question.
"I would not feel foolish at that failure," Truzenzuzex confided to him. "You have much
company."
Some bitterness crept into his voice. "Both the Commonwealth High Council and the
Court of Last
Resort of the United Church are of the opinion that nothing can be done to save the three
worlds.
They are attempting to rescue small groups of the three populations without causing
panic, which
will be inevitable. They refuse to consider the alternative."
"There's an alternative?" Flinx looked startled.
"We are hopeful" was all the philosoph would admit to. "But both Bran and myself feel
that
anything which might save billions of lives and uncounted trillions of credits, no matter
how
absurd it sounds, is worth serious and not jocular consideration. Our strongest assurance
that we
are on the track of something potentially helpful has been the frantic attempts of other
parties

to eliminate that hope. How your poetically inclined alien is involved in this I will tell
you in
a moment.
"While Bran and I are no longer connected to the Church, we still retain sympathetic
connections
in the bureaucracy. In the Commonwealth government, too. Through these we learned of
the death
sentence hanging over the three worlds in the path of the rogue. We felt as helpless and
sorrowfilled
as anyone. However, we elected to try to do something. Our specialty is the preCommonwealth, pre-Amalgamation history of this part of the galaxy. To make many
weeks of tedious
research brief, we learned of a possible connection between an ancient race and a similar
destructive appearance of a rogue collapsar. Somehow, somewhere on this side of the
galactic
center, the menace was met and dealt with.
"That in turn led us to search for anything that might tell us what became of the device
which
dealt with the first rogue. Rumors of a being of unknown type were brought to us by our
agents.
The being was at that time reported to be in the city of Drallar, on Moth. This being sang
nonsense rhymes and performed as a comic foil in a simple street entertainment. We
were not on
Drallar at the time, but we succeeded in obtaining copies of recordings from a tourist
who
witnessed the being's performance. This intellectual expressed astonishment that Bran
and myself
should be interested in such things.
"We were very excited when we saw the first images of your Ab," the philosoph went
on. "He matches
up with no known race. However, it was not his appearance, rather; one of his rhymes
we heard
while viewing the recording, which caused my breathing spicules to lock to the point of
fainting
and caused Bran to utter an oath I had not heard from him in eighteen years. You see,
Flinx, one
of the rhymes contained a mention of the race we believe successfully stopped the
intrusion of a
rogue collapsar approximately eight hundred thousand Terran years ago on the near side
of the
Shapely Center. That race was called the Hur'rikku."
There was a gasp, followed by a metallic clattering. Isili Hasboga had dropped the

armload of
tapes she had so laboriously salvaged. They sprawled across the floor. Several of them
had
cracked, and thin microscopic tape had unreeled from the twisted spools.
She made no move to recover the tapes. Her expression showed shock; her eyes were
wide in
disbelief.
Flinx saw something moving nearby: A truhand was plunging into a pouch in the
philosoph's thorax
vest. Perhaps it was the abrupt shock of Hasboga's reaction- perhaps his talent chose that
perverse moment to function- in any case, he sensed what was racing through the elderly
thranx's
mind.
"No, Tru!" he shouted, rising and stepping between the insect and Hasboga. "She's not a
spy, she's
an archeologist. Wouldn't she know of the Hur'rikku?"
Truzenzuzex turned blazing compound eyes on Flinx and considered his words. The
hand relaxed; the
concealed weapon in the pouch never emerged.
All at once, Hasboga came out of her moment-long trance. She turned her gaze to the
floor, saw and
remembered what had happened. Suddenly she was scrambling to retrieve her precious
tapes.
Occasionally she would glance back at the watchful Truzenzuzex, aware that something
had upset
him, but she never suspected that the old insect had been prepared to kill her simply on
the basis
of her reaction to what he had told Flinx.
"You are not a spy," he decided, the fire fading from his eyes. "I see that now."
"Me?" She looked back in confusion. "A spy? Spy, for whom?"
"I will tell you in time," he murmured. "When you indicated a familiarity with the
Hur'rikku I ...
Excuse me." He executed a thranx gesture of apology seasoned with contrition at his
own stupidity.
"Too many deaths are already involved in this matter. Bran and I can take no chances.
The
Commonwealth and the Church are already suspicious of our actions, and they dislike
having others
inquire into matters they consider wasteful. Then there are those who would like to see
the rogue
proceed unchallenged on its course of destruction."

"Who or what are the Hur'rikku?" Flinx was still a bit shaken from the severity of the
kindly
philosoph's murderous reaction to Hasboga's knowledge.
His antennae still aquiver, Truzenzuzex proceeded to explain. "The Hur'rikku are the
halflegendary
race who, scientists postulate, erupted from the region near the galactic, center some
nine hundred and fifty thousand years ago."
"They weren't half legendary," argued Hasboga. "They were completely legendary.
Myths about then
exist, but no physical proof has ever been found for which alternate explanations
couldn't be
provided."
"No physical proof, this is so," admitted Truzenzuzex. "But they frightened the
ovipositors of the
Tar-Aiym." His mandibles clicked in thranx laugher. "Of the Tar-Aiym we do have
physical proof."
Flinx knew the truth of that statement from his experiences of over a year ago.
"We know that about the time the Hur'rikku are rumored to have begun their expansion
outward from
the galactic center, this entire section of space was dominated by the Tar-Aiym. Roughly
half a
million Terran years ago, the indomitable Tar-Aiym were thrown into a racial panic. It
seems
reasonable to assume that the Hur'rikku were the cause of this."
Hasboga made a derisive sound. Truzenzuzex ignored her and continued on. "The TarAiym scientists
constructed numerous new weapons to counter the Hur'rikku threat. One was the
defensive weapon
known as the Krang. Another was a simple plague. That destroyed not only the
Hur'rikku but the
TarAiym themselves, and all life in the region we know today as the Blight, before
finally
destroying itself.
"At this point in time the Hur'rikku are mostly a legend. They exist because your friend
Ab sings
of them." A truhand gestured to where the alien was delightedly juggling a dozen rocks.
"The
Hur'rikku are like the rogue. Like it, we have no direct perception of existence. But we
can see
how it acts upon other objects. Similarly, we know the Hur'rikku existed because we
know of their
effect upon the Tar-Aiym. In fact, that is all we know so far of the Hur'rikku- that they

existed.
That and the fact that perhaps they may have found a way to counter the danger posed
by a
wandering collapsar- and a few other less-impressive myths."
"But you need physical proof!" Hasboga objected.
"Evidence need not be physical," was the insect's calm reply.
"You philosophical scientists are all the same," she said in exasperation. "You support
hypotheses
with dreams embedded in foundations of supposition."
Truzenzuzex was not upset by the disparaging of his chosen field. "So, Flinx, as little as
we know
of the Tar?Aiym, we know even less of the Hur'rikku. And yet ... your alien talks of
them."
Flinx turned disbelieving eyes on the humming Ab. "You think that Ab might be ...?"
"No." Truzenzuzex was quick to correct a blossoming misconception. "We do not think
your Ab is a
Hur'rikku. The last Hur'rikku died five hundred thousand years ago. What Bran and I
believe is
that he j more likely to be a very old member of some race living on the periphery of the
Blight,
a race that retains memories of both the Tar-Aiym and the Hur'rikku and their exploits.
The
legends of the Hur'rikku and the collapsar are known. It is part of one legend that the
Hur'rikku
threatened to use on the Tar-Aiym worlds the device which had stopped their rogue. If
true, that
would go far to explain the unprecedented panic among, the warrior Tar-Aiym."
Flinx turned to watch Ab's juggling act. Noting the smoothness of the blue skin, the
supple arms
and legs; the clearness in the four limpid blue eyes, he reflected that the alien didn't look
old.
He reminded himself than he was judging Ab's appearance by human standard.. Among
Ab's race,
smooth skin and bright eyes might be signs of advancing senility.
"The legends seem to imply," Truzenzuzex went or, "that beside this Hur'rikku device,
something
like the Krang is a larva's toy."
Flinx was pacing the floor worriedly. "Couldn't we try to use the Krang against this new
rogue?"
Thranx laughter spiced with sarcasm preceded the philosoph's response. "Just how
would you move
it" Flinx? You'd have to move the entire world of Booster, on which the Krang is located

and from
whose core it draws its power. Besides, if my initial supposition is correct and the Krang
does
generate a Schwarzschild discontinuity it would not harm a collapsar. Quite the
contrary."
He leaned forward and stared hard at Flinx. "Then there is the question of who could
operate the
Krang. I recall your saying that you had no idea how to operate it.
"Well, that's true also," Flinx almost panicked, trying to cover his mistake. Truzenzuzex
had
always been suspicious of Flinx's abilities. He hid his concern in wonder. "Something
that would
make the Krang seem to be a child's toy ... incredible."
"An ultimate weapon." Truzenzuzex nodded slowly.
A sharp laugh sounded from nearby. Ultimate weapons indeed! You and your tall friend
are madder
than this alien. No such thing as an ultimate weapon can exist. If it did, it would have
destroyed
everything in the galaxy by now, once it had been activated."
"Not if in activation it neutralized itself" Truzenzuzex argued charmingly.
"You can't convince me with semantics."
"I know, young lady. You require physical proof." More Thranx chuckling, a sound like
seashells
sliding against each other. "We think it worth trying to locate such proof, if it does exist.
We
have nothing to lose except three worlds."
Chapter Eleven
After a moment's silence, Flinx pointed back at Ab, "How do you know Ab knows
anything more about
the Hur'rikku than he's already said?"
"He appears to be a limitless fount of information, Flinx. or haven't you noticed that he
never
repeats the same rhyme twice?"
"'That may be so," Flinx conceded, "but he only talks nonsense."
"Much of it probably is nonsense that will always re-main incomprehensible to us."
Truzenzuzex was
agree-able. "But some of it is not."
"How do you propose to get any more Hur'rikku in-formation out of him?"
Truzenzuzex sighed deeply, an eerie whistling sound in the near-empty chamber. "We've
chased him
across two planets now so that I can do just that. But why don't you do it, Flinx?"

"Do what, sir?"
"Ask him. Ask him about the Hur'rikku."
"I ..." Flinx noticed that the philosoph had switched on a tiny recorder attached to his
thorax
vest. The insect was serious about this. Well, he could play along. Turning, he faced Ab
and said
sharply, "Ab! Abalamahalamatandra!" All twelve rocks fell to the stone floor, their
juggler
ignoring them save for a single blue orb. He gazed wanly at the stones until they stopped
bouncing.
"What about the Hur'rikku, Ab?" F1inx asked, feeling like an idiot as he talked sensibly
to his
ward. "Tell us about the Hur'rikku. Tell us about how they stopped the collapsar rogue."
Nine and five, five and nine, loverly to dine if fine. 'Ricku, 'Ricku, sing to hicks, haiku
you,
you key me."
"There, you sec?" Flinx turned and spread his hands I
in a gesture of helplessness. "It's useless- he's crazy."
"Not completely," countered Truzenzuzex. "It's sim-ply a matter of points of tangency.
You have
none. Bran and I have learned several. For example, Ne-inenive is a Geeprolian
translation for
Har'rikku neuter. They had three sexes, it seems. Ab is trying to convey information, but
it's
garbled through maybe a dozen languages at a time, all of which he's trying to
pronounce as
Terranglo."
Flinx Threw Ab a look of pure incredulity before re-turning his attention to the expectant
philosoph. "You mean Ab's been making sense all along?"
"No. Some of his chattering seems to be pure non-sense. The trouble is separating out
the sense.
Or per-haps I am wrong and everything he is saying would make sense if only we had
some way of
breaking it doom. His name, Abalamahalamatandra, for example. I wonder if that's just a
collection
of conveniently col-lected syllables, or if it actually means something." The philosoph
rose from
his squatting position. “ Let us take your Ab along, probe and prod him, and see what
other
insightful nonsense he can spout."
Tse-Mallory and September clambered back down the steps and stood at the base.
"Patience, shipbrother,"

Txuzenzuzex called to his companion. "We are coming."
"Now," TaerMallory responded in Terranglo. "We've wasted too much time here.
September and I
killed two Otoid scouts a few minutes ago. They must be returning. There axe also the
Qwarm to
consider."
F?inx started. He had almost forgotten about the professional assassins, with all the
amazing talk
of test races ultimate weapons, and a coherent Alb.
"You brought a fair-sized skimmer, sirs," said Sep-tember. "I think we can all fit inside."
"We can if you take no more than that." Tse-Mal-lory indicated Hasboga, who was laden
with tapes,
real books, and a few modest Mimmisompo artifacts.
"Nothing here for me," September commented with a grunt. "I can always come back for
whatever the
abos leave."
` Why bother, Skua?" Hasboga wanted to know. "We found nothing here. We probably
never
would." Her gaze roamed the chamber floor a last time. "We tried the wrong building. I
see no
profit in returning. Next time we'll try somewhere else."
"Sure we will, silly," September said reassuringly. "We'll raise the credit somewhere,
don't
worry," Ire shifted the enormous Mark Twenty from his shoulder to a ready position.
"Gentlesirs,
if you'll lead the way I'll endeavor to keep an eye or two on the tree trunks, in case the
need
rises for me to incinerate one or two overcurious little green brothers."
"We will chance your expertise in the jungle." Tse--Mallory's mouth twisted in distaste.
"Though I
wish you'd phrase your intent in a less primitive fashion. All intelligent beings are
brothers,
you know. The Otoid as well."
A reflective grin split the giant's tanned face. "I had a brother once. Didn't like him
either. I
..." He cut the story short with an expansive gesture. "After you, gentlesixs and lady."
As they emerged from the sheltering stone walls of the temple, Flinx found himself
nervously eying
every branch and vine and creeper, convinced that a thou-sand Otoid were concealed
nearby. At any
second he expected to feel a rain of darts, loosed from the nearest trees.

Ahead of him, Truzenzitzez was murmuring deeply in Low Thranx. Nonsense rhymes
and songs emanated
from Ali with the usual unconcern of the mad. Only now they seemed to be in response
to the
philosoph's hypnotic mutters. Some were in Ali's mangled Terran-glo, the rest in
languages unknown
to Flux. But twice, he thought he heard mention of the Hur'rikku, so per-haps the
philosoph was
learning something after all. Privately, Flinx couldn't help but think his two wizened
friends
were engaged in a fruitless chase founded on a futile assumption.
All the jungle noises which assaulted his ears were animalistic and indifferent. There
was no sign
of the native Otoid. It was only a short walk to the hovering skimmer.
Tse-Mallory employed a control panel on his belt to deactivate the protective energy
shield
surrounding the craft and then to have it sink to the ground for easy boarding. It was a
small
cargo craft, much larger than the tiny two-man ship Flinx and Pocomchi had trav-eled
in.
That forced Pocomchi and Habib into his thoughts again. Indirectly, at least, he was the
cause of
their deaths.
Why, he mused in anguished fury, did so many people have to perish around him, when
what he sought
was neither wealth nor power but only knowledge of his origins?
Tse-Mallory boarded the skimmer first, followed, with the always unexpected agility, by
Truzenzuzex, then Hasboga and September. As soon as Flinx entered the broad cockpit,
with Ali
bringing up the rear, Tse-Mallory touched a switch and the canopy door slid shut.
The engine whined expectantly. Soon they would be back in Alaspinport, where he
could press
September to finish his explanation, no matter how much the giant tried to put off Flinx's
questions this time. His gaze rose curiously, why he didn't know, to the transparent roof.
Something moved against the clear sky. Squinting, he stood on tiptoes and peered so
hard the back
of his eyes hurt. Then Flinx was jumping up and down, shouting violently, "Stop the
skimmer, stop,
stop!"
Tse-Mallory hit a switch reflexively, and the craft, which had commenced a slow turn,
came to an
abrupt halt. September was struggling to reclaim his rifle from the cargo area, while

Truzenzuzex
was digiting the skimmer's heavy armament uncertainly.
"What troubles you Flinx?" the philosoph inquired'; glancing back over a shoulder
turned Tyrolean
purple.
For an answer Flinx continued to stare skyward, though be gestured with his right band
toward the
control panel. "Put back the canopy," he requested. Tse--Mallory started to object. Flinx
s voice
rose almost hys-terically! "The canopy-put it back!"
The human scientist exchanged looks with his thranx companion, who simply shrugged.
Tse-Mallory
activated a control, and the transparent polyplexalioy dome slid back into the body of
the
skimmer, leaving only transparent sides, doors, and front windshield in place.
Hasboga moved to stand alongside Flinx. She stared into the sky. "I don't see anything,
Flinx,"
she said with surprising gentleness.
"There," he told her, pointing. "Coming toward -as out of the sun ... it has to be ... I'm
sure it
is!"
Two shapes wove a descending spiral, dancing on the air. Two small dragon-forms stark
against mountains
of cloud. One was noticeably larger than the other.
A hundred meters above the skimmer, they finished their aerial choreography and
separated.
Balthazaar flew off in the direction of the sun. The other began a steady twisting dive
toward the
open skimmer.
"That's a dragon!" Hasboga gasped, reaching for her sidearm. Flinx put a restraining
band on hers.
"No, it's all right, Isili. It's mine. It's Pip." His voice was cracking, despite his best efforts
at self-control.
A familiar diamond-patterned shape braked, pleated wings backbeating the air, tail and
lower body
hooked out and extended. Flinx raised his right arm out from his side. Pip dropped for it,
tail
curving around the proffered perch. The pleated wings folded tight to the body, and then
the
flying snake was ensconced in its usual position of rest on Flinx's shoulder.
Reaching down, its master affectionately stroked the back of the triangular head. While

the
minidrag, as al-ways, showed no outward sign of emotion, Flinx could sense a feeling of
pleasure
in his pet. Empathy cloaked him like the warm glow of stones surrounding a wood fire.
Several
moments passed in silence before Flinx noticed that everyone in the skimmer was
staring at him.
"Your pet came back," Truzenzuzex finally said, ex-plaining Pip to the still-uncertain
Hasboga and
Septem-ber. "I am pleased for you, Flinx. I remember what you two meant to each
other." With that,
he turned and activated the skimmer controls.
Hasboga eyed the snake warily, but settled back in her seat as the lithe craft picked up
speed.
Soon they were speeding back toward Alaspinport, traveling just above the waving grass
of the
savannas.
When the exuberance experienced on his pet's return had faded some, Flinx thought to
turn and look
over at September. The giant was enjoying the ride, since someone else was doing the
piloting for
a change. Thick fingers were running absently through his wild, wavy white hair. His
nose
interrupted the view behind him like a plow.
"Skua?"
September faced him and offered a pleasant, toothy smile. "What is it, young teller-melad?"
Flinx glanced significantly down at his now-occupied tight shoulder. "My minidrag. His
name is
Pip." He touched one leathery wing, and the snake shifted sleepily. His attention
returned to
September. "Twelve years ago, back on Moth, you lost a young minidrag, remember?"
"I see what you're thinking, lad." September put both hands around one knee, which
resembled a
knot on a tree, and leaned back again, thinking. "All mini-drags look the same to me,
lad. As to
whether your Pip happens to be the one I lost, I'm guessing it's possible. I never named
my snake,
so there's no way of knowing, is there? Minidrags aren't common off Alas-pin. I
wouldn't know of
any others that had been on Moth then. Might have been. If your Pip is the one., that
would be an

interesting coincidence, wouldn't it?"
"Yes, it sure would." Flinx kept his voice carefully even.
"Signifying nothing." September finished with that, and turned his gaze to the scenery
slipping
past out-side.
Flinx did likewise, watching the savanna roll past as Truzenzuzex and Tse-Mallory
skillfully
maneuvered the craft over low hills, around trees and upthrust, un-weathered rock
spires.
"Signifying nothing," he murmured softly to himself.
At Alaspinport, Flinx was forced to reveal that he had his own ship. That was fine with
Tru and
Bran. Flinx permitted them to commandeer it-on one con-dition. "I'm not through
questioning
September," he whispered to Tse-Mallory.
The scientist regarded him somberly. "You'll have him around for a while yet, Flinx.
Hasboga has
un-doubtedly told him of our plans. For their own protec-tion, we must take both with us
until
this matter is resolved. If not, they will be questioned by the Qwarm. I don't think they
would be
permitted to live."
Neither Hasboga nor September objected to a free trip off Alaspin once it was explained
to them
what might happen if they remained. Both appeared to be under the impression that they
would be
delivered im-mediately to some larger, safe world like Terra or New Paris. Flinx didn't
exactly
lie about that, he simply neglected to tell either of them that they would be tak-ing a long
route
around.
As they left the surface of Alaspin, Truzenzuzex's damnable curiosity prompted him to
ask Flinx
how he had acquired the impressive sum necessary to purchase and operate a private,
system-jumping
vessel like the Teacher. Flinx could not explain that the Teacher had been built by his
precocious
pupils, the Ulru-Ujurrians. Yet it was extremely difficult to lie believably in front of
someone
as perceptive as Truzenzuzex. So, in what he hoped was a natural tone of voice, he
explained that
he had purchased the ship out of the money given him by Maxim Malaika as reward for

his part in
discovering the Krang. When he ran out of money to operate the vessel, he would have
to sell it.
Truzenzuzex appeared to accept this facile explana-tion readily enough, though Flinx
could detect
a famil-iar twinge of suspicion in the philosoph's mind even as he acknowledged the
story.
Presently, they entered the Teacher with the insect explaining that Flinx's fast ship was
the
reason they were so long in tracking him down on Alaspin. Meanwhile, Flinx went about
the
difficult task of assigning quarters to everyone on a ship that had not been designed with
passeneers in mind.
"We've always been just a step behind you, Flinx," Truzenzuzex said. "On Moth we had
to stop and
deal with the Owarm, while you made your way to the shut-tleport. Then you
outdistanced us because
we were forced to take a commercial ship to Asaspin, one which stopped several times
along the
way, while you raced here directly. We were lucky to find you as soon as we did."
They entered the spacious lounee, spacious because Flinx enjoyed space and the Teacher
had that to
spare. The room accommodated them all comfortably.
The philosoph gazed around approvingly. "A fine ship you have for yourself, Flinx."
"Adequate" was the youth's response.
"I do not understand where the name came from."
"A whim." Flinx managed only a half-lie this time. "I've always had thoughts about
being a
teacher."
"An admirable profession. One to which too few beings dedicate themselves. I find
most, sadly, to
be teaching because they have good minds but no imag-ination. Teaching is charity for
the
intelligent."
Leaving the lounge to Hasboga and September, Flinx led the two scientists to the pilot's
compartment. Three walls were embroidered with controls, the fourth showed naked
space.
"Where do you want to go?" he asked, hands poised over the ship's instrumentation.
For the first time, Truzenzuzex and Tse-Mallory did not have a ready answer. Both
glanced at Ab,
who had trailed the three forward and was now rhyming at a rapid pace. Flinx couldn't

tell whether
the philosoph was making any sense of the alien's verses.
"Actually," Tse-Mallory had to admit, "we don’t know yet. Somewhere in the Blight, but
we need at
least a clue from your Ab. For now, head in the direc-tion of Hivehom. It's best if we
leave
Alaspin's vicin-ity."
Flinx conveyed the requisite orders to the navigation computer, which responded
promptly, though
it hesi-tated at the lack of a specific destination. A bald of deep purple formed at the nose
of
the ship, visible manifestation of the great KK drive's posigravity field. At minimal
acceleration, so as not to interact with Alaspin's gravity well, the Teacher began to move
out of
orbit. Once they were the minimum safe number of planetary diameters out, the drive
would be fully
en-gaged and the ship would leap ahead at a multiple of the speed of light.
"There's a ship coming into orbit." Flinx gazed in-terestedly at a gauge on the console.
"Not much traffic to this world," murmured Tse-Mallory. To Flinx's surprise, both he and
Truzenzuzex moved to activate several sensor controls and the large screen.
"Monitor configuration," Tse-Mallory instructed as he manipulated several controls.
"Monitoring." Truzenzuzex's delicate truhands made fine adjustments.
Flinx was prepared to leave the ship's controls on automatic. However, he turned
curiously instead
of -walking from the chamber. "Wait a minute. What's all the excitement about?" While
Pip shifted
on his shoul-der, he stared at the, two scientists, who were watching instruments with
intense
concentration. Flinx's gaze narrowed. "The incoming ship ... You still haven't told me
who hired
the Qwarm. I think I can guess, judging from what you told me about certain forces who
want to see
the rogue destroy Carmague-CoIIangatta and Twosky Bright. But I can't be sure."
"We intend to tell you, Flinx." Tse-Mallory spoke without taking his attention from the
controls
beneath his hands. "Does it matter so much to you? It's Ab they're after."
"I'd like very much to know why someone's trying to murder me because of Ab. That is,"
he added
sar-castically, "if it wouldn't be too much to ask, since I've given you the use of my
ship."
Both scientists were immune to sarcasm. Tru-zenzuzex's truhands continued to fine-tune
controls,

but he beckoned Flinx to his side with a foothand. "You wish to know, Minx." The youth
moved alongside
him. "There they are." He indicated the shape neatly focused on the computer tridee
tracker.
"Do you recognize that configuration? You are a bright human. I am certain your guess
is correct.
Now, who would stand to benefit most by the damage to Commonwealth production and
population the
rogue collapsar would cause?"
Flinx considered his supposition in the new light of the image displayed on the
viewscreen. It
confirmed what he had suspected, all right. But seeing physical proof was a good deal
more ominous
than simply sup-posing.
September and Hasboga walked into the piloting chamber. "I thought," September
bellowed, "that
since we're on our way, it might be fun to ..." Frowning, he stopped. He squinted hard at
the
picture on the screen. "Funny ... that looks like an AAnn courier ship." Hasboga looked
questioningly at him. He ignored her, crossing the floor in several huge strides to peer
closely
at the screen. "No ... no, by Pallanthian's Ghosts, it's a destroyer!" He turned a nononsense
gaze on Tse- Mallory. "What's an AAnn warship doing inside Co-mmonwealth
boundaries?"
"Boundaries, Mr. September?" Tse-Mallory trying to look innocent. "You can't draw
boundaries in
space."
"No, but you sure can on navigation charts," September shot back. "No one makes
mistakes light
years deep, not with automatic positioning equipment."
"No one said they had made a mistake," Tse-Mal-lory's voice was even, composed. He
returned his
attenention to the controls in front of him. "You needn’t sound so melodramatic,
September. You
rave like tridee fisherfax. Everyone puts too much reliance boundaries. Absurd, whey
the boundary
of the AAnn -Empire and that of the Commonwealth are hundreds1 of light-years high,
wide, and
deep. You can't build a fence, not even with the best deep-range monitoring systems.
You can

monitor worlds, but not parsecs.” He quieted for a moment to watch as the AAnn
warshL,y slipped
into orbit around Alaspin.
"There is nothing on Alaspin capable of resisting regular warship. So the AAnn will not
make
trouble. On the contrary, they will probably claim to be experi-encing trouble of their
own and
request assistance. Mutual aid for emergencies involving deep-space ships is thoroughly
covered by
the treaties."
"What happens," September wanted to know, "when a Commonwealth peaceforcer
shows up and detects no
sign of damage on board?"
Tse-Mallory smiled softly. "Mr. September, the AAnn will not linger about Alaspin.
They will
satisfy themselves that what they have come for, meaning Ab, is no longer on the planet.
Then they
will depart rap-idly. No doubt they axe tracking us at this very mo-ment." Hasboga
stifled a gasp.
"But while they may know about this ship, through Qwarm informants, the cannot be
sure Ab is
aboard. They must check Alaspin, first. By the time they know for certain, we will be v
long way
elsewhere."
"Pretests will be lodged over the unauthorized orbit,” Truzenzuzex declared. “Word will
reach
Terra and Hivehom. There will be accusations, denials, apol-ogies, concluded with
promises not to
do it again. We have done the same thing within the Empire. So long as nonstrategic
worlds like
Alaspin are involved and nobody gets killed, there's not much the offended side can do
short of
starting an interstellar war. The AAnn know they're not strong enough for that, and the
Commonwealth
is too conciliatory for it. So ... nothing will happen."
"It might as far as we're concerned." Flinx looked significantly at the philosoph, who
nodded
slowly in re-sponse.
"True FIinx. The presence of this ship means that the reptiles have lest patience with the
Qwarm."
He permitted himself a small sighing sound of satisfaction. "That is not surprising,
considering

how ineffective the assassin's clan has been. They could hardly know who has been
interfering with
them."
Tse-Mallory chuckled at that remark.
Truzenzuzex turned a somber gaze on Flinx. "This does not mean, however, that the
Qwarm are
finished with you. So long as they continue to believe you are responsible for their
difficulties,
they will continue to try to kill you."
September ventured a summation, "So we're running from both the reptiles and the
Qwarm."
"And the Commonwealth and Church as well," Tse-Mallory added.
Flinx looked uncertain. "Why them, too?"
"Remember, Flinx," the former Chancellor Second admonished him, "those
organizations believe Ab is
nothing more than a wild wish in the minds of two senile renegades."
Now it was Truzenzuzex's turn to laugh, a rapid clicking of all four mandibles.
"The Owarm are trouble enough, but I would rather deal with them than with minor
bureaucrats. If
we are detained officially, I wouldn't be surprised to see some minor functionary turn Ali
over to
them to keep the Empire pacified."
"Slow down, just a minute." Comprehension was beginning to dawn on Hasboga's dark
features. "If
we're going to avoid Commonwealth officials how are you going to set Skua and me
down anywhere
where we can raise financing?"
"We'll put you down on Burley, or on Terra, or wherever you wish," Tse-Mallory assured
her, "as
soon as we have completed our little experiment."
"1f you think I'm going to run off into the Blight and heaven knows where else with you
in pursuit
of some crazy theory, while the Qwarm and the AAnn try to kill you, you're out of your
minds!" Her
fury was exceeded only by hex incredulity.
There was a brief moment of disorientation. A slight shudder passed through the Teacher
indicating
that they had just exceeded light-speed. Pulled by the KK field, the ship continued to
accelerate.
When no one said anything, Hasboga walked over to stand next to Tse-Mallory. Eyes
flashing, she
shouted up at him, "I demand you put us down on the nearest developed Federation

world!"
The scientist sounded contrite. "Sorry, can't do that. We have no time to waste. The mere
presence
of the AAnn destroyer within the Commonwealth indicates that they axe growing
desperate. We can't
risk delays or detours. I think they cannot fallow us, but the AAnn are efficient. They
may be
able to pursue us based on the particulate matter produced by this ship's KK generator.
We cannot
afford to linger. Several bil-lion lives are at stake."
Fuming, she turned away from him. "Oh, come on! You've as much as said yourself that
the Hur'rikku
device is half myth. You can't really expect to find anything."
Tse-Mallory's eyes could not mask what he felt toward her at that moment. "Those
whose
death see as certain will climb a rope made of one straw, if such a rope can be provided.
We are
searching for that straw. Isili Hasboga, no one's personal desires axe going to obstruct
this
search until if is concluded.”
Hasboga looked ready to argue further, but Flinx in-terceded. "Please, Isili," he pleaded
with
her, "bear with them. Truzenzuzex and Bran Tse-Mallory are good humanx. If they
didn't have a good
reason for what they're doing I would never have agreed to provide them with a ship."
"Easy to say," she snapped angrily, "when your own life is at stake anyway!"
So ferocious was her reaction that Pip started, and stared threateningly at the source of
the
angry emana-tions being directed at his master. Flinx calmed the minidrag. The flying
snake
settled back on his shoul-der, but kept a watchful cold eye on the woman.
Flinx spoke softly but firmly. "If that's the case, why didn't I leave Ab behind to be killed
by
the AAnn? True it might not take the Qwarm off my back, but the AAnn would no
longer have an
interest in me. So maybe I have a little more than just self-preserva-tion at stake,
wouldn't you
say?"
"I'm sorry." She looked away. "It's just ... I've just had several years' work ruined, first by
Otoid arrows, now by finding myself involved in something I couldn't care less about."
Unable to argue further with Flinx, she turned her fury on September. "What about you,

stupid? You
worked nearly as hard on the excavating as I did. Now it's behind us and we're broke.
Broke! Don't
you un-derstand?"
He gazed down at her gently. "A stranger to im-pecuniosity I am not, silly bog. Me, I'm
just a
little ole hydrogen atom drifting in the galactic wind. Actually, I find the direction of our
present drift kind of intriguing. Probably not profitable, but sometimes it's nice to enrich
something besides one's pocket." Turning, he took a chair near the rear of the chamber.
"Besides,
I've been on Collangatta. Not Carmague, though I could always see it hanging greenand-white in
the sky overhead, and not Twosky Bright, but I've been to Collangatta. I liked the Collas.
They're
a friendly open sort. They know how to enjoy life. They made me feel welcome,
something that
doesn't always happen to me on a newly visited world. They made me feel at home.
"So, silly, before I see their world freeze over and turn into a round grave frosted with
frozen
gases, I’ll take a chance to save it." He gazed jovially at 'Tse--Mallory. "Best thing this
undertaking has going for it, near as I can see, is that the Commonwealth does't think it's
worth
trying. That's a good-enough reco-mmendation for me." She turned away from him
huffly, and he rose
and turned her. She struggled, but couldn’t move those massive arms.
"Isili, all accumulated wealth does is make you worry about the tax collector, and it's
getting
harder and harder to fool the computers. Plenty of time yet to acquire the stigma of
wealth. Or,
in your case, of fame."
"Do you really think that's it, Skua?" She gave him a pitying look. "That I'm desperate to
get
back to my pet project so I can have my fax in all the tridee tapes?"
"Not entirely," he admitted. "You're a little too de-voted to science for that. But then,
you're
not wholly immune to it, either. You're human, Isili. It's a curse we all have to bear."
"Speak for yourself." The smooth interjection came from near the console.
September let Hashoga leave his grasp and looked that way. "I stand corrected, Your
Bugship."
"Nothing personal." Truzenzuzex's reply was couched as mild amusement coupled with
gratification.

"Look at it this way, Hasboga." She kept her gaze resolutely elsewhere. "You've been
unlucky
enough to fall in with a couple of old fools, and you know what the old human saying
says about
them. So you might as well try to help instead of binder us. There's nothing you can do
about it
anyway. We can be as fanatical about saving lives as you can be about exhuming their
remains."
She whirled. "You're all crazy, every one of you" She stalked out of the cockpit, heading
for the
lounge.
September ought to have been upset. He wasn't, Flinx noted. The giant accepted
everything with an
equanimity which hinted at great mental as well as physical assurance.
Abruptly, Flinx decided he liked the enormous hu-man, whether or not the man was his
true father.
No, he would not try to coerce further information on that subject from September. He
was
beginning to realize that such knowledge would flow from September in his own time,
and that
patience would gain far more in-formation than arguing.
Rising from the chair, September moved to follow his employer. He winked at Flinx.
"Alcohol has a
way of dissolving anger the way acid does plastic, feller--me-lad. Tsili won't be really
happy
until she's digging up ancient junk again. But 1 think I can keep her fury at a level where
she
won't drive us all insane before thus voyage is over."
Chapter Twelve
Long days passed as the Teacher chased its own field through emptiness. Tse-Mallory
and
Truzenzuzex employed a substantial part of the ship's computer in probing Ab, trying to
make sense
of rhymes which sometimes employed terms and words from six differ-ent languages at
once, some of
them no longer spoken anywhere, some using words that were fourthhand translations
from the
original. It was exhausting, frus-trating work, made no easier by Ab's good-natured
desire to make
everything sound like Terranglo.
"We have formed a hypothesis," Truzenzuzex was saying to Flinx one day as they sat in

the lounge
listen-ing to Ab burble endlessly nearby. "Bran and I have decided that not only is Ab
not
speaking nonsense, but that everything he says makes sense. We simply haven't the time
or
equipment to track down every-thing he is saying, to translate it properly. Half of our
translations are largely intuitive, and the rest at least partially so."
Flax's gaze went upward, to where Pip was darting lazily among the three-dimensional
false clouds
in the simulated late-afternoon sky projected by instrumenta-tion in the walls.
"Everything seems
to make sense to Ab, but then, everything a madman says makes sense to himself." He
glanced at Ab.
"I don't know how you'll ever find the world you want from him."
Ab abruptly turned two blue eyes on Flinx. "Can-nachanna, banarana, lemon pie and
apple vana. What
ticks inside the helical mix?"
"There, you see?" Flinx said. "It's the same as…" He stopped and stared at the
philosoph. Tru was
sit-ting on the thranx loungeseat, gazing blankly into the distance. "Tru?"
Truzenzuzex stared a moment longer, then turned to Flinx. "That's it."
Flinx felt groggy. "What's it?"
"The world ... maybe." The philosoph was mutter-ing to himself as he raced on four legs
and
foothands for the lounge computer terminal. Still dazed, Flinx fol-lowed.
"It is an old Visarian name for a main sequence star inside the Blight. The star is RNGC
1632 on
Common-wealth charts." He was shouting commands to the computer while trying to
talk into the
intercom at the same time.
Tse-Mallory appeared in the room in response to the more coherent instructions. The tall
scientist
was only partially dressed, still wet from an unfinished shower, and quite indifferent to
his near
nudity. "What's hap-pened, ship-brother? Something at last?"
"Cannachanna, Bran."
While Truzenzuzex worked with incredible speed at the terminal, Tse-Mallory walked
over to sit
next to Ab. Water glistened on his body under the bright artifi-cial light as he regarded
the
alien, who was playing with his fingers.
"Cannachanna, remember. Remember Abalamahala-matandra." He was gazing

unblinkingly into one blue
eye, doing things with his eyes and voice and hands. "What about Cannachanna?"
Ab winked all four eyes in sequence and sang pleasantly, "Go, go, go, fast, fast, fast.
Needle-pie
death from underwear past. Kalcanthea tree for I am …" and on and on, as usual.
But that was enough; it was a confirmation. Tse--Mallory and Truzenzuzex came as
close to kicking
up their heels as Flinx had ever seer. them.
"The computer," Truzenzuzex said, when he got his breath back and finally responded to
Flinx's
questions, "has accepted the reference, liven a transposition, and plotted a course. We are
on our
way, at last. Praise to the Hive!"
The most astonishing transformation the information produced occurred not in the two
scientists,
but in Isi Hasboga.
"You mean the Hur'rikku actually existed?" she asked Tse-Mallory, her eyes shining in
disbelief
and wonder.
"So it would seem. We're heading for a Hur'rikku; world right now. It's located in the
proper
position for such a world, on the far center-side of the Blight. That's where the Hur'rikku
expansion would have reached to when they encountered the Tar-Aiym. It's also the
logical place to
establish a threat, to mount major weapons system."
"I can't believe it," she said, "I can't believe it. Such things don't happen in real life."
"The incredible always happens in real life," Tse--Mallory chided her. "Its the expected
which
makes up most fiction."
"A Hur'rikku world," she was murmuring. "A. Hur'rikku world." She looked up with
such caked desire
that Flinx was embarrassed. "We'll be the first humanx to see it. Do you ... do you think I
might
have a chance to do some fieldwork?"
Tse-Mallory smiled; his voice was fall of assurance "Hasboga, we're all going to be
doing a great
deal of fieldwork. Or do you think we're simply going to orbit the world the Hur'rikku
inhabited,
find a continent sized sign in symbospeech saying `Ultimate Weapon-Follow the Arrow,'
and walk
right up to it?"

She was so excited at the prospect of being the first archeologist to set foot on a
legendary
world of a mythical race that she hardly heard Tse-Mallory's stern sarcasm.
Flinx had been through the Blight once before. It looked no different from any other
section of
normal space, save for having a slightly higher population of stars than the Arm in which
the
Commonwealth lay. It still gave him the shivers. Once these myriad worlds had been
home to dozens
of intelligent races. Now only lower forms lived there, all higher varieties having been
exterminated in the ravening plague unwittingly un-leashed by the panicked Tar-Aiym
half a million
years ago.
Even those two usually aloof beings, Tse-Mallory and Truzenzuzex, were affected. They
kept
themselves busy with Ab and stayed out of the control cabin, stayed away from its wide
port and
its panorama of stars. Instead, they discussed abstruse philosophies in arcane languages,
or
played games of such complexity with the ship's computer than an onlooker could not
even figure
out who eventually won, much less how the game was played.
Three weeks passed when they announced that Ab possessed an approximate vocabulary
of twenty-eight
trillion words, in three million, four hundred sixty thousand languages, of which at least
two
million were no longer used and two hundred four thousand were purely mathematical.
These figures did not indicate the mind of an idiot.
Isili Hasboga, now expectant and happy, reveled in the comparative luxury of the
Teacher. It was
her first time on a private craft, since position and finances had always relegated her to
economyclass
transports when-ever travel between worlds had been necessary.
What Hasboga found impressive merely amused September. His interest was in the
practical workings
of the ship. There were times when the giant worried Flinx, such as when he found
September
staring in-tently at some aspect of the Teacher's construction. Eventually he relaxed,
telling
himself that if the giant discovered anything unusual about the ship, he would probably
ascribe it
to some vagary or peculiarity of the firm which had constructed it. Which would be

trice. Just so
long as no one guessed at how peculiar the Teacher's manufacturers were.
Flinx found he was left pretty much to himself. The ship ran without help. Checking and
rechecking
its smooth operation took little time. He had to find otter excuses not to stare out the
ports.
What made him and the two scientists truly uncomfortable was not the emp-tiness of the
inhabitable
planets around them, but the inescapable deep-down fear that somewhere on one of
those worlds a
viable remnant of the Tar-Aiym's un-stoppable plague still lurked, waiting to infect some
unsuspecting
explorer with an age-old malignancy.
The system of Cannachanna looked no different from many others Flinx had seen
schematized on fie
ship's screen. There were only three planets circling the hot K-type sun. And unless the
Hur'rikku
were suited to extraordinary extremes of temperature and pressure, they could not have
lived
either on the massive, frozen gas giant circling farthest out or on the sun-blistered globe
that
skimmed scorchingly close to the primary. That left only the middle planet of the three.
Thougl.1
farther from its sun than Earth was from Sol it would still be a hot world. But at least it
possessed an atmo-sphere humanx could breathe. It could support life. It was the only
possibility.
"Of course," Tse-Mallory reminded everyone as they started surfaceward in the shuttle,
"we have no
evi-dence to show that the Hur'rikku were anything like ourselves, or even that they
were a carbonbased
form."
But then, they had little evidence of any kind concerning the Hur'rikku.
That this world had been inhabited by some race was amply confirmed by the Teacher's
scanners. All
four major continents were dotted with ruins. They were extensive enough to indicate
that at one
time ins the distant past the world circling Cannachanna had supported a sizable
population..
With nothing else to go on, Truzenzuzex and Tse-Mallory opted for touchdown near the
largest city
they could find. It was located near the west coast of the northern hemisphere's largest
continent. The shuttle landed softly under Tse-Mallory's skilled direction as Flinx stared

out at
a sky the color of molten iron. The star Cannachanna shone through the pulsing redness
like an
engorged blood vessel.
Pure white sand shushed under the shuttlecraft's skis as they touched down. Only a slight
crosswind made the landing other than ordinary. Instrumentation indi-cated that the vast,
mountainless plain they had set down on was hot. It was after midday, and the outside
temperature
registered nearly 45°C in the fresh shade of the shuttle.
The little group stepped down the ramp onto the white sand. Flinx and Hasboga were
sufficiently
dark-skinned not to require protection from the sun beating down relentlessly through
crimson-hued
clouds. Truzenzuzex was practically comfortable, except for the dryness of the air. He
was the one
who recommend-ed and produced proper creams and sprays from the ship's dispensary
to protect the
more delicate skins of Tse-Mallory and September.
While the others stood in the shade of the shuttle wing, Truzenzuzex led Ab out onto the
surface.
Ab im-mediately kneeled and rhymed as he traced incompre-hensible designs in the
sand.
They listened intently as the philosoph addressed them: Ab cannot be hypnotized,
though the
Tunnels know Bran and I have tried. But through various techniques I think I can gain
his
attention more closely than one could using normal speech. Doing so some-how depends
on the pitch
of one's voice.
"These last few days prior to our arrival Bran and I have been querying Ab constantly
about the
weapon. Since he has not provided us with any directions, we feel we might just as well
start here
and move from city to city, in the hope that something will trigger Ab to provide the
proper
response."
"Do we have to stay here?" Hasboga was staring yearningly at the distant city. Towers of
wellpreserved
metal and unknown materials loomed tantalizingly over gypsum dunes.
“Hashoga, we are not here for simple exploration. My own curiosity presses me toward
the city

common sense and a more desperate need hold me back from it." Truzenzuzex looked
sad. "It must be
this way, at least until we find what we have come for."
Hasboga was not appeased. "First you drag Skua and me all this way and then you tell
me I can't so
much as have a close look at one of the greatest dis-coveries in the history of humanx
science.
Here we are on the world of a race no one really believed even ex-isted." She kicked
angrily at
the sand, sending a pow-dery white spray downwind.
They were standing on a world of hot ice, Flinx thought.
Tse-Mallory eyed her reprovingly. "This world will always be here, Isili Hasboga.
Whereas CarmagueCol-langatta and Twosky Bright will not be, unless we can find the weapon and make it
work."
"Even if the thing is here, it probably isn't func-tional. You realize that, of course."
September's gaze shifted from Truzenzuzex to Tse-Mallory.
The tall scientist smiled back at him and shrugged slightly. "We're nothing if not
optimists,
September, It's in the nature of bumanxkind to defy the odds."
"That's the difference between us," September said; turning his attention also to the
distant,
archaic me-tropolis. "It's in the nature of Septemberkind to ride with the odds. That's
how I've
lived as long as-" He saw Flinx gesturing for attention. "Something happen-ing, young
feller-melad?"
Flinx was pointing at Ab. "He's going to do some-thing."
Tse-Mallory's reply to September was forgotten. Even Hasboga's interest was distracted
from the
city.
Ab turned in place as if searching intently for some-thing no one else could see. Finding
a
direction, he waddled off toward the southwest. When he got roughly ten meters from
the shuttle,
he stopped and hunted around his feet. After concluding a careful survey of the sand he
was
standing on, he sat down with a thump, reached out with three arms, and commenced
etching a fresh
slew of abstract patterns while singing to himself. He was as happy as any three-year-old
in a
sandbox.
"Wonderful." Hasboga threw her hair back and ran both hands over it. "The end of the

noble quest.
What do we do now?"
Though obviously disappointed, Truzenzuzex didn't show it in his reply. "We could not
reasonably
expect that the alien would immediately lead us to the weapon. Now we must begin our
search in
earnest." Hasboga's expression brightened, and the philosoph hastened to add, "From the
air."
"Why the air?" she wanted to know, downcast.
"Before we commence the laborious task of exam-ining these cities on foot, there is a
chance Ab
may recognize or be stimulated by some larger pattern."
Gathering up Ab, who as always came along without a fuss, they returned to the shuttle.
The ramp
was sucked in behind the last boarder, the engines engaged, and the little vessel turned to
rise
into the wind.
Behind, a few human and tbranx footprints re-mained in the sand. Gentle wind began
patiently to
erase them.
Beginning with the largest on each continent, they went at high speed from city to city.
Soon they
were traveling over far smaller urban centers than the one they had set down next to. At
each new
city Truzenzuzex and Tse-Mallory would glance hopefully over at Ab. Each time Ab
would stare
delightedly at the new landscape beneath the shuttle, would rhyme ceaselessly, and then
Truzenzuzex would read the com-puter interpretation of what Ab had said and the
shuttle would
change course once again.
Several days of such searching convinced Tse-Mal-lory that they might be on the planet
a long,
long time. Hearing this, Hasboga grew nearly as hot as the air they were flying through.
She
insisted on being set down in some city, any city, to pursue her work.
Unable to refute her arguments, Tse-Mallory and Truzenzuzex finally agreed. She might
discover
some-thing useful to them, and it would be quieter on board the shuttle without her.
September opted to join her, as much because the aerial search was beginning to bore
him as for
any other reason. They disembarked on the outskirts of the first city they had visited,

taking
along ample supplies and sufficient weaponry to defend themselves, although there had
been no sign
of hostile life.
Indeed, this world boasted little in the way of animal life and not much in the way of
vegetation.
Most of Cannachanna II's surface ran to desert, some low, some high. The largest living
thing they
had found so far was a sort of nervous-looking pink cactuslike plant which soared fifteen
meters
or more into the angry sky and was several meters around at the base. Its root sys-tem,
TseMallory observed, must be astonishing.
Water flowed below, rather than on top of the land. There was little in the way of large
bodies of
fresh water. The land showed the sameness as the cities. And each city was like the next,
differing only in size. They were full of crumbling, disintegrating stonework and pitted
metal
structures, inhabited now only by in-sinuating winds and fading memories. The
Teacher's shuttle
flew over each with the same hopes, departed with identical disappointment.
"The Tar-Aiym built better cities but fewer, judging from what we saw of Booster."
Truzenzuzex was
star-ing out at the desert sliding past beneath them. "That fits with what we know of the
Hur'rikku's rumored pro-lificacy and helps to explain the Tar-Aiym's fright."
"You're sure that Ab's not one of them?" Flinx indi-cated the alien, who was strapped
into a chair
facing a wide viewport.
Tse-Mallory shook his head. "The shape of the doors we have seen on low passes is
enough to demonstrate
that, whatever else Ab is, he is not a Hur'rikku. They were much smaller than All,
smaller
than our-selves. Closer to the Otoid of Alaspin, if you need a race for comparison.
Whereas the
Tar-Aiym, as near as we can tell from similar evidence on their world of Booster, were
massive
creatures far larger even than your friend September. And yet," he mused, staring out
over the
wastelands of metal and rock and sand, "the tiny Hur'rikku succeeded in terrifying the
greater TarAiym to the point where they lost control of their military science and created something
which

ulti-mately destroyed, them all."
Truzenzuzex looked unhappy as he preened his an-tennae with a truhand. "We are
wasting time, I
fear. We cannot spend forever on this world. Another week, and I recommend returning
to hire
additional, nongov-ernment help." At Flinx's look of surprise he added: "It is in my
nature to be
impatient, friend Flinx."
As the shuttle banked sharply to leave the city they had just inspected, the philosoph
slumped in
his lounge-seat. "Ab still shows no indication of responding to anything on this world. I
fear
that he might not react to the weapon even if we passed directly over it. And since we
have no
idea what to look for, if it does not resemble a humanx weapon we could pass the thing
by in equal
ignorance. How many cities have we in-spected, ship-brother?"
"Fifty-five, counting the last."
Truzenzuzex made a sound indicative of mild disgust mixed with personal
recrimination. "We could
check out a thousand fifty-five, I'm afraid, without any hope of success."
His companion smiled back at him stolidly. "Pos-sible, but we must examine those
thousand and however
many more. Three worlds await our-"
Truzenzuzex waved resignedly. "Yes, I know, I know. But it seems so hopeless. If we
could only pry
some clue, some hint as to where the weapon was kept, out of Ab, we might find it. On
Booster the
location of the Krang was evident from its size, its position of iso-lation and importance,
and
the uniqueness of its con-struction. We have detected nothing similar on this world,
nothing out
of the ordinary in any city."
It was then that Flinx, keyed by Truzenzuzex's words, bad one of those rare moments of
intuition
which he could never predict. Yet that flash of intuition probably was not the result of
his
special talents at all. There was nothing extraordinary about the thought that occurred to
him. It
might simply have been that he, unlike the scientists, could think only of simple
possibilities.
Ile had already voiced half a hundred opinions on the possible location of the weapon

prior to
this one. None had been worthwhile. But this one definitely was.
"If I," he said casually, rubbing the back of Pip's head, "had built a really powerful
weapon, I'd
want to make awful sure that if it went off accidentally no one would get hurt."
"In the ocean, perhaps?" mused Tse-Mallory uncer-tainly. "But there are signs that the
oceans were
heav-ily used, perhaps as a food source. We have seen no place of sufficient isolation to
construct or locate such a weapon."
Truzenzuzex left his antennae alone. "Not on this planet, no. I would not put a device
capable of
destroy-ing a collapsar on any inhabited world."
Tse-Mallory merely nodded slowly, comprehending. The philosoph went to the shuttle
controls and
reset its course for the camp set up in the northern hemisphere by September and
Hasboga several
weeks ago.
"We have studied this world in hopes of finding something huge and different. The
weapon could be
small and ordinary-looking as well. But before we try combing every building, I think it
behooves
us to try your theory, Flinx."
Flinx shook his bead. "But if it's in this system and not on this planet, how do we find
it?"
"Your same thought holds, Minx." Truzenzuzex leaned away from the controls. "Any
race cautious
enough to place such a dangerous device off its world would take care not to lose track
of it.
They would want to know where it was at all times. As yet we have not monitored
persistent surface
sources of radiation for any energy traveling out into space. Such energy should be
produced by
the most sophisticated, reliable machinery the Hur'rikku could construct. They would be
designed
to be long-lasting and self-repairing, in case of peripheral damage."
September was sick of the desert and rejoined them willingly and gladly. Hasboga
reacted to the
word that they might be leaving the planet permanently some-what less enthusiastically.
She was on
the verge, she as-sured them, of uncovering secrets of the Hur'rikku which would keep
Commonwealth

researchers busy for decades. September half convinced, half coerced her onto the
shuttle.
"We may have to return tomorrow, if this idea re-veals nothing," Tse-Mallory said in an
effort to
placate her. "We may not discover any energy being beamed offplanet. A few
circumpolar and
equatorial orbits should be enough to tell."
Hasboga fumed and argued and cried and having no choice, gave in.
Sensors on board the Teacher had previously record-ed over a hundred sources of
radiation from
still-fune-tioning Hur'rikku machinery. Many seemed to be homing beacons. These were
located on
the outskirts of vast urban areas, near spacious plains that might once have been
shuttleports or
some other kind of staging area.
Three such beams were still broadcasting with enough power to reach deeply into space,
well beyond
where an incoming craft would need to pick them up. One beam emerged from the
ground near the
largest city on the south polar continent and dissipated itself in the general direction of
Sagittarius. Flinx was more tempted than he could say to try to follow that im-mensely
powerful
radiant arrow to its ultimate destina-tion.
But they desperately needed to locate something somewhat closer to home. So Flinx had
the computer
plot the beam's course for future reference. Someday, perhaps...
A second beam led the Teacher and its anxious oc-cupants to the fourth moon of the
peripheral gas
giant. They traced it to some small ruins, better preserved than any they had seen on the
inhabited world itself. There was some erosion, however, since the mo-on possessed an
atmosphere
of its own. They had difficulty convincing Hasboga they couldn't afford to linger near
the
wonderfully intact Hur'rikku structures.
The third beam directed them to a fourth planet, one the ship's instruments had not
detected
during their initial rapid approach to the Cannachanna systen. That was not surprising,
however:
The fourth planet war, less a world than a drifting moon, about a third the size of Earth's.
It
orbited Cannachanna twice as far out as the gas giant did. It was a bleak, meteor-scoured
globe,

relentlessly uninviting, coated with a thin crust of frozen methane and ammonia. It had
no free
atmo-sphere. One side always faced sunward; the other perpetually gazed at the abyss of
interstellar space.
They found a tiny receiver on Cannachanna IV. The beam from the Hur'rikku world
ended there. A
quick search of the receiving installation revealed only receiv-ing equipment. There was
nothing
remotely like free-standing device or weapon. Everything was tied to the receiving
station.
The team commenced a slow, low-orbit probe of the moon-world's surface. Detectors
showed nothing
below them but reflective frozen gas and dead rock.
Truzenzuzex was watching the monitor's monoto-nous reports flow dutifully to readouts
in the
piloting chamber. "This is the end, I suppose," he said dole-fully. "'ride might as well
attempt
to follow the first transmission to Sagittarius." He shook his shining, jewel-eyed head. "I
fear I
am almost too old to mare such a journey."
Tse-Mallory's expression was equally disconsolate, even as he tried to sound optimistic.
"There is
still a chance. We have not finished the survey yet. And we can always return to the
second planet
and begin again. The supposition we're pursuing may have been error."
"True," agreed the pbilosoph.
"Gentlesirs." Flinx glanced back from his positiota-by the monitors. "There's an artifact
ahead of
us."
That announcement precipitated a rush by the two scientists toward the smaller screens
located in
the main console. Sure enough, according to the instru-ments they were approaching a
comparatively
small solid object of indeterminate composition. It remained stable above the small
planet and lay
in a straight line with the transmission ending on the rocky globe's op-posite side.
With all instruments operating and alert for any sign of a reaction from the device, the
Teacher
nudged cau-tiously closer.
A fourth voice added itself to the general discussion: "See flivver run and diver,
hopscotch

moplatch, pud-din'n thatch a house and teach a mouse." Ab lec-tured them in that vein
for half an
hour, then turned away and resumed his solitary singing.
Truzenzuzex ran the entire recorded dialogue through the vocabulary they had
laboriously constructed
for Ab. It produced one recognizable Terranglo word: "Bang."
The philosoph could hardly contain his excitement. "Gentlesirs, I think we've found our
weapon."
But the actual sight of the artifact, when they had drawn near enough to inspect it
visually, was
disap-pointing. Certainly it displayed none of the visual awesomeness of the quiescent
Tar-Aiym
weapon, The Krang-or, for that matter, the impressiveness of many humanx weapons
Flinx had seen or
heard of.
September was urged forward, to venture his opin-ion. It was not complimentary. "A
single SCCAM
shell would make basic particles of that thing. That's the most pitiful excuse for an
ultimate
weapon anyone ever dreamed up."
"A germ," Tse-Mallory pointed out, "does not look particularly impressive either, but a
certain
variety once wiped out every creature in the Blight, including both the Tar-Aiym and the
Hur'rikku."
Flinx edged the ship in until they were floating only fifty meters from the artifact. It was
about
a hundred meters in length, a roughly cylindrical shape with four curving sides which
met at two
pointed ends. Things that looked like long antennae protruded another few meters from
each of the
two ends. It resembled a four-sided banana, only it was straight instead or curved.
The artifact was a rusty-brown color, but it didn’t look quite like metal. Starlight and the
observation lights of the Teacher gleamed off its sides. It had a candy-slick luster
reminiscent
of plastic. But it wasn’t a plastic, either, Flinx mused as he studied the readout.
Where two curved sides met, the material assumed a translucence completely out of
keeping with its
otherwise solid appearance. Turning a work beam on the surface through one port, they
discovered
that the entire substance was translucent, although no matter how powerful the light
shined on it,
one could only see about a meter into the thirty-meter depth of the artifact.

The light also revealed that all four sides were graved with a tiny, surprisingly florid
script.
Small protrusions and indentations broke the smoothness of :as sides with a decidedly
random
regularity.
They could find nothing that looked like an entrance port, muzzle, trigger, exhaust,
generator-in
short, nothing that would lead an onlooker to believe he was examining a weapon. It was
a hundredmeter
length of metal-glass-plastic something that was determinedly inocuous in appearance
and
inert in state.
At the scientist's urgings, Flinx guided the ship in slow circle under, around, and back
over the
top of t long alien form. Then the Teacher slipped between small planet and the device.
If this
maneuver interrrpr-ed any vital transmission or broadcast, it didn't show in the continued
inactivity of the device.
Tse-Mallory looked anxious. "That's the weapon, air right. Ab confirmed it. It's got to be
the
weapon.' Flinx had never seen him so nervous.
Alongside him, compound eyes regarded the mofic,i-less artifact unblinkingly. Then the
philosoph
moved to activate specific sensors on the control console.
Hasboga appeared, looking sleepy. Her lethargy van-ished when she saw the artifact.
September
quieted her, tried to explain what they had found and what they were doing. She
listened, but her
real attention was reserved for the inscriptions cut into the device's flanks. "A diffusion
scan
won't penetrate the material. Truzenzuzex's gaze moved from one readout to the next.
"Still no
evidence of any movement relative to the planet below or to our ship. Nor is the artifact
emitting
any radiation-at least, not any variety this vessel is equipped to detect. And there is no
connection of any sort to the surface below." He turned from the controls and regarded
them
thoughtfully. One truhand rubbed idly at his lower mandibles.
"This exceptionally unexceptional ghost from the Hur'rikku past must be the weapon.
We have Ab's
one significant, if colloquial, reference to it. We have the fact that it is here, in the safest
place to store a power-ful weapon in this system. Yet it persists in maintaining a pose of

innocence. What we have observed on the Hur'rikku world does not prepare me to
accept this as a
deception. I confess I do not know how to proceed to prove it is otherwise.
"How is it supposed to work?" Hasboga edged closer to the curving main viewport,
beyond which the
device drifted. "Not that I care how big an explosion it makes, you understand."
Tse-Mallory did not smile. "We don't know that it explodes."
"Well, does whatever it's supposed to do. But I'd like to have a closer look at those
inscriptions
on it."
"You may have your chance," said Truzenzuzex. "We may have to decipher them in
order to learn how
the device operates. Certainly the mechanism has not manifested itself to us."
"The inscriptions might not be instructions," Flinx pointed out prosaically. "They might
simply
say `This ultimate weapon manufactured by H'pel's Ultimate Weapons, Inc.', or
something like
that."
A valentine-shaped head swiveled to face him. "We'd best hope otherwise, Flinx."
Tse-Mallory indicated agreement. "I feel like a Ne-anderthal cornered by a Smilodon.
Someone has
just handed me Mr. September's Mark Twenty and I have ten seconds to figure out how
to use it.
Probably I'd end up employing it as a club." He gestured at the floating enigma. Lights
from the
Teacher's ports shone eerily on the dull-colored surface. "If we aren't careful, we're
liable to
end up like that Neanderthal, looking dumbly down the barrel of a Hur'rikku weapon
whip: we pound
on its trigger. We'd better be careful which of those protrusions and indentations on its
surface
we stick our manipulative digits into. I'd much rather learn how to activate the device
from a
distance. However," be added, without evident concern for his personal safety, "if
someone has to
jump up and down on it to make it go off, that is what we'll do.
"But we won't do it here, where it will do no good. First we must convey the device to
the present
location of the rogue." He turned his gaze on Flinx. "There's a planetless binary system
in the
path of the rogue. Wa should reach that spatial vicinity at the same time as ox slightly

after the
rogue if we depart from here now and, drive at maximum velocity for rendezvous. We
will -have the
rare opportunity to observe the influence of a massive collapsar on another stellar object.
We
will also see," he said, directing his words subtly to Isih Hasboga, "what will happen to
the suns
of Carmague-Collangatta and Twosky Bright if our research turns out to have been
incorrect."
"Suppose that's the case." Hasboga looked subdued. "What will you do then?"
Tse-Mallory smiled very slightly. "Then Tru and I will go hunting down the next best
legend." He
glance back to Flinx. "I think there is ample room. The cargo hold is standard?"
Flinx nodded. "The Teacher was modeled on a small freighter. I haven't had any
occasion to handle
freight" -another small lie-" but there's no reason wily the hold shouldn't be functional."
He
indicated the Hur'rikku artifact filling the port. "The ship's hold should be able to contain
several objects that size."
The Teacher's attitude was altered so that the huge cargo doors in its tail were facing the
object. Flinx operated the hatches and watched telltales indicate that the huge metal
panels were
performing properly.
The hold was little more than, a vast open sphere within which all kinds of cargo could
be stored
at null g. At present the cavernous space was empty. There would be plenty of room for
the
Hur'rikku device.
Gradually Flinx activated the posigravity tractor beams, used for manipulating large
cargo. Every
muscle in his body was a touch tenser than usual. No one knew if the powerful tractors
would have
an ad-verse effect on the artifact. Only instruments indicated when the tractors locked
on,
however. The artifact re-mained as quiescent as before.
"Slide it into the ship, Minx," said Tse-Mallory, watching different sensors. "Slowly."
Through the use of rear-facing tridees they were able to see the artifact. Tse-Mallory
looked up,
smiled, and nodded with a touch of impatience. Several minutes had passed.
"It's all right, Flinx. You can bring it in now."
Minx glanced up from the controls, confusion and uncertainty mixing in his expression.
"Bran,

that's what I've been trying to do. The tractors are set on max-imum pull- but the thing’s
not
budging."
Chapter Thirteen
Truzenzuzex and Tse-Mallory checked instrumenta-tion, confirmed that the ship's cargo
handlers
were op-erating properly. Everything read normal, performed efficiently-yet the artifact
refused
to enter the Teacher. Flinx had an idea, which Tse-Mallory quashed.
"Why don't we just back the ship around the ob-ject?"
"No good, Flinx," Tse-Mallory explained. "If the tractors can't move the object, then I'm
not sure
it will move along with the ship. Try again."
Flinx did so, then tried a third time, each time at a different setting, using the four
tractors
in differing configurations.
Hasboga looked awed. "It hasn't moved a centime-ter." She stared at the screens.
"Young feller-me-lad?" September looked from the screens over to the control console.
"What's your
manipulation capacity?"
"Two hundred and fifty thousand tons, dead-weight mass, per tractor. I've tried
employing them
along the same axis, one million tons of putting power. No good-it doesn't move."
September looked thoughtful as he stroked his chin. "Even if that artifact is unusually
dense
stuff, I don't imagine it weighing anywhere near that much."
"`Unusually dense leaves a great deal of room for variation, Mr. September," said
Truzenzuzex.
"The duralloy this vessel is made of is composed of excep-tionally dense metals." A
truhand
fluttered in the direction of the screens showing the device. "That ob-ject may be
composed of
super-dense material."
"Maybe it's as dense as the collapsar," ventured Hasboga.
Truzenzuzex stiffed a laugh; the woman was not a physicist. "If that were so, then our
device
would weigh as much as several galaxies. I think that un-likely. We will have to find
something
more powerful to pull with."
"Or push with," Flinx murmured.
Truzenzuzex made a sound indicative of agreement mixed with hesitancy. "There are

other ways to
employ a KK field."
I see what you're thinking, you two." Tse-Mallory looked doubtful and rot a little
worried. "I
don't know. It's risky, very risky."
"But worth trying." Flinx was sure it would work. "Instead of trying to pull the device,
we'll
position the Teacher behind it, line up on course, and push with the field."
"Why not just pull it with the field?" Hasboga asked.
"No," Tse-Mallory replied, "we have to try to push. A Kurita-Kinoshita field is spherical
when
formed, but when you pass light-speed it becomes teardrop-shaped. The tip of the drop
extends only
to include that solid matter which is firmly connected to the field projector, meaning the
ship.
It's possible, but if the field contract-ed sufficiently, and it should at the speed we'll be
traveling,
then we could lose the artifact."
"We are much more certain of retaining control of it if it is riding in the front bulge of
the
field." Tru-zenzuzex was gesturing with all four tmhands and foothands now. "Assuming
that the
field exerts suffi-cient pressure to move it, which is by no means cer-tain."
"We could lose the artifact that way also, Tru."
"That is so, ship-brother," the philosoph conceded. "But can you think of anything else
to try?"
"No. No." Tse-Mallory had to admit there was noth-ing else to do but try it.
"I'm not sure I understand your worry, Bran," Flinx confessed.
Truzenzuzex tried to explain, although spatial physics was not his area of expertise
either. "Even
in the leading bulge of the sun mass, the Kurita-Kinoshita field is narrow, Flinx. The
higher the
speed, the flatter and more angular the bulge. If we should misjudge slightly coming out
of KuritaKinoshita space, space plus- or improperly form the field-then all or part of the
Hur'rikku
artifact could emerge into normal space while we are still in space-plus. The result
would be either
partial disintegration of the object or, if it drops whole into normal space, its loss. We
would continue to travel at plus-light-speed velocity, while the artifact would be kicked
out at
an angle from our present course into normal space, at a speed of several . . . well,

before we
could so much as twitch an antenna, let alone slow speed or reverse direction or both,
the artifact
would have long vanished. Our chances of relocat-ing it in free space would border on
the
infinitesimal.
Flinx looked crushed. "Maybe we'd better try something else, then."
But it was the querulous Tse-Mallory who objected to that idea. "No, Flinx. Tru is right.
We have
to try pushing with the KK field." His eyes wandered to the waiting artifact. "Even if it
is
resting in a stasis field, no stasis field can resist the pressure of a KK drive."
"You left out one thing," September interrupted. "Known. No known stasis field can
resist a KK.
Flinx edged the Teacher around until the great curving disk of the field projector was
properly
positioned with regard to the floating artifact. Truzenzuzex had the computer check all
positional
calculations four times to make certain the field would engulf the Hur'rikku device from
precisely
the required distance.
"All clear here," said Tse-Mallory, looking up briefly from the readouts he was
monitoring.
"Engage the drive, Flinx."
Within the immensely complex instrumentation of the ship, Flinx's subsequent
instructions were computerconveyed to the appropriate sections. A diffuse sphere of radiant purple energy began to
form in front of the Teacher's projector. No one in the ship's piloting chamber could see
the
field begin to take shape. It was bidden in front of the projecting disk. So was the
Hur'rikku
artifact. But the field appeared in the form of changing readouts and shifting dials on the
chamber's
instruments.
Very slowly, the Teacher began to accelerate out of the Cannachanna system. It passed
through the
space where the alien device had been floating. Since it was no longer there, it was
proper to
assume that the arti-fact was now perilously ensconced slightly forward of the KK field's
gravitational nexus.
Muted congratulations mixed with expressions of re-lief on board the ship. "It's got to be

there,"
Flinx con-firmed after an instrument check. "We're using twice the power to accelerate
half as
fast as normal. The ship is handling the load all right, though."
Tse-Mallory lapsed into thought, pleased but puzzled. "I thought that once the artifact
was moved,
the stasis field would either collapse or be left behind. Yet if Flinx is correct, Tru, the
stasis
field is traveling with the device."
"There may be no stasis field involved. Our first guess, involving super-dense
construction, may
be the correct one. There is also a type of stasis field that is not really a stasis field in the
way we know it. A theo-retical state of matter that is called FCI, fixed cosmic inertia."
His
mandibles moved idly, nibbling at one another. "I wonder, I wonder. Such a state of
matter has
been postulated but not proven mathematically. Not yet. An FCI object would appear to
be
motionless, Bran. Yet what one would see would not be the object itself, but only its
most recent
manifestation. The real object would consist of undetectable but very real en-ergy built
up within
the object itself. The object moves, or seems to, with us. But the energy it has built up
trails
behind it."
"Tru," a bewildered F1inx, interrupted, "you're leav-ing me behind, too."
"Briefly, Flinx," the pbilosoph explained, "what we may have ahead of us is an object
that appears
to move but in reality is motionless-the universe shifts around it. If we could move it, it
would
release its true inertial energy." He shook his head. "I still do not un-derstand how that
could
be sufficient to affect a collap-sar." He moved to a computer terminal. "I have work to
do,
gentlesirs."
Straining to move something which Truzenzuzex in-sisted wasn't really moving, the
Teacher raced
out of the long-dead system, carrying them at maximum speed back through the Blight.
Flinx tried
with every instru-ment on board to detect the trail of energy which Tru hypothesized the
Hur'rikku
device was leaving behind it. He found nothing.

However, if what Tru suspected was correct, then the artifact had been building up FCI
force for
over a half million years. Trying to imagine what such power could do (if indeed it
existed) if
released in one small place simultaneously left Flinx a little dizzy.
So instead he found a small ball, and he and Pip played a lot of catch.
What no one had yet detected, since it had taken great care not to be detected, was
another ship,
which had arrived in the system of Cannachanna shortly be-hind them. Instead of
following them to
the world of the Fur'rikku, it had been content to remain just be-hind the horizon of the
gas
giant, concealed by that protosun's energy fields and extensive tenebrous atmo-sphere.
It had remained there, monitoring their activity with-out rest. While its occupants had to
take
care not to be observed, a caution which somewhat inhibited the effi-ciency of their
surveillance,
they were still able to track the Teacher's hasty departure and plot its course.
As soon as the Teacher passed into space-plus, this small but very fast craft sped at
enginewarping
veloc-ity to a thinly populated world on the fringes of the Commonwealth. There it
made
contact with a mining colony which was as efficient in its true function as it was at its
geological deception.
By now the Teacher was many parsecs distant. That did not matter to the crew of the
small vessel.
In con-veying their information to the inhabitants of the sta-tion they bad accomplished
their
assigned task.
The beings who had piloted that ship and who ran the purported mining station below
were neither
hu-man nor thranx. They had longish mouths filled with sharp, pointed teeth, and
expressions which
conveyed their utter contempt for anything not like themselves, Their skins were hard,
shiny, and
scaly, the minds beneath crested skulls active and devious.
Carefully scattered throughout the Commonwealth were others of their kind, some
disguised
surgically to resemble men. (None were disguised to look like thranx, for these were a
bipedal,
two-armed folk, in no way insectoid. Their blood, unlike that of Earthly rep-tiles, was
warm. And

though they preferred a warm, dry climate, they now moved vigorously about the cold
world they
occupied.
There were several functional mine shafts around the station. The AAnn occupied this
borderline
world by treaty with the Commonwealth, so appearances were important. The mine shaft
beneath the
station it-self contained, not valuable mineral deposits, but a subatomic-particle
acceleration
communicator, known more commonly as a deep-space beam.
Metamorphosed into a stream of charmed positively charged quarks, a message could be
flashed from
accel-erator to accelerator, world to world, at dizzying speed, far faster than a restricted
tridee beam. A tridee beam employed high-speed leptons to carry its messages. Tridee
leptons and
Kurita-Kinoshita sun fields traveled through space-plus. But the less-than-perceptible
quarks
moved through something so esoteric it could not be properly described, and so had
been labeled
null-space, or space-minus.
At each successive receiving station the positively charged charmed quarks were
carefully
redirected and reaccelerated to their next destination. Eventually they would reach an
ultimate
destination. Instead of being reaccelerated there, the unstoppable beam would be read by
a
subelementary-particle counter and its message deciphered. Only another counter lying
directly in
the path of the message could intercept it, and the chances of that ever happening were
as remote
as the region where such beams eventually ended up. Only an enormous vessel, not
smaller than a
dread-nought, was large enough to contain a deep-space -beam station.
So the Teacher raced on, oblivious to the fact that its probable destination had been
guessed. Its
inhabi-tants were of mixed emotions. But no matter what each individual wished for in
the way of
an eventual destina-tion, all hoped that their journey would soon meet with success.
Months later, they finally arrived in the vicinity of the Velvet Dam. A swirling blackness,
the
dark nebula hid everything behind it from view of any humanx-oc-cupied world.

That is what the rogue will be coming through in less than nineteen years, on collision
course
with the sun of Twosky Bright." Tse-Mallory studied the shuddery emptiness coolly.
"Unless we do
something to stop it. It will announce itself to general and amateur astronomers then
because of
the hole it wil leave behind as it sucks in gas and particles from the nebula." Flinx stared
at
the vast black brush stroke through which only a few large suns shone faintly and tried
to imagine
it with a hole cut out of its middle. The scale of the danger they were soon to confront
was
beginning to be appreciated. It was one thing to talk about a col-lapsar, another thing
entirely
to confront it.
Under Tse-Mallory's instructions, the Teacher al-tered its course slightly for the last
time, to
rendezvous with the predicted position of the binary system and the onrushing collapsar.
The
Hur'rikku artifact re-mained in position ahead of the field center.
September compared their feat thus far to a seal swimming the Atlantic Ocean with a
ball balanced
on its nose. Flinx knew what the Atlantic Ocean was-it was one of Terra's three major
bodies of
water. But a seal?
"It looks kind of like a Largessian, young feller-me--lad," the giant informed him. "Only
smaller,
without hands, and with a smaller head."
That description enabled Flinx to conjur a picture, though it was difficult to imagine one
of the
lazy na-tives of Largess swimming an ocean while balancing anything on its nose.
Days passed, and the ship gradually decellerated un-der the two scientist's careful
supervision.
They could still drop the device in a trillion cubic kilometers of empty space. Having
successfully brought it this far, neither man nor thranx was prepared to risk losing it.
Finally
they slowed to a point where everyone experi-enced a brief instant of somewhereelseness and
nausea. The Teacher had returned to normal space.
Ahead of them should be the twin-sun system newly catalogued as RNGC 11,432 and
11,433. Everyone
hurried to the fore observation port, in the observa-tion-piloting blister, as the ship was

positioned to provide them with a view.
No one spoke about the sight which greeted them until Tse-Mallory said quietly:
"Gentlesirs and
lady, we are a few days late. The rogue has already arrived."
What lay slightly to one side of them as the Teacher slowed to a stop was a sight that
almost
precluded description. The rogue, the multiple collapsar, could oz course not be directly
observed, but its effects could. And they could be heard, as was amply proven whey.
Flinx opened
all sensor equipment to monitor the precise position of the rogue. A violent, teeth-grating
scream
filled the room before Flinx, in a cold sweat, could lower the volume.
Hasboga winced, her hands covering her ears to shut out that inorganic wailing. Her
eyes were
squinched tightly closed. Next to her, September reached out with a comforting arm. No
humorous
twinkle was in his eyes- not now.
Flinx turned the sound level down to where the howl was bearable, but he could not
bring himself
to cut i
out entirely. There was something mesmerizing about that shriek, an effect caused as
much by the
knowledge of what was behind it as by the sound itself. He be-came aware of his own
rapid
breathing, and forced himself to calm down.
"What is it?" Hasboga glanced up at September and leaned against his massive shoulder.
"I've never
heanv anything like it in my life."
"I doubt anyone has, Isili." September wore a pecu-liar expression as he regarded the
phenomenon
visible through the port. "A man being killed slowly has L tendency to scream.
Interesting to
learn that a star reacts the same way."
"You are romanticizing," Truzenzuzex commented. "That so-called scream is only the
result of tornapart
matter releasing energy as it is sucked into the collapsar."
Flinx reflected that although the philosoph's explanation was more accurate, September's
provided
a more effective description.
Leaving the controls on automatic, he moved in for better look. RNGC 11,432 was an
orange, K-9 supergiant.

Its companion star, which rotated counter-clockwise as opposed to its giant brother, was
far smaller but much hotter, a yellow-green furnace. From each sun, according to the
direction of
its ro-tation, a long tendril of glowing matter extended to Flinx's right. One curled in a
tightening clockwise spi-ral to vanish into nothingness; the other twisted inward from
the
opposite direction. Around both tendrils clus-tered a vast, diffuse cloud of energy
particles and
gases which had also been pulled from both stars. A black circle rested in the center of
that
cloud, a circle that looked like a black cutout on fluorescent paper. At its center was a
minuscule point with the mass of suns.
How many stars lay crushed and collapsed to that point? Dozens, hundreds-maybe
thousands. How much
of the universe had the wanderer already gobbled up? Flinx envisioned whole galaxies
with thin
black lines running through them, forming the trail of the wandering rogue where suns,
worlds,
populations had disappeared.
Was there a pit in Andromeda? Perhaps a hole in the middle of the Magellanic Clouds?
Yet that was
the force they were going to try to counter with the metal-glass- plastic something riding
in
front of the Teacher. Something which September had estimated could be reduced to less
than dust
by a single SCCAM projec-tile.
Even the old philosoph's description of what FCI could mean seemed insignificant by
comparision
with an object which presently was draining the mass of two stars as easily as a sponge
could soak
up two drops of water.
Too bad for Carmame and Collangatta, Flinx mused silently. Too bad for the bright star
of humid
Twosky Bright. Too bad, too sad -for the untold van-ished worlds already destroyed in
unknown
galaxies unimaginable ages ago.
They could throw a billion SCCAM shells, a hundred suns at the rogue. Nothing could
destroy it.
The billion SCCAM projectiles would add infin-itesimally to the collapsar's mass. The
hundred suns
would add a bit more. Both would only make the rogue that much more powerful, that
much more

destructive.
Flinx was on the verge of suggesting they turn and go home when Tse-Mallory looked
over at him and
said matter-of-factly, "I suppose we might, as well get started."
September commented without smiling, "You don't mean that now that you've seen the
thing you're
going to try to do something with that little-bitty husk of iron or whatever it is?"
Truzenzuzex regarded the towering human seriously. "The legend says it can do
something. We are
here. We will remain or track the rogue until we learn whether it can or not. We have
nothing to
lose."
"Listen," September argued softly, "the biggest bomb imaginable would only add to the
rogue's
mass, right?"
Truzenzuzex and Tse-Mallory did not reply.
"Stubborn, I see. Well, it's in a good cause. I won-der how much a miracle masses?" He
guided
Hasboga toward the door.
"Where are we going, Skua?"
"To the cabin. I'm wasting my time trying to argue with brain-cases. They may set that
device off.
It won't stop the collapsar, but I wouldn't be surprised if it destroys us. If I can't talk
them
out of it, I want to die the best way I know how."
"How's that?" she inquired mischievously. As they left the room he was leaning over and
whispering
in her ear.
The philosoph watched them depart. "Fatalist." He looked peeved.
There was something other than a touch of reproval in Tse-Mallory's voice. "True, Tru,
but a
fatalist with style." More serious, he faced his friend. "He's right, you know. We may
accomplish
nothing here other than our own destruction."
"Does that mean you believe we have a choice, ship-brother?"
Tse-Mallory reacted almost angrily. "Of course not! Flinx, activate the engines and back
us away."
Using minimal power, the Teacher left the mysteri-ous Hur'rikku device once again
floating freely
in space. Or, Flinx reflected, if you believed Truzenzuzex's theory, space shifted around
the

stationary device.
Under the scientist's instructions, he positioned the ship broadside to the device. It sat
there
in view of the starboard observation port, as innocuous-looking, enig-matic, and inert as
it had
been in the system of Can-nachanna.
Flinx had given himself over to the advice of two far wiser heads than his own. A
request for new
instruc-tions produced a disconcerting reply from Tse-Mallory.
"I don't know what to do next. Flinx. I suspect the next logical step is for some of us to
1,0
outside and see what we can make of those protrusions and depres-sions on the artifact's
surface."
Truzenzuzex agreed. Both were preparing to don suits when an insistent, deceivingly
gentle
bcepint~ from the main pilot's console distracted Flinx's attention. Leaving the two
scientists to
their discussion, he walked over and studied the active readout. It was one he hadn't had
occasion
to use often before, but there was no mistaking that urgent call. He wanted to make
certain before
causing any alarm, so he switched to printout for confirmation.
SHIP OR SHIPS APPROACHING
"Bran, Tru," he called out, louder when they didn't respond immediately. While he
waited for a
response, Flinx began activating other sensory instruments and demanding information.
Both
scientists came over, saw the brief readout, and moved rapidly to monitor other
consoles.
Lighting up the main screen provided them with a picture of eleven dots arranged on a
grid. Other
sensi-tive machines added distance, direction, and velocity. They were not seeing the
ships, of
course, only the en-ergy manifestations of their respective drive fields.
Compared to the other ten dots, the one traveling approximately in the center of the
configuration
was enormous. "That's a dreadnought," Tse-Mallory observed with frozen indifference.
He glanced
glumly at his companions. "Analysis of drive fields indicates they're not humanx
vessels. It's a
war sphere, alright."
"A battle formation, this deep in the Common-wealth?" Flinx couldn't believe the AAnn

would go to
such extremes. But then, it would require a fleet a hundred times the size of the force
nearing
them to -attack and possibly destroy three fortified worlds. Probably the AAnn were
taking what
appeared to be reasonable gamble to insure that the rogue was no". diverted from its
predicted
path.
"This is a very sparsely explored, uninhabited region of Commonwealth-claimed
territory, Flinx,"
Truzen-zuzex pointed out. "Anyone could slip in and out of here undetected with
comparative ease
and safety."
"How much time?" Tse-Mallory eyed his ship-brother hopefully.
Truzenzuzex studied the instruments below faceted orbs. "A dreadnought, several
cruisers, the rest
destroyers or research vessels." He glanced over at Bran Tse-Mallory. "They will drop
into normal
space. in ten minutes." Thranx did not perspire, but Flinx had the impression that the
philosoph
was trying to.
"If we're going to get away ..." Flinx said, starting toward the pilot's console. A strong
hand
caught his left arm in a gentle but unbreakable grip of restraint. Pip stirred nervously on
Flinx's other shoulder, and his master also sensed the seriousness in the tall scientist’s,
mind.
"We cannot simply leave, Flinx. We must make an attempt to use the device. It may be
that it is
activated by what it eventually destroys. In this case, that would be the collapsar itself."
"How," Flinx asked very slowly, "would we do that?"
Tse-Mallory smiled like a Churchman. "In order to prevent the approaching ships from
interfering,
the ar-tifact would have to be accelerated rapidly toward the rogue. We know of only
one way to
move it."
Flinx turned to a port, to where two distant stars were vanishing from existence, and he
tried to
imagine suffering the same fate. It was not pleasant to contemplate.
Chapter Fourteen
"We have no other option, Flinx.” Truzenzuzex sounded sad, but quite as unshakable as
his human
associate.. "If we take it with us, the AAnn will surely pursue. We certainly cannot risk

letting
the weapon fall into their hands. This way, by destroying it-and, only incidentally,
ourselves-we
can at least insure that does not happen."
Flinx tried to calm Pip, who was hunting with slitted eyes and pointed tongue for
whatever was
causing so- much turmoil within his master. But he did not fly at Truzenzuzex or TseMallory, for
their present thoughts where Flinx were concerned were ones of genuine sorrow and
fondness.
"We have a minute or two to search the artifact's surface," Tse-Mallory commented. "I'll
see if I
can dis-cover anything. If not, just leave me out there. At least, if driving the device into
the
rogue works, I’ll have a nanosecond to enjoy it." He started for the nearby observation
lock where
the suits were kept, then paused. "There's a light on here.” He turned a quizzical gaze
toward
Flinx. "A maliunction?”
Flinx instantly began searching the ship with voice and instruments. Both registered two
additional bodies: September and Hasboga.
There was no sign of Ab.
A sharp whistle sounded from both the console and the door leading toward the lock.
Flinx knew
that signal from every emergency drill he had ever been run through on a commercial
ship.
"He's cycling the outer lock!" Truzenzuzex moved to press his mandibles to the curved
edge of the
star-board port, trying to see around it.
Flinx fumbled with the controls on the nearest inter-com: "No Ab! Don't do it-wait!"
"Let him, Minx. Perhaps Ab knows what he's do-ing." Tse-Mallory sounded hopeful.
`It's not that, it's not that, Flinx explained wildly, gesturing at six tiny lights on the lock
door. They formed a pretty pattern. "There isn't a suit on board, for human or thranx, that
will
property fit him!"
Tse-Mallory scratched the back of his neck while he walked to stand by his ship-brother.
"Maybe
our friend Ab doesn't need a suit. Maybe ..." and then he was working hurriedly at a part
of the
computer that had not been employed for months.
A sharp pop and whistle sounded over the intercom. Slowly Flinx turned it off. He spoke

almost
inaudibly. "It doesn't matter now. He's outside. There's no air in the lock." The innocent,
stupid, but harmless alien had become his responsibility. There was no rhyming, no
singing in the
observation blister now, nor would there ever be again.
It was Ab who had led them to the Hur'rikku device. Despite that, Elias had forgotten
him completely
is the excitement and tension of the past weeks. Not that that was a decent excuse.
"Flinx, come here." Truzenzuzex was beckoning with a truhand and foothand together.
"I think you
might be interested in what's happening outside."
Flinx ran to stand beside the staring philosoph.
Ab's body was drifting slowly toward the long red-brown artifact. It appeared that all
four eyes
were open. All four arms were extended at right angles from the pear-shaped body and
angled
downward to meet the four extended legs. If the attitude the alien's limbs had assumed
was
unintentional, it constituted the most regularized rigor mortis Flinx had ever imagined.
A human would be twisted, contorted, and dead from the cold vacuum by now. Ab might
be also, but
something about the precise arrangement of those eight limbs led Flinx to think
otherwise.
"He's definitely moving toward it," Tse-Mallory ob-served, his voice tight.
"What could be more natural?" Truzenzuzex was awed past astonishment. "He is curious
and wishes a
closer look. But I still do not understand. Why should he be curious? Bran, everything
we have
studied, ev-erything we have surmised about the Hur'rikku, tells us that this Ab thing
cannot
possibly be a member of that race. Bran?"
Tse-Mallory did not glance up from the readouts he was poring over, from the
instrumentation he
was ma-nipulating. "Quiet, brother. I'm working."
Truzenzuzex knew Bran as well as he knew himself. He did not even trouble his brother
with a
reply.
Flinx's shock at what occurred next was so overpow-ering that a startled Pip flew off his
shoulder
and flut-tered nervously around the domed ceiling of the room.
Three meters from the artifact, the body of Abala-mahalamatandra split into four equal
parts. Each

sec-tion held an eye, an arm, and a leg. Moving indepen-dently by some strange method
of
propulsion, each Ab-quarter positioned itself independently facing one of the artifact's
four
sides approximately opposite its equator.
Together, in a unison too precise to be accidental, they moved toward the rust brown
surface.
About that time Flinx noticed the similarity between the configni-ration of each interior
part of
the Ab-quarters and several depressions and protrusions on the artifact. Only idly did he
note
that there was no blood or dan-gling organs visible where Ab's insides, should have
been. Those
interior surfaces were irregular but unbro-ken.
They touched the artifact simultaneously. Four arms slid into four matching holes. Four
legs did
likewise, twisting and curving to fit. Four eyes contacted flat, stubby projections. Flinx
could
have sworn that, just before touching, the eye nearest the port winked at him.
All four quarters of what formerly had been the creature called Ab had merged smoothly
with the
Hur'rikku artifact. You could hear breathing and little else in the observation blister of
the
Teacher.
Tse-Mallory looked up, rubbed his eyes, and spoke. "He named himself well, or was
well named."
Truzenzuzex and Flinx looked over at him. "I put our Ab vocabulary to work on
something we ought
to have worked on first-his name. Abalamahalamatandra. A composite from four
different languages,
two being derivatives from other languages, one derived from yet a third. Together they
form a
couplet in a language three hundred and fifty thousand years dead, which the computer
then
compressed according to the rhyme scheme Ab used when announcing his name. I got
one word I'm
pretty positive of out of the whole business." He paused, then said anticlimactically:
"Key."
"An informational key as well as a mechanical one," Truzenzuzex mused as he turned
his gemlike
gaze back to the port. "Certainly it was willing enough to impart information. We simply

didn't
know enough to under-stand the answers."
"Ab's a machine." Flinx too was staring back out the port. "The AAnn must at least have
suspected
what he is. No wonder they wanted him destroyed."
"Slow down, Flinx." Tse-Mallory tried to caution him. "We know only that Ab's a
machine, some kind
of key. We still don't know if he's the right kind."
"All that nonsense," Flinx was muttering to himself. "All the years he must have
wandered about
aimlessly, taken in hand by different races and different masters. I wonder how many
secrets, how
much knowledge, he babbled to people who didn't understand."
Behind them a readout buzzed for attention. It recorded information from several
external sensors.
Tse-Mallory, the closest, moved to read the informa-tion.
"Something is, according to this, happening to the artifact. Also, we have three minutes
to get
away be-fore the AAnn war sphere arrives."
A soft yellow glow appeared and enveloped the en-tire Hur'rikku device. "?`here!" Flinx
pointed.
Where the four parts of Ab had touched the device, four black circles suddenly appeared.
Inside
those dark holes nothing could be seen. Part of the interior of the arti-fact was apparently
gone,
yet they could not exactly see through it. When the black circles appeared, the yellow
aura
vanished.
Within the artifact, something that was not normal space had been created. Flinx was so
intrigued
that he forgot to panic. Yet nothing more happened. There was no titanic explosion, no
steady hum
as from an ac-tivated machine, nothing. The artifact continued to sit in free space,
unchanged
save for four holes in its sides which met to form ... nothing.
"We can't wait any longer if we're going to get away," Tse-Mallory announced,
examining a readout.
"But is it activated? Nothing's happened, no change in energy flow according to our
instruments.
What else has to be done, dammit!"
"Bran," Truzenzuzex said slowly. "I just don't know. But the Ab-thing has certainly done
something. I think we'd best leave the device alone. It's a chance, but humanx society

has
prospered because of the chances individuals within it have taken. Also because our
survival drive
is so strong. At the moment, my own is working overtime. Up the universe, ship-brother.
Let us
depart, and trust in the rhymes of the fool who was not."
Without another word, Tse-Mallory activated the KK drive. "I want to see whether we're
going to be
remembered as prophets or fools. We'll stay in normal space and see what happens,
unless the AAnn
come after us. I'm betting they'll be more interested in the device."
As they moved out of the immediate vicinity of the Hur'rikku artifact, Pip returned to
Flinx's
shoulder.
Immediately thereafter the AAnn war sphere as-sumed a cluster position around the
ancient remnant
of that mysterious dead civilization. On board the Teacher, three anxious faces studied
long-range
detec-tors.
"They've encapsulated it." Tse-Mallory idly checked another screen. "No sign of
pursuit."
"We are of no concern to them now," Truzenzuzex pointed out. He was worried, terribly
so. "We may
not know for years, decades, or in our lifetimes if we have made a proper decision. The
device may
take that long to function, or the AAnn that long to learn how to op-erate it." The
philosoph
noticed Flinx's drawn ex-pression, and chittered his concern.
"It's just that I'm only now starting to realize what Ab might be capable of doing," Flinx
explained, "and thinking about all the time I spent in his company. Or its company. I
don't know
of many machines with per-sonality. Ab had that."
Looking like a cluster of enormous metallic soap bubbles, the AAnn flagship had slowed
to a stop
along-side the artifact. From the honor chair aboard the dreadnought, Baron Lisso PN
studied the
dwarfed sil-ver of metal-glass-plastic with great satisfaction.
Messages of congratulations at that very moment were undergoing composition and
would soon be
broadcast via the deep-space beam which ran the entire length of the enormous vessel to
secret
bases within the Commonwealth. From there they would be relayed to the Empire.

There would be joy in many burrows, the Baron re-flected. After many long years of
service to the
Em-peror and the Pack of Lords, he might hope to find himself raised to that status, or
even to be
made an ad-viser with a chance of succeeding the Emperor himself.
The desperate humanx ploy, ineffectual as it would likely have been, had been stopped.
Not only
that but the object of all their enterprise had been captured. It floated outside the
warship. Now
there remained only tests to be run before it could be brought safely aboard. Baron Lisso
PN
didn't believe anything-much. less the relatively tiny object outside-could interrupt the
course
of the collapsar. That was a myth. Bu: myths often had some foundation, so it would be
best to be
cautious until the ancient artifact's harmlessness had been assured.
"Bring the object into the storage hold. Use the method described to us by our
informants within
the Commonwealth. Back us around it. Our tractors are far more powerful than anything
the tiny
humanx vessel could have mounted, but we will push it when we leave, if that is
required.
"But it is best to study under convenient conditions."
While the other ships of the war sphere watched alertly for the approach of any humanx
or Commonwealth
force, the massive dreaduought laboriously ad-justed its attitude so that the rear of the
main globe backed up to the Hur'rikku device. Doors slid aside, revealing a vast, airless,
illuminated compartment within. Carefully it backed over the artifact, encapsulat-ing it.
The
massive four-sided panels slid shut behind.
Several leading archeologists and other scientists shunted over to the dreadnought from
two fully
equipped laboratory vessels, accompanied by members of the dreadnought's militarysciences staff.
They were greeted by the Baron and his executive officer in the zero-gravity vacuum of
the cargo
hold. The small group of suited AAnn drifted, studying the artifact visually while a huge
battery
of instruments ex-amined it with senses no living creature possessed.
"Honored One," the executive officer said, "a message relayed from the periphery ship
Analosaam.

They report that the humanx vessel continues to flee in normal space and request orders
to pursue
and destroy."
"Request denied." The Baron was unimpressed by their prize. It would not he much of a
trophy to
haul back to Sectorcav. "Having failed in their futile at-tempt with this relic, they may be
trying to tempt one or more of our ships into following within detection range of a
Commonwealth
or Church outpost. That would precipitate a useless incident. Let our presence here
remain
undetected.
"As for any story they may choose to relate concern-ing us, without proof no one would
believe a
tale tell-ing of an Imperial war force penetrating this deeply into the Commonwealth
simply to
capture a device the Commonwealth government does not believe in any-way. Before
anyone could
arrive here to check their story, we shall be gone homeward."
"Home." The word was breathed softly by the physicist on the Baron's right. Personally,
he was
even less impressed than the noble by the Hur'rikku artifact. Instrument readings relayed
to him
via his suitcom indicated that the object floating before them was emitting not a doam of
energy,
was not composed of explosive materials, and was to all appearances as inert and
harmless as the
caps on his two front incisors. He was anxious to render his opinion. Then he could return to the
hot, shifting sands of his own home.
One by one the scientists present gave their opinions. Ail agreed that if the device before
them
had once been a weapon, the rot of ages had destroyed its viabil-ity. But by all means
bring it
back to Sectorcav. Its in-scriptions and interior would interest the archeologists, at least.
"Does that mean we can inspect it more closely?" the Baron inquired impatiently. He too
was ready
to go home.
The chemist in charge felt confident enough to reply. "As long as one avoids the stilluninspected
protrusions and depressions, I should think it would be quite safe, Honored One. We are
monitoring
for any change in the object's status, but I personally anticipate none."

"Sure," a physicist-metallurgist added, "if it was ca-pable of functioning, the humanx
would
already have activated it."
"Logic and truth," agreed another, with a positive°, twitch of his head.
Propelled by gentle kicks off the curving wall and the encircling walkway, and trailing
control
cables, the group moved toward the device. A few tugs on the cables brought them to a
drifting
stop alongside it.
"What are those black circles that appear to be solid on the surface of each plane?" the
Baron, no
neophyte scientist himself, asked the others.
"They may not be solid, according to some readings, Honored One." The scientist
sounded puzzled.
"They show properties of solid surfaces and of vacuum simul-taneously. It is an
interesting but
not necessarily dan-gerous phenomenon..."
Tse-Mallory's face was an unreadable mask as he looked up from the screen. "Still no
signs of
their giv-ing chase. I think they'll be content with having stopped us. Resolution at this
distance is difficult, but I believe they've taken the artifact on board the dread-nought."
Truzenzuzex's usual placid demeanor broke for an instant, as a foothand slammed with
surprising
force against the metal beneath the bank of instruments. "Something should have
happened by now,
if the, device was going to do anything. The machine Ab-“
"Ab was no machine." Flinx sounded bitter. Their foolish but charming ward had
apparently
quartered himself on a whim. "Ab was somebody."
"It is something humanxkind has long suspected." Seeing how emotionally Flinx was
reacting, the
phil-osoph tried to comfort him by changing the subject a little. "For example, you
humans used to
anthropomor-phize certain advanced machines long before it was learned that instincts
were more
accurate about such mechanicals than minds."
"I'm afraid it's finished, ship-brother. We must try another legend. Otherwise it will all
be over
for the people of the three worlds."
Flinx turned his gaze away from the screen. Out the rear port of the observation blister
he could

still see clearly the twin suns RNGC 11,432-3. The AAnn war-ships were far too small
to be
detected by tae naked eye.
The position of the two spiraling trails of matter being drawn off the two suns had
altered as the
rogue traveled deeper through the system. While it was prob-ably only his imagination
he thought
that the circum-ference of both stars had shrunk noticeably. With a stomach-wrenching
thought for
the doomed people of Carmague-Collangatta and Twosky Bright, he turned back to his
companions and
discovered September eye-ing him questioningly. The giant and Hasboga, having
discovered that
annihilation wasn't imminent, had re-turned to the observation chamber.
Truzenzuzex and Tse-Mallory's hunt had reached an unsatisfactory conclusion. Now it
was time to
resolve his own.
Eyes full of blue wisdom watched him, almost seemed to sense his question. "This ship
is emergency
-coded to respond in a dangerous situation only to my voice, September. I can let you
and Hasboga
off or keep you aboard until I get satisfaction. I want answers and I want them now."
Oddly, September seemed to approve of Flinx's an-nounced intentions rather than
reacting angrily
to them.
"You never told me what you were doing on Moth trying to buy me. And you mentioned
others, too. I
want to know why you were at that auction."
"I like your ship. Keep me on it as long as you want." Was the giant laughing?
Flinx walked over, put hands on hips, and stared up at that graven visage. September
towered over
him. He weighed more than twice as much as the youth and could have broken his bones
with one
hand. Provided, however, that the small, alert shape coiled about Flinx's right shoulder
did not
interfere. Many men had found that "however" to be a fatal one.
Not that September intended to react belligerently. "'Pon my soul, young feller-me-lad, if
Idon't think you're threatening old Skua." He smiled petulantly.
Flinx turned away, angry at himself now. "I'm sorry. I don't like a universe where threats
replace
reason the way rock replaces bone in a fossil. I especially don'6 like to threaten friends."

Eyebrows of white lichen lifted in surprise. "So you regard me as a friend?"
Flinx spoke without looking at the giant. "I'd like to think of you as one."
There was an odd catch in September's voice. "I’d like that, feller-me-lad. So ... I'll tell
you
what you want to know."
Flinx whirled and immediately tried to stifle his ex-citement. He took a seat while
September sat,
lotuslike, opposite him. Hasboga turned her attention to the stars, a little miffed at being
ignored.
Tse-Mallory and Truzenzuzex remained glued is their respective instruments. Flinx
knew neither
would concede failure until it was irrevocably displayed to them. Creatures of theory,
they were
the most pragmatic and empirical of men.
"A little less than twenty standard years ago," Sep-tember began, "I found myself devoid
off
credit and prospects. I've been poor several times in my life lad. It's not nice. I was
depressed,
my brain wasn't func-tioning right ... the reasons need not concern you. I took a job I
probably
shouldn't have.
"There was a firm, small, but associated with some very important persons, I later found
out.
Their motives were good. They believed they could through the use of their combined
abilities,
improve humanity. Physically, not morally. For their theories to prove themselves,
normal
conditions were essential for :he raising of their `improved' children. They found an
ideal
launching device in couples desiring to have chil-dren in which the father was sterile.
There are
many organizations which supply viable sperm to such cou-ples. It provided the firm
with an ideal,
inconspicuous cover.
"Needless to say, the couples purchasing sperm were not told that it had been
improved.” The giant
looked away. "I didn't find out what was going on, you must understand, until after."
Flinx forbore asking until after what.
"The couples thought they were buying standard spermatozoa full of high-class genes.
They had no
way of knowing that those genes had been toyed with. I ap-plied and was accepted as a

sperm
donor." He allowed himself a slight grin. "I'm sure it was because of my size and
strength, not my
overwhelming brilliance. Remember I had no idea what was going to be done to what I'd
sold. There
were numerous other donors besides myself, of course.
"How many or how often they donated I don't know. I donated several times. Donated,
hell-sold. And
now you can see why I can't say if I'm your fa-ther or not, Flinx. It could have been my
sperm
that was implanted in your mother, or it could have been any one of many others. Even a
chromosome
match now couldn't tell us, because of the alterations made in certain genes by the firm's
technicians."
"How did you eventually find all this out?" Flinx found himself bizarrely fascinated by
the tale.
Alter-ation of genes . .. improvement of humanity-he was not so sure he was an
improvement, but
the explana-tion went a long way toward explaining the source of his erratic, peculiar
talents.
"Most of the first group of altered offspring were born on Terra or on worlds close to it.
Most of
them were born normal, but there were some, perhaps a fifth, who were born malformed
or
genetically damaged. Sometimes the damage was pretty gruesome.
"The firm's organizers, remember, were essentially decent beings, men and women,
human and thranx.
They were properly horrified, broke up the firm and disbanded. The government got
involved. There
was a lot of talk of criminal proceedings, but the government couldn't find anyone to
prosecute,
because they had, and still have no idea that the children were damaged as the result of
prenatal
manipulation.
"To protect themselves as much as possible, the firm's organizers set about a program of
what you
might call building up a case for the future defense. They employed a network to recover
as many
of the healthy children they'd produced, or to learn the whereabouts and identities, as
they
could. Unfortunate malfunctions they had destroyed." September's voice was flat.
"In order to preserve secrecy, this network used as many former employees as possible.

They
explained that just by donating, I could be considered an accoom-plice by a vengeful
government.
So I took the job."
Flinx didn't inquire if September had tracked down any unsuccessful children.
I was about to buy you at the auction on Moth, to bring you back to Terra. They're
raising several
other healthy but abandoned or orphaned altered kids in a special school back there.
Meanwhile,
the government was beginning to learn things. They knew nothing of the children, but
several
members involved with the firm had been arrested. They would recognize me. So when
a lot of local
police showed up at the auction, I had to leave in a hurry. I intended to come back later
and
repurchase you from whoever finally bought you."
"Why didn't you, Skua?"
"Because shortly afterward the network collapsed, some employees talked in exchange
for immunity,
and most of the founders of the original firm were arrested. Judging from the hysterical
stories
in the tridee faxcasts, I thought it would be a good idea to quietly drop my association
with the
network and with the firm. I managed to lose myself for a while."
"What happened to the founders?" Minx's excitement was beginning to return. Father or
not Septennber
might not be the end of his trail. "What about their records?"
"Sorry, feller-me-lad, I don't know for a fact- but I do have big ears." He wiggled them
for
emphasis. "From what I heard, the firm's records were destroyed in a fire."
"Well, the experimenters then." F1inx tried to re-main hopeful.
"Public revulsion forced some unusually stiff penalties. Most of those involved were
sentenced to
selective neurosurgery." Flinx slumped. He knew what that meant. "That part of their
memories
dealing with the firm and its activities was erased. Their personalities and most of their
knowledge remain, but nothing about the firm or its activities."
"I thought that was against Church doctrine."
September nodded. "It is, but public outcry was pretty violent, feller-me-lad. The AntiScience
League had a field day, as you can imagine. Sometimes Church opinion prevails. In this
case the

Inner Chancellors and the Last Resort probably thought it prudent not to in-sist. A rift in
Churchgovernment
relations wouldn't have benefited anyone."
"But ... you could be my father."
"I don't deny it lad. Can't." He stretched his legs out, winced. One had gone to sleep.
"From what
I know of you, I'd be proud to be, but," he was forced to add, "it could have been one of
several
dozen other donors."
"What if I'd been one of the malformed ones?"
"Young feller," September said seriously, "most of those poor predamned souls never
knew it when
they were killed. Some of them were born without senses, some with new ones. Without
arms, or
legs, or both. With extra limbs or two heads or no head. And there was lots worse.
Remember, most
of the altered chil-dren turned out healthy-if anything, they were a bit stronger, a touch
smarter
than the average. I'm not de-fending the firm now, understand. Just telling you fact, and
the fact
is that that one initial batch didn't turn out too bad."
First batch, Flinx thought. An icy fury built within him. Pip moved nervously. He was an
ingredient in a scientific stew. He was ...
Something September said came back to him. "Some were born without senses," he'd
said, "and some
with new ones." If his awkward abilities were the results of that misguided genetic
manipulation,
then there might be others possessed of similar confusion and talents, uncertain,
terrified,
unsure of their own unpredictable abilities.
And what of September? What went on beneath that granite forehead, behind luminous
azure eyes?
Maybe -son stared up at possible-father. Neither said a word.
"What could their function be?" Baron Lisso PN questioned his science staff as he used
a guideline
to maneuver himself over to the nearest black circle on the Hur'rikku artifact. One
physicist
pulled herself over next to him. She held a boxy affair in both hands. It looked like a
small
dumbbell, with a bright red plastic square pierced by the handle. A cluster of buttons and
switches and other controls adapted for manipulation by a clawed hand studded the box's

surface.
Several small disks fronted it and were directed at the mysteri-ous black circle.
"Instrument readings remain inconclusive, Honored One," she declared. "We cannot
penetrate the
black, areas. Until we are more certain of their nature, I hesi-tate to subject the artifact to
any form of particulate in-spection. Contact with energy or matter might set the weapon
off."
"Bah," said the Baron. "We have already deter-mined that if it was once a weapon, it is
presently
dysfunctional."
Under the withering stares of the other homesick sc-ientists, the single remaining
protester found
herself backing down.
"Honored One," she managed to finish worriedly, "no precipitate action to take:"
"It puts out no energy, takes in no energy. It is dead, millions of time units dead. Yet you
do
not wish! us to proceed with examination. The inscriptions, foe example," and he
gestured at the
engraved script cov-ering the artifact's flanks, "will provide much informa-tion once
they are
deciphered. Perhaps some will aid is our mission to obliterate those warm-skinned
humans and stiffjointed
thranx who infest so much of oar present portion of this galaxy.”
Reaching out, be traced one long character with a gloved hand. The moment he
contacted the
artifact, the single querulous scientist unwillingly sucked in her breath. Nothing
happened.
Turning, the Baron eyed her condescendingly. Her suit tag indicated she was called DiVuoyyi
LMMVCT. The suit hid most of her shape, but not all of it. Her hips were wide. Perhaps
later,
after her unnecessary caution had been lost, he would endeavor to show his ability to be
forgiving
and compassionate to mistake-makers. In his quarters, on the blue dune.
With the hand he tapped the peculiar, as-yet-uniden-tified substance. "Dead, inert,
harmless, as
anyone can see." He drew back his hand, compensated for the movement in zero g, and
smacked the
surface hard. "Why do you not trust your own knowledge, lya-nye? Why do you doubt
your own evident
wisdom?" He moved until he was directly opposite the edge of one of the dark gaps in
the
artifact's surface.
"We cannot see into this space, yet there must be a space there. In the presence of
instrumental
indecision, we AAnn have always reacted efficiently." So saying, be reached out a hand,
fingers
spread, and shoved against the darkness. His hand passed through the black surface and
vanished;
and for a length of time just this side of instantaneous, he became the first and only one
of his
kind to touch Elsewhere.
Matter in Elsewhere triggered the device. Of course, the device was not actually there,
within the
AAnn warship. It was somewhere half a million years back in space, where the system
of Cannachanna
had once been. It was connected to its present manifestation by an unimaginably vast
buildup of
FCI energy. When Baron Lisso PN triggered it, that energy and the actual device
slipped,
avalanched through a different state of space.
It all came together inside the AAnn warship. There was no explosion as a result,
however. The
accumu-lated energy simply gave the slingshotted artifact a little shove. The Hur'rikku
device was
a needle. What it did was punch a tiny hole in the fabric of the uni-verse.
Into the other universe.
Elsewhere waterfalled into Here. The Baron vanished. The scientists around him
vanished.
Everything in the immediate spatial vicinity, which consisted of eleven armed vessels of
various
sizes and their crews, vanished. They disappeared in tiny flashes of supernal brilliance,
going
out of existence like moths in a firestorm.
Only an electronic angel on board the Teacher saved Flinx and his companions. The
computer
detected the danger and threw the ship into space-plus just in time to save it from
annihilation.
Since that annihilation was racing toward them only at near light-speed, the Teacher
didn't have
to accelerate enormously. Only rapidly.
When they started picking themselves off the deck, it was the resilient, armored
Truzenzuzex who

was firs on his feet and back at the consoles. Long-range scanners were activated, and
the scene
forming behind them came into view. There was no need to increase their velocity. They
needed only
to travel a little above light-speed to outspace the pursuing destruction.
Flinx and the others crowded around the screen. So stunned was the youth that he didn't
notice a
terrified Pip had vanished out the passageway.
"Gone." Tse-Mallory studied the detectors in disbelief. "They're gone, Tru. All eleven
ships. Not
a trace of them."
"Somehow they activated the device," murmured Truzenzuzex. Awed, he studied the
picture on the
screen. "Humanx, pay attention. What we are wit-nessing is unique."
Out of the region where the AAnn war sphere bad drifted seconds before, something had
emerged. An
in-tense sphere of pure white brilliance, it was bordered. by a black fire that could not be
seen
through. A tenta-cle of that blackness which was more than black seemed to shine as it
stretched
outward. That was impossible, of course. Nothing could glow black.
It was a distortion of every known physical law, yet it existed, even if a normal spectrum
would
have been appalled by it. From several hundred million kilom-eters away, a similar
tendril of
intensely glowing white fire was extending out from the event horizon of the collapsar.
"It's drawing matter out of the black hole, out of the rogue," said Tse-Mallory in a
stunned
whisper.
"That's crazy." September knew enough to sound confident about that. "Things fall into
black
holes. They don't come out of them again. Ever."
"Nevertheless, that is what is taking place, or else we and the instruments on board this
vessel
have all gone mad." Truzenzuzex's flashing compound eyes moved constantly from
screen to other
instruments. "I would not wager on that possibility. But then, I would never previously
have
wagered I would ever actually see an expandar. A white hole."
As it left the event horizon of the collapsar, the stream of incredibly dense matter pulsed
with
increas-ing intensity, until it was so bright that the Teacher's compensators were hard

pressed to
stop down the light to where it wouldn't burn out the detectors: It ap-proached the
expandar
slightly above the angle of ap-proach of dark material from the latter's event horizon.
Mutual attraction altered angular momentum. Both streams twisted, turned, spiraled in
toward each
other. At the center of the two entwining spirals, they met.
On board the Teacher, a gauge which measured lev-els of radiant energy exploded.
Another simply
snapped. They had been pushed beyond the range their designers had imagined existed.
Where the two tendrils, brilliant and black, came to-gether, a sphere of multicolored,
incredible
energy formed. It grew and steadied as they watched.
"Imagine that at one time all the matter in the uni-verse was concentrated in one
collapsar," TseMallory mused. "It finally meets a weak point in space. The point gives and the two
universes or
more meet. What you get is a very Big Bang. What you get, maybe, is the new energy
which later
coalesces to form our present galaxies."
"You also get something which totally annihilates matter," Truzenzuzex pointed out. "An
efficient
irre-sistible weapon." The philosoph looked pale. "How do you stop an immense
concentration of
matter? Why, with an equal amount of antimatter." Light in the ob-servation blister
bounced off
his eyes as if from a crys-tal chandelier. "Thank the Hive we never explored the trap
after Ab set
it. Any amount of matter, a single touch, probably would have been enough to set it of.
But that's
not what shakes me." He paused a moment to collect himself.
"We were going to drive the Hur'rikku device and ourselves into the collapsar. Had we
done that,
there would have been no gradual matter-antimatter annihilation, as we are seeing now.
The white
hole would have been created within the collapsar. All, all of the collapsar matter would
have
been destroyed at the same time.
"If that collapsar contains the remains of a hundred million suns, all would have turned
to energy
simulta-neously." He rubbed at his mandibles. "I've always wanted to know what a
quasar looked
like, gentlesirs and lady-but not from close up!"
He turned back to the screen. "The flow of matter into antimatter appears relatively
constant.
That matches what the instruments tell us. We have a new star, gentlefolk. A rainbow
star."
Tse-Mallory looked up from the console. "Tru, the motion of the collapsar has changed.
No," he
added quickly at the expression of alarm on the philosoph's face, "it's not moving toward
the
white hole. No quasar in our back yard. It looks like they're both going to or-bit around
the new
star, if you can call it a star. Dis-tance between the two remains, I'm happy to say, constant."
"How long will it burn?" wondered Hasboga, her arm around September's left. "It's
beautiful."
"You'll be able to see it for a few million years at least, I'd guess," said Tse-Mallory.
"Butthat's
not where the real beauty will come from." She eyed him quizzically.
"The Velvet Dam," explained Truzenzuzex. "The extensive dark nebula that lies between
here and the
Commonwealth worlds. When the energy from this steady annihilation reaches it, it will
turn a dark
nebula into the most magnificent sight in our galaxy. I would not be surprised if the
colors
become visible on Terra and Hivehom in the daytime. We will not live to see it, I am
sorry to say.
But we have made a wonderment for our grandchildren and the generations to follow."
They continued to watch until the clashing colored energies of the rainbow star had
faded to a
small spot of brilliance on the screen. Then Flinx put the Teacher on course for Twosky
Bright,
the nearest major Com-monwealth world. Primarily tranx-settled, it would be a good
place for
Trazenzuzex to communicate the knowledge of their accomplishment to officialdom. He
could also
help raise research funds for Isili Hasboga, who brightened at the announcement of the
philosoph's
intention to help.
Flinx paused a hand going reflexively to his shoul-der. The familiar form was not there.
He did
not remember when Pip had left him, but it had been some time ago, he was certain. For
a second he
panicked, thinking back to that awful time on Alaspin when he feared his pet had
abandoned him
forever.
That was no worry here, however, and he relaxed. The minidrag had to be somewhere
aboard the
Teacher. In fact, he mused, the minidrag had been ab-senting itself for longer and longer
periods
ever since they'd left Alaspin. No doubt, he thought reluctantly, the experience of brief
freedom
had made his beloved pet permanently more independent. He would have to cope with
it.
It was no problem to excuse himself to go hunting for Pip. Everyone else's attention was
focused
else-where. Truzenzuzex and Tse-Mallory were deep in a discussion of the new
phenomena now
receding behind them. September and Isili Hasboga were equally en-grossed in each
other.
So Flinx went prowling through corridors and cabins, shouting out Pip's name. The
minidrag had to
be somewhere in the living quarters or the few other pressurized sections of the ship.
Working his
way me-thodically back and down from the observation blister, he eventually reached
his own cabin.
"Pip! Come on out, Pip. It's all right. My mind is calm now."
An answering hiss sounded from behind his bed. He frowned. It was an unusually soft
hiss. Was Pip
sick? Maybe, he thought worriedly, that was the reason for the extended absences. He
took an
anxious step toward the bed.
`Pip, are you all ...?'
Something that resembled a tiny missile shot past his ear, droning like a herculean
bumble bee. He
froze. A second shape whizzed by him, then another, followed by three more. He stood
in befuddled
amazement in the middle of the room as four, five, six tiny winged shapes dove and
hummed around
his head.
There was a much throatier hiss from behind the bed. Immediately all six shapes dashed
over the
covers in ragged formation.
Flinx found Pip coiled neatly on a rumpled blanket on the other side, sequestered
comfortably
between the bed-bulk and the metal wall. As he watched, the winged sextet settled itself
neatly
around the much larger diamond-patterned Pip, looking for all the world like a squadron
of
stingships hovering around a moth-ering cruiser.
Looking up, slitted eyes stared directly into his own. Flinx felt a warm mental thrum
pass between
the mini-drag and his own sensitive mind. It was the second time he had become a father
todayfirst
to a new kind of star, and now to six undeniably cute cable-shapes of winged poison.
"All these years we've been together," Flinx mur-mured comfortingly, "and you turn out
to be a
she."
No wonder he-she, he corrected himself-had van-ished with the impressively muscled
minidrag Balthazaar.
No wonder their return and parting had resembled the conclusion of some unseen aerial
ballet. Neither minidrag had abandoned his master. They bad merely taken a brief
sojourn in
response to a higher directive that itself was part of the jungles of Alaspin.
"You ought to have told me, Pip," Flinx -said reprovingly, but he was unable to restrain a
brad
smile. As if in response, six tiny empathic shapes soared up at him. They buzzed him,
picking
curiously at his ears, pulling his hair, fluttering in front of his eyes with the ravenous
curiosity of all newborns, Pip watched to make sure everything was all right, then
nuzzled her
triangular head deeper into the folds of the blanket.
Undoubtedly, Fllinx mused, she was seeking maximum warmth- but all the same, it
could have been
something akin to embarrassment.
