
FOR
LOVE OF
MOTHER-NOT
ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“Now there’s a scrawny, worthless-looking little runt,”
Mother Mastiff thought. She cuddled the bag of woodcarvings a little closer to her waist, making certain it was protected from the rain by a flap of her slickertic. The steady
drizzle that characterized Drallar’s autumn weather fled from
the water-resistant material.
Offworlders were hard pressed to distinguish any difference
in the city’s seasons. In the summer, the rain was warm; in
autumn and winter, it was cooler. Springtime saw it give way
to a steady, cloying fog. So rare was the appearance of the
sun through the near-perpetual cloud cover that when it did
peep through, the authorities were wont to call a public holiday.
It was not really a slave market Mother Mastiff was trudging past. That was an archaic term, employed only by cynics.
It was merely the place where labor-income adjustments
were formalized.
Drallar was the largest city on the world of Moth, its only
true metropolis, and it was not a particularly wealthy one. By
keeping taxes low, it had attracted a good number of offworld businesses and trading concerns to a well-situated but
mostly inhospitable planet. It compensated by largely doing
away with such annoying commercial aggravations as tariffs
and regulations. While this resulted in considerable prosperity
for some, it left the city government at a loss for general revenue.
Among the numerous areas that were rarely self-supporting
was that involving care of the impoverished. In cases in which
indigence was total and an individual was isolated by circum1


stance, it was deemed reasonable to allow a wealthier citizen
to take over responsibility from the government. This thinned
the welfare rolls and kept the bureaucracy content, while providing better care for the individual involved—or so the officials insisted—than he or she could receive from underfunded
and impersonal government agencies.
The United Church, spiritual arm of the Commonwealth,
frowned on such one-sided economic policies. But the Commonwealth did not like to interfere with domestic policies,
and Drallarian officials hastened to assure the occasional
visiting padre or counselor that legal safeguards prevented
abuse of “adopted” individuals.
So it was that Mother Mastiff found herself leaning on her
cane, clutching the bag of artwork, and staring at the covered
dispersement platform while she tried to catch her breath.
One curious attendee moved too close, crowding her. He glowered when she jabbed him in the foot with her cane but moved
aside, not daring to confront her.
Standing motionless on the platform within the Circle of
Compensation was a thin, solemn boy of eight or nine years.
His red hair was slicked down from the rain and contrasted
sharply with his dark skin. Wide, innocent eyes, so big they
seemed to wrap around the sides of his face, stared out
across the rain-dampened assembly. He kept his hands clasped
behind his back. Only those eyes moved, their gaze flicking
like an insect over the upturned faces of the crowd. The majority of the milling, would-be purchasers were indifferent to
his presence.
To the boy’s right stood a tall, slim representative of the
government who ran the official sale—an assignment of responsibility, they called it—for the welfare bureau. Across
from her a large readout listed the boy’s vital statistics, which
Mother Mastiff eyed casually.
Height and weight matched what she could see. Color
of hair, eyes, and skin she had already noted. Living relatives, assigned or otherwise—a blank there. Personal history—
another blank. A child of accident and calamity, she thought,
thrown like so many others on the untender mercies of gov-


3

ernment care. Yes, he certainly would be better off under the
wing of a private individual, by the looks of him. He might at
least receive some decent food.
And yet there was something more to him, something that
set him apart from the listless procession of orphans who paraded across that rain-swept platform, season after season.
Mother Mastiff sensed something lurking behind those wide,
mournful eyes—a maturity well beyond his years, a greater
intensity to his stare than was to be expected from a child in
his position. That stare continued to rove over the crowd,
probing, searching. There was more of the hunter about the
boy than the hunted.
The rain continued to fall. What activity there was among
the watchers was concentrated on the back right corner of
the platform, where a modestly attractive girl of about sixteen was next in line for consignment. Mother Mastiff let out
a derisive snort. Government assurances or not, you couldn’t
tell her that those pushing, shoving snots in the front row
didn’t have something on their minds beyond an innocently
altruistic concern for the girl’s future. Oh, no!
The ever-shifting cluster of potential benefactors formed
an island around which eddied the greater population of the
marketplace. The marketplace itself was concentrated into a
ring of stalls and shops and restaurants and dives that encircled the city center. The result was just modern enough to
function and sufficiently unsophisticated to attract those intrigued by the mysterious.
It held no mysteries for Mother Mastiff. The marketplace
of Drallar was her home. Ninety years she had spent battling
that endless river of humanity and aliens, sometimes being
sucked down, sometimes rising above the flow, but never in
danger of drowning.
Now she had a shop—small, but her own. She bargained
for objets d’art, traded knicknacks, electronics, and handicrafts, and managed to make just enough to keep herself
clear of such places as the platform on which the boy was
standing. She put herself in his place and shuddered. A
ninety-year-old woman would not bring much of a price.


4

There was an awkwardly patched rip at the neck of her
slickertic, and rain was beginning to find its way through the
widening gap. The pouch of salables she clutched to her thin
waist wasn’t growing any lighter. Mother Mastiff had other
business to transact, and she wanted to be back home before
dark. As the sun of Moth set, the murky daylight of Drallar
would fade to a slimy darkness, and things less than courteous would emerge from the slums that impinged on the marketplace. Only the careless and the cocky wandered abroad
at such times, and Mother Mastiff was neither.
As the boy’s eyes roved over the audience, they eventually
reached her own—and stopped. Suddenly, Mother Mastiff felt
queasy, unsteady. Her hand went to her stomach. Too much
grease in the morning’s breakfast, she thought. The eyes had
already moved on. Since she had turned eighty-five, she had
had to watch her diet. But, as she had told a friend, “I’d rather
die of indigestion and on a full stomach than waste away eating pills and concentrates.”
“One side there,” she abruptly found herself saying, not
sure what she was doing or why. “One side.” She broke a
path through the crowd, poking one observer in the ribs with
her cane, disturbing an ornithorpe’s ornate arrangement of
tail feathers, and generating a chirp of indignation from an
overweight matron. She worked her way down to the open
area directly in front of the platform. The boy took no notice
of her; his eyes continued to scan the uncaring crowd.
“Please, ladies and gentlebeings,” the official on the platform pleaded, “won’t one of you give this healthy, honest
boy a home? Your government requests it of you; civilization
demands it of you. You have a chance today to do two good
turns at once; one for your king and the other for this unfortunate youth.”
“I’d like to give the king a good turn, all right,” said a
voice from the milling crowd, “right where it would do him
the most good.”
The official shot the heckler an angry glare but said nothing.
“What’s the minimum asking?” Be that my voice? Mother
Mastiff thought in wonderment.


5

“A mere fifty credits, madam, to satisfy department obligations and the boy is yours. To watch over and care for.” She
hesitated, then added, “If you think you can handle as active
a youngster as this one.”
“I’ve handled plenty of youngsters in my time,” Mother
Mastiff returned curtly. Knowing hoots sounded from the
amused assembly. She studied the boy, who was looking down
at her again. The queasiness that had roiled in her stomach the
first time their eyes had met did not reoccur. Grease, she
mused, have to cut down on the cooking grease.
“Fifty credits, then,” she said.
“Sixty.” The deep voice that boomed from somewhere to
the rear of the crowd came as an unexpected interruption to
her thoughts.
“Seventy,” Mother Mastiff automatically responded. The
official on the platform quickly gazed back into the crowd.
“Eighty,” the unseen competitor sounded.
She hadn’t counted on competition. It was one thing to do
a child a good turn at reasonable cost to herself, quite another to saddle herself with an unconscionable expense.
“Ninety—curse you,” she said. She turned and tried to locate her opponent but could not see over the heads of the
crowd. The voice bidding against her was male, powerful,
piercing. What the devil would the owner of such a voice
want with a child like this? she thought.
“Ninety-five,” it countered.
“Thank you, thank you. To you both, the government says.”
The official’s tone and expression had brightened perceptibly. The lively and utterly unexpected bidding for the redheaded brat had alleviated her boredom as well as her concern.
She would be able to show her boss a better than usual daily
account sheet. “The bid is against you, madam.”
“Damn the bid,” Mother Mastiff muttered. She started to
turn away, but something held her back. She was as good a
judge of people as she was of the stock she sold to them, and
there was something particular about this boy—though she
couldn’t say precisely what, which struck her as unusual.
There was always profit in the unusual. Besides, that mourn-


6

ful stare was preying unashamedly on a part of her she usually kept buried.
“Oh, hell, one hundred, then, and be damned with it!” She
barely managed to squeeze the figure out. Her mind was in a
whirl. What was she doing there, neglecting her regular business, getting thoroughly soaked and bidding for an orphaned
child? Surely at ninety her maternal instinct wasn’t being
aroused. She had never felt the least maternal instinct in her
life, thank goodness.
She waited for the expected rumble of “one hundred and
five,” but instead heard a commotion toward the back of the
crowd. She craned her neck, trying to see, cursing the genes
that had left her so short. There were shouts, then yells of
outrage and loud cursing from a dozen different throats. To
the left, past the shielding bulk of the ornithorpe behind her,
she could just make out the bright purple flash of uniformed
gendarmes, their slickertics glaring in the dim light. This
group seemed to be moving with more than usual energy.
She turned and fought her way forward and to the right,
where a series of steps led to the platform. Halfway up the
stairs, she squinted back into the crowd. The purple ’tics
were just merging into the first wall of office and shop complexes. Ahead of them a massive human shape bobbed and
dipped as it retreated from the pursuing police.
Mother Mastiff permitted herself a knowing nod. There
were those who might want a young boy for other than humanitarian purposes. Some of them had criminal dossiers on
file that stretched as far back as her lifeline. Obviously someone in the crowd, a salaried informer, perhaps, had recognized the individual bidding against her and had notified the
authorities, who had responded with commendable speed.
“One hundred credits, then,” the disappointed official announced from the platform. “Do I hear any more?” Naturally,
she would not, but she played out the game for appearance’s
sake. A moment passed in silence. She shrugged, glanced over
to where Mother Mastiff still stood on the stairway. “He’s
yours, old woman.” Not “madam” any longer, Mother Mastiff
thought sardonically. “Pay up, and mind the regulations, now.”

7

“I’ve been dealing with the regulations of this government
since long before ye were born, woman.” She mounted the
last few steps and, ignoring the official and the boy, strode
back toward the Processing Office.
Inside, a bored clerk glanced up at her, noted the transactioncomplete record as it was passed to his desk-top computer
terminal, and asked matter-of-factly, “Name?”
“Mastiff,” the visitor replied, leaning on her cane.
“That the last name?”
“First and last.”
“Mastiff Mastiff?” The clerk gave her a sour look.
“Just Mastiff,” the old woman said.
“The government prefers multiple names.”
“Ye know what the government can do with its preferences.”
The clerk sighed. He tapped the terminal’s keys. “Age?”
“None of your business.” She gave it a moment’s thought
and added, “Put down old.”
The clerk did so, shaking his head dolefully. “Income?”
“Sufficient.”
“Now look here, you,” the clerk began exasperated, “in
such matters as the acquisition of responsibility for welfared
individuals, the city government requires certain specifics.”
“The city government can shove its specifics in after its
preferences.” Mother Mastiff gestured toward the platform
with her cane, a wide, sweeping gesture that the clerk had the
presence of mind to duck. “The bidding is over. The other
bidder has taken his leave. Hastily. Now I can take my money
and go home, or I can contribute to the government’s balance
of payments and to your salary. Which is it to be?”
“Oh, all right,” the clerk agreed petulantly. He completed
his entries and punched a key. A seemingly endless form spat
from the printout slot. Folded, it was about half a centimeter
thick. “Read these.”
Mother Mastiff hefted the sheaf of forms. “What are they?”
“Regulations regarding your new charge. The boy is yours
to raise, not to mistreat. Should you ever be detected in violation of the instructions and laws therein stated”—he gestured
at the wad—“he can be recovered from you with forfeiture of


8
ALAN DEAN FOSTER

the acquisition fee. In addition, you must familiarize yourself with—” He broke off the lecture as the boy in question
was escorted into the room by another official.
The youngster glanced at the clerk, then up at Mother
Mastiff. Then, as if he’d performed similar rituals on previous occasions, he walked quietly up to her, took her left
hand, and put his right hand in it. The wide, seemingly guileless eyes of a child gazed up at her face. They were bright
green, she noted absently.
The clerk was about to continue, then found something
unexpected lodged in his throat and turned his attention instead back to his desk top. “That’s all. The two of you can go.”
Mother Mastiff harrumphed as if she had won a victory
and led the boy out onto the streets of Drallar. They had supplied him with that one vital piece of clothing, a small blue
slickertic of his own. He pulled the cheap plastic tighter over
his head as they reached the first intersection.
“Well, boy, ’tis done. Devil come take me and tell me if I
know why I did it, but I expect that I’m stuck with ye now.
And ye with me, of course. Do you have anything at the
dorm we should go to recover?”
He shook his head slowly. Quiet sort, she thought. That
was all to the good. Maybe he wouldn’t be a quick squaller.
She still wondered what had prompted her sudden and uncharacteristic outburst of generosity. The boy’s hand was warm
in her gnarled old palm. That palm usually enfolded a credcard for processing other people’s money or artwork to be
studied with an eye toward purchase and even, on occasion,
a knife employed for something more radical than the preparation of food, but never before the hand of a small child. It
was a peculiar sensation.
They worked their way through crowds hurrying to beat
the onset of night, avoiding the drainage channels that ran
down the center of each street. Thick aromas drifted from the
dozens of food stalls and restaurants that fringed the avenue
they were walking. Still the boy said not a word. Finally, tired
of the way his face would turn toward any place from which


9

steam and smells rose, Mother Mastiff halted before one establishment with which she was familiar. They were nearly
home, anyway.
“You hungry, boy?”
He nodded slowly, just once.
“Stupid of me. I can go all day without food and not give
it a second thought. I forget sometimes that others have not
that tolerance in their bellies.” She nodded toward the doorway. “Well, what are ye waiting for?”
She followed him into the restaurant, then led the way to a
quiet booth set against the wall. A circular console rose from
the center of the table. She studied the menu imprinted on its
flank, compared it with the stature of the child seated expectantly next to her, then punched several buttons set alongside
the menu.
Before too long, the console sank into the table, then reappeared a moment later stacked with food; a thick, pungent stew
dimpled with vegetables, long stalks of some beige tuber,
and a mass of multistriped bread.
“Go ahead,” she said when the boy hesitated, admiring his
reserve and table manners. “I’m not too hungry, and I never
eat very much.”
She watched him while he devoured the food, sometimes
picking at the colorful bread to assuage what little hunger
she felt herself, barely acknowledging the occasional greeting from a passing acquaintance or friend. When the bottom
of the stew bowl had been licked to a fine polish and the last
scrap of bread had vanished, she asked, “Still hungry?”
He hesitated, measuring her, then gave her a half nod. “I’m
not surprised,” she replied, “but I don’t want ye to have any
more tonight. You’ve just downed enough to fill a grown man.
Any more on top of what you’ve already had and you’d end up
wasting it all. Tomorrow morning, okay?” He nodded slowly,
understanding.
“And one more thing, boy. Can ye talk?”
“Yes.” His voice was lower than anticipated, unafraid and,
she thought, tinged with thankfulness.



10
ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“I can talk pretty good,” he added without further prompting, surprising her. “I’ve been told that for my age I’m a very
good talker.”
“That’s nice. I was starting to worry.” She slid from her
seat, using her cane to help her stand, and took his hand once
again. “It’s not too far now.”
“Not too far to where?”
“To where I live. To where ye will live from now on.” They
exited the restaurant and were enveloped by the wet night.
“What’s your name?” He spoke without looking up at her,
preferring instead to study the dim storefronts and isolated,
illuminated shops. The intensity of his inspection seemed
unnatural.
“Mastiff,” she told him, then grinned. “ ’Tis not my real
name, boy, but one that someone laid upon me many years
ago. For better or worse, it’s stuck longer with me than any
man. ’Tis the name of a dog of exceptional ferocity and ugliness.”
“I don’t think you’re ugly,” the boy replied. “I think you’re
beautiful.”
She studied his open, little-boy expression. Dim-witted,
dim-sighted, or maybe just very smart, she thought.
“Can I call you Mother?” he asked hopefully, further confusing her. “You are my mother now, aren’t you?”
“Sort of, I expect. Don’t ask me why.”
“I won’t cause you any trouble.” His voice was suddenly
concerned, almost frightened. “I’ve never caused anyone any
trouble, honest. I just want to be left alone.”
Now what would prompt a desperate confession like that?
she wondered. She decided not to pursue the matter. “I’ve no
demands to make on ye,” she assured him. “I’m a simple old
woman, and I live a simple life. It pleases me. It had best
please ye as well.”
“It sounds nice,” he admitted agreeably. “I’ll do my best to
help you any way I can.”
“Devil knows there’s plenty to do in the shop. I’m not
quite as flexible as I used to be.” She chuckled aloud. “Get
tired before midnight now. You know, I actually need a full


11

four hours’ sleep? Yes, I think ye can be of service. You’d best
be. Ye cost enough.”
“I’m sorry,” he said, abruptly downcast.
“Stop that. I’ll have none of that in my home.”
“I mean, I’m sorry that I upset you.”
She let out a wheeze of frustration, knelt and supported
herself with both hands locked to the shaft of the cane. It
brought her down to his eye level. He stood there and gazed
solemnly back at her.
“Now ye listen to me, boy. I’m no government agent. I
don’t have the vaguest notion what possessed me to take
charge of ye, but ’tis done. I will not beat you unless you deserve it. I’ll see to it that you’re well fed and reasonably
warm. In return, I demand that ye don’t go about braying stupid things like ‘I’m sorry.’ Be that a deal?”
He didn’t have to think it over very long. “It’s a deal—
Mother.”
“That’s settled, then.” She shook his hand. The gesture
brought forth a new phenomenon: his first smile. It made his
tiny, lightly freckled face seem to glow, and suddenly the
night seemed less chilly.
“Let’s hurry,” she said, struggling erect again. “I don’t like
being out this late, and you’re not much the bodyguard. Never
will be, by the looks of ye, though that’s no fault of yours.”
“Why is it so important to be home when it’s dark?” he
asked, and then added uncertainly, “Is that a stupid question?”
“No, boy.” She smiled down at him as she hobbled up the
street. “That’s a smart question. It’s important to be safe at
home after dark because the dead tend to multiply in direct
ratio to the absence of light. Though if you’re cautious and
never grow overconfident and learn the ways of it, you’ll find
that the darkness can be your friend as well as your enemy.”
“I thought so,” he said firmly. “I’ve thought so for”—his
face screwed up as he concentrated hard on something—“for
as long as I can remember.”
“Oh?” She was still smiling at him. “And what makes you
think that it’s so besides the fact I just told it to ye?”


12
ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“Because,” he replied, “most of the times I can ever remember being happy were in the dark.”
She pondered that as they turned the corner. The rain had
lessened considerably, giving way to the mist that passed for
normal air in the city. It didn’t trouble her lungs, but she worried about the boy. The one thing she didn’t need was a sick
child. He had cost her enough already.
Her stall-home was one of many scattered through the
seemingly endless marketplace. Stout shutters protected the
nondescript façade, which occupied ten meters at the far end
of a side street. She pressed her palm to the door lock. The
sensitized plastic glowed brightly for an instant, beeped
twice, and then the door opened for them.
Once inside, she shoved the door shut behind them, then
automatically turned to inspect her stock to make certain
nothing had disappeared in her absence. There were racks of
copper and silver wares, rare carved hardwoods for which
Moth was justly renowned, well-crafted eating and drinking
utensils, including many clearly designed for non-humans,
cheap models of Moth itself with interrupted rings of flashy
floatglitter, and various items of uncertain purpose.
Through this farrago of color and shape, the boy wandered.
His eyes drank in everything, but he asked no questions,
which she thought unusual.
It was in the nature of children to inquire about everything. But then, this was no ordinary child.
Toward the rear of the shop front a silver box stood on a
dais. Its touch-sensitive controls connected the shop directly
to the central bank of Drallar and enabled Mother Mastiff to
process financial transactions for all customers, whether they
came from up the street or halfway across the Commonwealth. A universal credcard allowed access to its owner’s
total wealth. Banks stored information; all hard currency
was in general circulation.
Past the dais and the door it fronted were four rooms: a
small storage chamber, a bathroom, a kitchen-dining area,
and a bedroom. Mother Mastiff studied the arrangement for
several minutes, then set about clearing the storage room. An-


13

cient and long-unsold items were shoveled out onto the floor,
together with cleaning equipment, clothing, canned goods,
and other items. Somehow she would find room for them elsewhere.
Propped up against the far wall was a sturdy old cot. She
touched a button on its side, and the device sprang to life,
skittering about as it arranged itself on springy legs. Further
excavation revealed a bag of support oil, which she plugged
into the mattress. It was full and warm in minutes. Finally,
she covered the cot with a thin thermosensitive blanket.
“This’ll be your room,” she told him. “ ’Tis no palace, but
’tis yours. I know the importance of having something ye can
call your own. Ye can fix up this bower however ye like.”
The boy eyed her as if she had just bestowed all the treasures of Terra on him. “Thank you, Mother,” he said softly.
“It’s wonderful.”
“I sell things,” she said, turning away from that radiant
face. She gestured toward the storeroom out front. “The things
ye saw on our way in.”
“I guessed that. Do you make much money?”
“Now ye sound like the government agent back there at
the platform.” She smiled to show him she was teasing. “I
get by. I’d much like to have a larger place than this, but at
this point in my life”—she leaned her cane up against her
bed as she strolled into the larger room—“it seems not likely
I ever will. It does not bother me. I’ve had a good, full life
and am content. You’ll soon discover that my growls and
barks are mostly show. Though not always.” She patted him
on the head and pointed toward the compact kitchen.
“Would ye like something hot to drink before we retire?”
“Yes, very much.” Carefully, he took off his slickertic, which
was dry by then. He hung it on a wall hook in his bedroom.
“We’ll have to get ye some new clothes,” she commented,
watching him from the kitchen.
“These are okay.”
“Maybe they are for ye, but they’re not for me.” She
pinched her nose by way of explanation.
“Oh. I understand.”



14
ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“Now what would ye like to drink?”
His face brightened once again. “Tea. What kinds of tea
do you have?”
“What kinds of tea do ye like?”
“All kinds.”
“Then I’ll choose ye one.” She found the cylinder and depressed the main switch on its side as she filled it with water
from the tap. Then she searched her store of foodstuffs.
“This is Anar Black,” she told him, “all the way from Rhyinpine. Quite a journey for dead leaves to make. I think ’tis
milder than Anar White, which comes from the same world
but grows further down the mountain sides. I have some local
honey if ye like your drink sweet. Expensive, it is. Moth’s flowers are scarce save where they’re grown in hothouses. This
world belongs to the fungi and the trees; the bees, poor things,
have a hard time of it, even those who’ve grown woolly coats
thick enough to keep the damp and cold out. If honey’s too
thick for ye, I’ve other sweeteners.”
Hearing no reply, she turned to find him lying still on the
floor, a tawny, curled-up smudge of red hair and dirty old
clothes. His hands were bunched beneath his cheek, cushioning his head.
She shook her head and pushed the cylinder’s off button.
The pot sighed and ceased boiling. Bending, she got her
wiry arms beneath him and lifted. Somehow she wrestled
him onto the cot without waking him. Her hands pulled the
thermal blanket up to his chin. It was programmed and would
warm him quickly.
She stood there awhile, amazed at how much pleasure
could be gained from so simple an activity as watching a
child sleep. Then, still wondering what had come over her,
she left him and made her way across to her own room,
slowly removing her clothes as she walked. Before long, the
last light in the rear of the little shop winked out, joining its
neighbors in nightfall. Then there was only the light wind
and the hiss of moisture evaporating from warm walls to
break the silence of the mist-shrouded dark.


2
The boy ate as if the previous night’s dinner had been no more
substantial than a distant dream. She cooked him two
full breakfasts and watched as he finished every bite. When
the last pachnack was gone, and the final piece of bread
wolfed down, she took him into the shop.
He watched intently as she entered the combination to the
metal shutters. As they rose, they admitted a world entirely
different from the empty night. One moment he was staring
at the dully reflective line of metal strips. The next brought
home to him all the noise, the confusion, and bustle and
sights and smells of the great Drallarian marketplace; they
flooded the stall, overwhelming him with their diversity and
brilliance. Mother Mastiff was not a late sleeper—which was
good, for the crowd would rise in tandem with the hidden
sun. Not that the marketplace was ever completely deserted.
There were always a few merchants whose wares benefited
from the mask of night.
The boy could tell it was daytime because it had grown
less dark. But the sun did not shine; it illuminated the raindrops. The morning had dawned warm, a good sign, and the
moisture was still more mist than rain. A good day for business.
Mother Mastiff showed the boy around the shop, describing various items and reciting their prices and the reasons
behind such pricing. She hoped to someday entrust the operation of the business to him. That would be better than having
to close up every time she needed to rest or travel elsewhere.


16
ALAN DEAN FOSTER

The sooner he learned, the better, especially considering the
way he ate.
“I’ll do everything I can, Mother,” he assured her when
she had concluded the brief tour.
“I know ye will, boy.” She plopped down into her favorite
chair, an overupholstered monstrosity covered with gemmac
fur. The skins were worn down next to nothing, and the chair
retained little value, but it was too comfortable for her to part
with. She watched as the boy turned to stare at the passing
crowd. How quiet he is, she thought. Quiet and intense. She
let him study the passersby for a while before beckoning him
closer.
“We’ve overlooked several things in the rush of the night,
boy. One in particular.”
“What’s that?” he asked.
“I can’t keep calling ye ‘boy.’ Have ye a name?”
“They call me Flinx.”
“Be that your last name or your first?”
He shook his head slowly, his expression unhappy.
“Mother, I don’t know. It’s what they called me.”
“What ‘they’ called ye. Who be ‘they’? Your”—she
hesitated—“mother? Your father?”
Again, the slow sad shake of the head, red curls dancing.
“I don’t have a mother or a father. It’s what the people called
me.”
“What people?”
“The people who watched over me and the other children.”
Now that was strange. She frowned. “Other children? Ye
have brothers and sisters, then?”
“I don’t”—he strained to remember—“I don’t think so.
Maybe they were. I don’t know. They were just the other children. I remember them from the early time. It was a strange
time.”
“What was so strange about it?”
“I was happy.”
She nodded once, as though she understood. “So. Ye re-


17

member an early time when you were happy and there were
lots of other children living with you.”
He nodded vigorously. “Boys and girls both. And we had
everything we could want, everything we asked for. All kinds
of good food and toys to play with and . . .”
A wealthy family brought to ruin, perhaps. She let him
ramble on about the early time, the happy time, a while
longer. What catastrophe had overtaken the boy in infancy?
“How big was this family?” she asked. “We’ll call it your
family for now. How many other boys and girls were there?”
“I don’t remember exactly. Lots.”
“Can you count?”
“Oh, sure,” he said proudly. “Two, three, four, five, and
lots more than that.”
Sounded like more than just a family, though an extended
family could not be ruled out, she knew. “Do ye remember
what happened to them, and to you? Ye were all happy, and
ye had lots of friends, and then something happened.”
“The bad people came,” he whispered, his expression turning down. “Very bad people. They broke into where we lived.
The people who watched us and fed us and gave us toys fought
the bad people. There was lots of noise and guns going off
and—and people fell down all around me. Good people and
bad people both. I stood and cried until somebody picked me
up and carried me away. They carried me down lots of halls
and dark places, and I remember getting into some kind of
a—car?”
She nodded approvingly. “Probably. Go on, boy.”
“I was moved around a lot. That was the end of the happy
time.”
“What happened after that?” she prompted him.
“I’m not sure,” he said slowly. “It’s so hard to remember.”
“I know ’tis painful for ye, Flinx. I need to know all about
ye that I can, so I can help ye as best as I’m able.”
“If I tell you,” he asked uncertainly, “you won’t let the bad
people come and take me away?”
“No,” she said, her voice suddenly soft. “No, I won’t let

18
ALAN DEAN FOSTER

them come and take ye away, Flinx. I won’t let anyone come
and take ye away. Ever. I promise ye that.”
He moved a little nearer and sat down on the extended leg
support of the big chair. He had his eyes closed as he concentrated.
“I remember never staying in one place for very long at a
time. The people, the good people who took care of me and
fed me, they kept the bad people away. They were always
upset about something, and they yelled at me a lot more than
before.”
“Were they mad at ye?”
“I don’t think so. Not really.” He licked his lips. “I think
they were scared, Mother. I know I was, but I think they
were, also. And then”—a look of confusion stole over his
face—“I went to sleep. For a long time. Only, it wasn’t really
a sleep. It was like I was asleep and yet like I wasn’t.” He
opened his eyes and looked up at her. “Do you understand
that, Mother? I don’t.”
“No, I’m not sure I do, boy.” Her mind worked. Now who,
she wondered, would take the time and trouble to sedate a
child for a long period of time? And why bother?
“Then some more bad people suddenly showed up, I
think,” he went on. “I didn’t see them this time. But some of
the people who watched me died or went away. Then there
was just me and one man and one lady, and then they were
gone, too.”
“Your mother and father?”
“No, I don’t think so,” he told her. “Anyway, they never
called themselves that. They were just two of the good people. Then some other people came and found me. People I’d
never seen before. They took me away with them.”
“Were they good people or bad people?”
“I don’t think they were either,” the boy replied carefully.
“I think they were kind of in-between people. I think maybe
they were sorry for me. They tried to be nice, but”—he
shrugged—“they were just in-between people. They moved
me around a lot again, and there were different places and


19

lots of new children I didn’t know, and then there was yesterday, and you bought me. Right?”
She put a hand to her mouth and coughed. “I didn’t buy
ye, actually. I agreed to take responsibility for ye.”
“But you paid the government money for me, didn’t you?
I was told that was what was going to happen to me.”
“It was only to pay off the debt the government incurred
for taking care of ye,” she explained to him. “I don’t actually
own ye. I would never do that.”
“Oh,” he said quietly. “That’s nice. I’m glad.” He waited a
moment, watching her, then added, “That’s everything I can
remember.”
“Ye did fine.” She leaned forward and pointed to her right,
up the street. The chair groaned. “If ye walk six stalls that
way, ye’ll find a very small shop run by a mur man. His name
be Cheneth. Go up to him and tell him who ye be and where
ye came from. And ye can buy from him”—she thought a
moment, not wishing to overdo things—“a half credit’s worth
of whatever ye see in his shop.”
“What kind of shop is it?” he asked excitedly.
“Candy,” she said, enjoying the light that came into his
face. “Ye remember what candy is, don’t ye? I can see by the
expression on your face that ye do.” She could also tell by
the speed with which he took off up the street. He was back
before long, those deep emerald eyes shining from his dark
face. “Thank you, Mother.”
“Go on, go on, move to one side! You’re blocking my—
our—view of the customers. Wander about, learn the ins and
outs of where ye live now.”
He vanished like a ray of sunshine, his red hair disappearing into the crowd.
Expensive, she thought to herself. That boy’s going to be
expensive to raise. How by the ringaps did I ever let myself
fall into this? She grumbled silently for another several minutes until a potential customer appeared.
Flinx learned rapidly. He was undemonstrative, highly adaptable, and so quiet she hardly knew when he was around. Soon


20
ALAN DEAN FOSTER

he was amazing her with his knowledge of the layout and
workings of the marketplace and even the greater city beyond.
He worked constantly on expanding his store of information,
badgering shopkeepers with persistent questions, refusing to
take “I don’t know” for an answer.
Mother Mastiff put no restrictions on him. No one had
ever told her it was improper to give an eight-year-old the
run of a city as wild as Drallar. Never having raised a child
before, she could always plead ignorance, and since he returned dutifully every night, unscathed and unharmed, she
saw no reason to alter the practice despite the clucking disapproval of some of her neighbors.
“That’s no way to handle a boy of an age that tender,” they
admonished her. “If you’re not careful, you’ll lose him. One
night, he won’t come home from these solo forays.”
“A boy he is, tender he’s not,” she would reply. “Sharp he
be, and not just for his age. I don’t worry about him. I haven’t
the time, for one thing. No matter what happens to him, he’s
better off than he was under government care.”
“He won’t be better off if he ends up lying dead in a gutter
somewhere,” they warned her.
“He won’t,” she would reply confidently.
“You’ll be sorry,” they said. “You wait and see.”
“I’ve been waiting and seeing going on ninety years” was
her standard reply, “and I haven’t been surprised yet. I don’t
expect this boy to break that record.”
But she was wrong.
It was midafternoon. The morning mist had developed into
a heavy rain. She was debating whether or not to send the
boy out for some food or to wait. Half a dozen people were
wandering through the shop, waiting for the downpour to let
up—an unusually large number for any day.
After a while, Flinx wandered over and tugged shyly at her
billowing skirt. “Mother Mastiff?”
“What is it, boy? Don’t bother me now.” She turned back
to the customer who was inspecting antique jewelry that
graced a locked display case near the rear of the stall. It was


21

rare that she sold a piece of the expensive stuff. When she
did, the profit was considerable.
The boy persisted, and she snapped at him. “I told ye,
Flinx, not now!”
“It’s very important, Mother.”
She let out a sigh of exasperation and looked apologetically at the outworlder. “Excuse me a moment, good sir.
Children, ye know.”
The man smiled absently, thoroughly engrossed in a necklace that shone with odd pieces of metal and worn wood.
“What is it, Flinx?” she demanded, upset with him. “This
better be important. You know how I don’t like to be disturbed when I’m in the middle of—”
He interrupted her by pointing to the far end of the shop.
“See that man over there?”
She looked up, past him. The man in question was bald
and sported a well-trimmed beard and earrings. Instead of
the light slickertic favored by the inhabitants of Moth, he
wore a heavy offworld overcoat of black material. His features were slighter than his height warranted, and his mouth
was almost delicate. Other than the earrings he showed no
jewelry. His boots further marked him as an offworld visitor—
they were relatively clean.
“I see him. What about him?”
“He’s been stealing jewelry from the end case.”
Mother Mastiff frowned. “Are you sure, boy?” Her tone was
anxious. “He’s an offworlder, and by the looks of him, a reasonably substantial one at that. If we accuse him falsely—”
“I’m positive, Mother.”
“You saw him steal?”
“No, I didn’t exactly see him.”
“Then what the devil”—she wondered in a low, accusatory
voice—“are ye talking about?”
“Go look at the case,” he urged her.
She hesitated, then shrugged mentally. “No harm in that, I
expect.” Now whatever had gotten into the boy? She strolled
toward the case, affecting an air of unconcern. As she drew
near, the outworlder turned and walked away, apparently un-

22
ALAN DEAN FOSTER

perturbed by her approach. He hardly acted like a nervous
thief about to be caught in the act.
Then she was bending over the case. Sure enough, the
lock had been professionally picked. At least four rings,
among the most valuable items in her modest stock, were
missing. She hesitated only briefly before glancing down at
Flinx.
“You’re positive it was him, ye say?”
He nodded energetically.
Mother Mastiff put two fingers to her lips and let out a
piercing whistle. Almost instantly, a half-dozen neighboring
shopkeepers appeared. Still the bald man showed no hint of
panic, simply stared curiously, along with the others in the
store at the abrupt arrivals. The rain continued to pelt the street.
Mother Mastiff raised a hand, pointed directly at the bald
man, and said, “Restrain that thief!”
The man’s eyes widened in surprise, but he made no move
toward retreat. Immediately, several angry shopkeepers had
him firmly by the arms. At least two of them were armed.
The bald man stood it for a moment or two, then angrily
shook off his captors. His accent, when he spoke, marked
him as a visitor from one of the softer worlds, like New Riviera or Centaurus B. “Now just a moment! What is going on
here? I warn you, the next person who puts hands on me will
suffer for it!”
“Don’t threaten us, citizen,” said Aljean, the accomplished
clothier whose big shop dominated the far corner. “We’ll settle this matter quick, and without the attention of police. We
don’t much like police on this street.”
“I sympathize with you there,” the man said, straightening
his overcoat where he had been roughly handled. “I’m not
especially fond of them myself.” After a pause, he added in
shock, “Surely that woman does not mean to imply that I—”
“That’s what she’s implyin’, for sure,” said one of the men
flanking him. “If you’ve nothin’ to fear, then you’ve no reason not to gift us a moment of your time.”
“Certainly not. I don’t see why—” The outworlder studied


23

their expressions a moment, then shrugged. “Oh, well, if it
will settle this foolishness.”
“It’ll settle it,” another man said from behind a pistol.
“Very well. And I’ll thank you to keep that weapon pointed
away from me, please. Surely you don’t need the succor of
technology in addition to superior numbers?”
The shopkeeper hesitated and then turned the muzzle of
his gun downward. But he did not put it away.
Mother Mastiff stared at the man for a moment, then looked
expectantly down at Flinx. “Well? Did ye see where he put the
rings?”
Flinx was gazing steadily at the bald man, those green eyes
unwinking. “No, I didn’t, Mother. But he took them. I’m sure
of it.”
“Right, then.” Her attention went back to the offworlder.
“Sir, I must ask ye to consent to a brief body search.”
“This is most undignified,” he complained. “I shall lodge
a complaint with my tourist office.”
“I’m sorry,” she told him, “but if you’ve nothing to hide,
it’s best that we’re assured of it.”
“Oh, very well. Please hurry and get it over with. I have
other places to go today. I’m on holiday, you know.”
Acting uncertainly now, two of the men who had responded to Mother Mastiff’s whistle searched the visitor.
They did a thorough job of it, working him over with the experience of those who had dealt with thieves before. They
searched everything from the lining of his overcoat to the
heels of his boots. When they had finished, they gazed helplessly over at Mother Mastiff and shook their heads.
“Empty he is,” they assured her. “Nothing on him.”
“What’s missing, Mother?” Aljean asked gently.
“Kill rings,” she explained. “The only four kill rings in my
stock. Took me years to accumulate them, and I wouldn’t
know how to go about replacing them. Search him again.”
She nodded at the bald man. “They’re not very big and would
be easy enough to hide.”
They complied, paying particular attention this time to the
thick metal belt buckle the man wore. It revealed a hidden

24
ALAN DEAN FOSTER

compartment containing the man’s credcard and little else.
No rings.
When the second search proved equally fruitless, Mother
Mastiff gazed sternly down at her charge. “Well, Flinx, what
have ye to say for yourself ?”
“He did take them, he did,” the boy insisted, almost crying. “I know he did.” He was still staring at the bald man.
Suddenly, his eyes widened. “He swallowed them.”
“Swallowed—now just a minute,” the visitor began. “This
is getting ugly. Am I to wait here, accused by a mischievous
child?” He shook an angry finger at Flinx, who did not flinch
or break his cold, green stare.
“He took them,” the boy repeated, “and swallowed them.”
“Did you see me take these rings?” the bald man demanded.
“No,” Flinx admitted, “I didn’t. But you took them. You
know you did. They’re inside you.”
“Charming, the experiences one has on the slumworlds,”
the man said sarcastically. “Really, though, this exercise has
ceased to be entertaining. I must go. My tour allots me only
two days in this wonderful city, and I wouldn’t want to waste
any more time observing quaint local customs. Out of the
kindness of my nature, I will not call upon the gendarmes to
arrest you all. One side, please.” He shoved past the uncertain shopkeepers and walked easily out into the rain.
Mother Mastiff eyed the man’s retreating back. Her
friends and fellow merchants watched her expectantly, helplessly. She looked down at the boy. Flinx had stopped crying.
His voice was calm and unemotional as he gazed back up at
her.
“He took them, Mother, and he’s walking away with them
right now.”
She could not explain what motivated her as she calmly
told Aljean, “Call a gendarme, then.”
The bald man heard that, stopped, and turned back to face
them through the now gentle rain. “Really, old woman, if you
think I’m going to wait—”
“Aljean,” Mother Mastiff said, “Cheneth?” The two shop-


25

keepers exchanged a glance, then jogged out to bring the
bald man back—if false restraint charges were filed, they
would be against Mother Mastiff and not them.
“I’m sorry, sir,” Cheneth, the candy man, said as he gestured with his pistol, “but we’re going to have to ask you to
wait until the authorities arrive.”
“And then what? Are they going to haul a free citizen to
the magistrate because a child demands it?”
“A simple body scan should be sufficient,” Mother Mastiff
said as the three re-entered the shop. “Surely you’ve no reason to object to that?”
“Of course I’d object to it!” the visitor responded. “They
have no reason or right to—”
“My, but you’re suddenly arguing a lot for someone with
nothing to worry about,” Aljean, the clothier, observed. She
was forty-two years old and had run her way through four
husbands. She was very adept at spotting lies, and she was
suddenly less convinced of this visitor’s innocence. “Of course,
if perhaps you realize now that you’ve somehow made a bit
of mistake and that we quaint locals aren’t quite the simpletons you believe us to be, and if you’d rather avoid the inconvenience of a scan, not to mention official attention, you’ll
learn that we’re agreeably forgiving here if you’ll just return
to Mother Mastiff what you’ve taken.”
“I haven’t taken a damn—” the bald man started to say.
“The jails of Drallar are very, very uncomfortable,” Aljean
continued briskly. “Our government resents spending money
on public needs. They especially scrimp when it comes to the
comfort of wrongdoers. You being an offworlder now, I don’t
think you’d take well to half a year of unfiltered underground
dampness. Mold will sprout in your lungs, and your eyelids
will mildew.”
All of a sudden, the man seemed to slump in on himself.
He glared down at Flinx, who stared quietly back at him.
“I don’t know how the hell you saw me, boy. I swear, no
one saw me! No one!”
“I’ll be blessed over,” Cheneth murmured, his jaw drop-

26
ALAN DEAN FOSTER

ping as he looked from the thief to the boy who had caught
him. “Then you did take the rings!”
“Ay. Call off the authorities,” he said to Aljean “You’ve
said it would be enough if I gave back the rings. I agree.”
Mother Mastiff nodded slowly. “I agree, also, provided
that ye promise never to show your reflective crown in this
part of this marketplace ever again.”
“My word on it, as a professional,” the man promised
quickly. “I did not lie when I said that I was on holiday.” He
gave them a twisted smile. “I like to make my holidays selfsupporting.”
Mother Mastiff did not smile back. She held out a hand.
“My kill rings, if ye please.”
The man’s smile twisted even further. “Soon enough. But
first I will need certain edibles. There are several fruits which
will suffice, or certain standard medications. I will also need
clean cloths and disinfectant. The boy is right, you see. I did
swallow them. Provide what I need and in an hour or so you
will have your cursed rings back.”
And forty minutes later she did.
After the thief and the little group of admiring shopkeepers had gone their respective ways, Mother Mastiff took her
charge aside and confronted him with the question no one
else had thought to ask.
“Now, boy, ye say ye didn’t see him swallow the rings?”
“No, I didn’t, Mother.” Now that the crowd had dispersed
and he had been vindicated, his shyness returned.
“Then how the ringap did ye know?”
Flinx hesitated.
“Come now, boy, out with it. Ye can tell me,” she said in a
coaxing tone. “I’m your mother now, remember. The only
one you’ve got. I’ve been fair and straightforward with ye.
Now ’tis your turn to do the same with me.”
“You’re sure?” He was fighting with himself, she saw.
“You’re sure you’re not just being nice to me to fool me?
You’re not one of the bad people?”
That was a funny thing for him to bring up, she thought.


27

“Of course I’m not one of them. Do I look like a bad people?”
“N-n-no,” he admitted. “But it’s hard to tell, sometimes.”
“You’ve lived with me for some time now, boy. Ye know
me better than that.” Her voice became gentle again. “Come
now. Fair is fair. So stop lying to me by insisting you didn’t
see him swallow those rings.”
“I didn’t,” he said belligerently, “and I’m not lying. The
man was—he was starting to walk away from the case, and
he was uncomfortable. He was, he felt—what’s the word? He
felt guilty.”
“Now how do ye know that?”
“Because,” he murmured, not looking at her but staring
out at the street where strange people scurried back and forth
in the returning mist, “because I felt it.” He put his small
hand to his forehead and rubbed gently. “Here.”
Great Ganwrath of the Flood, Mother Mastiff thought
sharply. The boy’s a Talent. “You mean,” she asked again,
“you read his mind?”
“No,” he corrected her. “It’s not like that. It’s just—it’s a
feeling I get sometimes.”
“Do ye get this feeling whenever ye look at someone
who’s been guilty?”
“It’s not only guilty,” he explained, “it’s all kinds of feelings. People—it’s like a fire. You can feel heat from a fire.”
She nodded slowly. “Well, I can feel certain things from people’s heads. Happiness or fear or hate and lots of other things
I’m not sure about. Like when a man and a woman are together.”
“Can ye do this whenever ye wish?” she asked.
“No. Hardly ever. Lots of times I can’t feel a thing. It’s
clean then and doesn’t jump in on me, and I can relax. Then
there’s other times when the feeling will just be there—in
here,” he added, tapping his forehead again. “I was looking
toward that man, and the guilt and worry poured out of him
like a fire, especially whenever he looked at the jewel case.
He was worried, too, about being discovered somehow and
being caught, and a lot of other things, too. He was thinking,


28
ALAN DEAN FOSTER

was throwing out thoughts of lots of quick money. Money he
was going to get unfairly.”
“Emotions,” she mused aloud, “all emotions.” She began
to chuckle softly. She had heard of such things before. The
boy was an empathic telepath, though a crude one. He could
read other people’s emotions, though not their actual thoughts.
“It’s all right, Flinx,” she assured him. She put out a hand
and gave his hair a playful tousle. “Ye did right well. Ye saved
me, saved us both, a lot of money.” She looked over at the
small leatherine purse that now held the four recovered and
cleansed rings. They still smelled of disinfectant.
“No wonder that thief couldn’t figure out how you’d spotted him. Ye really didn’t see him take the rings.”
“No, Mother. I wasn’t even sure what he’d taken.”
“Ye just felt the reaction in his mind?”
“I guess,” he said. “I—I don’t know how it happens, but I
know that most people can’t do it, can they?”
“No,” she said gently, “most other people can’t. And
sometimes they become very upset if they think there’s
someone around like ye who can.”
Flinx nodded solemnly. “Like the bad people?”
“Maybe,” she said, considering that possibility. “Maybe
like the bad people, yes. Ye can’t control the power, you’re
sure?”
“I’m sure. I’ve tried. Sometimes it’s just there, a burning
inside my head. But most of the time it’s not.”
She nodded. “That’s too bad, too bad. Ye have what’s
called a Talent, Flinx.”
“A Talent.” He considered that a moment, then asked uncertainly, “Is it a good thing?”
“It can be. It can also be a dangerous thing, Flinx. We
must make a secret of it, your secret and mine. Don’t ever tell
anyone else about it.”
“I won’t,” he murmured, then added energetically, “I promise. Then you’re not mad at me?”
“Mad?” She let out a long, rolling cackle. “Now how
could I be mad with ye, boy? I’ve regained my jewelry, and
you’ve gained quite a bit of respect among our neighbors. In


29

the marketplace, that can be a tradable commodity, as ye may
discover someday. They think you’ve a sharp eye and a
sharper tongue. The reality be something more, though I
wouldn’t argue ye can cut words with the best of them. Keep
your Talent to yourself. Remember, our secret.”
“Our secret,” he repeated solemnly.
“Can ye do anything else?” she asked him, trying not to
sound eager. “Anything besides feeling what others be feeling?”
“I don’t think so. Though sometimes it feels like—I don’t
know. It burns, and it makes me afraid. I don’t know how it
happens to me, or why.”
“Don’t trouble yourself about it, boy.” She didn’t press the
matter when she saw how it upset him. “There’s nothing to
be afraid of.” She drew him close, held him next to her thin,
warm frame.
“Ye utilize your mind and everything else ye own. That’s
what it all’s been given to ye for. A Talent be no different
from any other ability. If there be anything else ye want to try
with yourself, ye go ahead and try it. ’Tis your body and
brain and none other’s.”



3
Tthathe bycouple
came from Burley. Mother Mastiff could tell
their rough accents and by the inordinate amount
of gleaming metal jewelry they wore. They were handicraft
hunting. The intricately worked burl of black caulderwood in
Mother Mastiff’s shop caught their attention immediately. It
had been finely carved to show a panoramic view of a thoruped colony, one of many that infested Moth’s northernhemisphere continents. The carving ran the entire width of
the burl, nearly two meters from end to end. It was a half
meter thick and had been polished to a fine ebony glow.
It was a spectacular piece of work. Ordinarily, Mother Mastiff would not have considered parting with it, for it was the
kind of showpiece that brought passers-by into the stall. But
this couple wanted it desperately, and only the impossibly
high price seemed to be holding them back.
Flinx wandered in off the street, picked at a pile of small
bracelets, and watched while the man and woman argued.
Quite suddenly, they reached a decision: they had to have
the piece. It would complete their recreation room, and they
would be the envy of all their friends. Hang the shipping
cost, the insurance, and the price! They’d take it. And they
did, though the amount on their credcard barely covered it.
Two men came later that afternoon to pick up the object and
deliver it to the hotel where the visitors were staying.
Later that night, after the shop had closed, after supper,
Mother Mastiff said casually, “You know, boy, that couple who
bought the caulderwood carving today?”
“Yes, Mother?”



31

“They must have been in and out of the shop half a dozen
times before they made up their minds.”
“That’s interesting,” Flinx said absently. He was seated in
a corner studying a chip on his portable viewer. He was very
diligent about that. She never thought of sending him to a
formal school—rental chips had been good enough for her
as a child, and they’d damn well be good enough for him.
“Yes,” she continued. “They barely had the money for it. I
pressed them. I backed off, I did everything I could think of
to convince them of its worth once I saw that they were really
serious about buying the thing. Every time, no matter what I
said, they left the shop and went off arguing between themselves.
“Then ye put in an appearance and stood there and watched
them, and lo-de-do-de, sudden-like, their sales resistance just
crumpled up and went aflight. Be that not interesting?”
“Not really,” he replied. “Doesn’t that happen lots of times?”
“Not with an item as expensive as the caulderwood, it
doesn’t. It hardly ever happens that way. Now I don’t suppose ye had anything to do with the sudden change of heart
on the part of those two? ’Tis not likely ye sensed their hesitation and maybe did something to help them along?”
“Of course not, Mother.” He looked away from his viewer
in surprise. “I can’t do anything like that.”
“Oh,” she murmured, disappointed. “Ye wouldn’t be lying
to me now, would ye, boy?”
He shook his head violently. “Why would I do a thing like
that? I’m just happy you made so much money on the sale.
I’m always glad when you make money.”
“Well, that be one thing we have in common, anyway,” she
said gruffly. “That’s enough viewing for one night. You’ll
strain your young eyes. Be to bed, Flinx.”
“All right, Mother.” He walked over and bestowed the
obligatory peck on her cheek before scurrying off to his own
room. “G’night.”
“Good night, boy.”
She stayed awake in her own bedroom for a while, watching one of the rented entertainment chips on her own viewer.

32
ALAN DEAN FOSTER

The show had been recorded on Evoria and benefited from
the exotic location and the presence of thranx performers. It
was late when she finally shut it off and readied herself for
sleep. A quick shower, half an hour brushing out her hair, and
she was able to slide with a sigh beneath the thermal blanket.
As she lay in the dark, waiting for sleep, a sudden disquieting thought stole into her mind. Why would the boy lie to
her about such a possible ability?
He might do it, she thought, because if he could convince
one couple to make an unwanted purchase, he probably
could do it to others. And if he could do it to others, what
about this past autumn when she had been hurrying past the
government auction platform on her way across town, and
something had brought her to a puzzling halt. Wasn’t it possible that the purchase she had made then—the unwanted,
inexplicable-to-this-day purchase that she had never looked
at too closely—had been helped along its way by the mental
nudging of the purchased? Why had she bought him? None
of her friends could quite understand it either.
Disturbed, she slipped out of the bed and walked across
the resting and eating space to the boy’s room. A glance inside
revealed him sleeping soundly beneath his cover, as innocentlooking a child as one could hope to set eyes upon. But now
something else was there, too, something unseen and unpredictable that she could never be certain about. Never again
would she be able to relax completely in the boy’s presence.
Already she had forgotten her initial regrets and had
begun to extend to him the love she had never before been
able to give to his like. He was an endearing little twit and
had been more than helpful around the shop. It was good to
have such company in her old age. But for a while now, just
for a while, she would pat and reassure him with one hand
and keep the other close by a weapon. At least until she could
be sure in her own mind that it still was her own mind she
could be sure of.
Silly old fool, she thought as she turned back toward her
own room. You’ve praised him for having a Talent, and now
you’re worried about it. You can’t have it both ways. Besides,


33

what need to fear a Talent its owner could not control? That
confession of the boy’s seemed truthful enough, to judge by
his distress and bewilderment.
She was feeling easier by the time she slipped into her bed
the second time. No, there was no reason to worry. It was interesting, his Talent, but if he couldn’t control it, well, no
need to be concerned.
Clearly, anyone unable to master such an ability would
never amount to much, anyway.
“Haithness, Cruachan, come here!”
The woman seated before the computer screen had spent
still another morning poring through reams of abstract data.
She was trying to put together a chemical puzzle of considerable complexity. But that morning, as happens on rare
occasions, an especially vital piece of the puzzle had unexpectedly fallen into place. Instead of a morass of figures and
undisciplined graphics, the screen now beamed out an image
of perfect symmetry.
The man who hurried over from the center of the room to
glance over her shoulder was tall, the lines striping his face
impressive. The dark-haired woman who joined him in staring
at the screen was equally imposing.
The chamber in which the three of them worked was situated in a small, nondescript office building located in an unimportant city on a backwater world. For all that the equipment
they hovered over had a cobbled-together appearance, most
of it was still of a type requiring enormous expertise to operate and great expense to fund.
Both the knowledge and the money came from scattered,
seemingly unrelated locations throughout the Commonwealth.
To the men and women who practically lived in the room, isolation was their honored burden, obscurity their most potent
weapon. For they were members of a uniquely despised and
persecuted minority, at war with the tenets of civilized society. Truly were their hearts pure and their purposes of noble
mien—it was just their methodology that the rest of civilization questioned.


34
ALAN DEAN FOSTER

The three staring intently at the computer screen certainly
did not look like candidates for such special attention. The
tall man, Cruachan, had the look of a kindly grandfather; the
Oriental lady seated before the console would have seemed
more at home in an ancient era, clad in flowing silks and
wooden shoes. Only the tall black woman standing opposite
Cruachan showed some of her inner hardness in her face.
That hardness and cold resolve lived in each of them,
however, fostered and intensified by two decades of persecution. They saw themselves as men and women apart from the
common herd. Their aim was nothing less than the improvement of mankind in spite of itself. That their methods might
result in damage to the innocent was something they had
known from the beginning. They had put that and other conventionally moral beliefs aside, believing that such sacrifices
were necessary that the majority might benefit. They called
their group the Meliorare Society, an innocent-sounding name
drawn to mask the intention of improving humanity via the
artificial manipulation of genetic material.
Their troubles began when several of their less successful
experiments came to light, whereupon the outcry over the
revelations had been enormous. Now they were compelled to
work in scattered outposts instead of in a single research installation, always barely a jump ahead of pursuing government authorities. They were looked down upon and viewed
with horror by the general populace.
Many of their associates had already vanished, having been
discovered and taken into custody by the relentless minions
of an ignorant officialdom: martyrs to science, the survivors
knew—inhuman monsters, according to the media reports.
Of course, the aims of the Meliorare Society were dangerous! Improvement—change—was always viewed as dangerous
by the shortsighted. The members had steeled themselves to
that way of thinking, and it no longer affected them. What mattered were results, not the opinions of the ignorant masses.
So they did not fear dying, did not fear the even more
horrible punishment of selective mindwipe, because they
believed in the rightness of their cause. If only one of their


35

experiments turned out successfully, it would vindicate the
work propounded on Terra some forty years earlier by the
Society’s founder. Then they would be able to re-emerge into
the scientific community that had disowned them. They would
be able to point with pride to a mature, noticeably improved
human being.
The air of excitement that pervaded the room was restrained
but clearly felt as they gathered around the computer screen.
“This had better live up to its readout, Nyassa-lee,” Cruachan warned. “I have half a volume of information to process
from the Cannachanna system, and as you know, we’re likely
going to have to abandon this place and move on within the
month. That means reset, breakdown of equipment, and all
the difficulties moving entails.”
“You know me better than that, Cruachan,” said the woman
seated in the chair. There was no feeling of triumph in what
she had just done; they had progressed beyond such trivialities. “I’ve been feeding and cross-correlating records on dispersal and individual subject characteristics for months now.
It’s finally paid off. I’ve located Number Twelve.”
The tall black woman leaned closer to the screen. “Number Twelve—that sticks in the mind. Male, wasn’t it?”
Nyassa-lee nodded and indicated the screen. “Here, I’ll
run the relevants back for you.”
They refamiliarized themselves with the details of the
case in question. It had been eight years since case interdiction. In the eight years since, they had encountered a number
of other subjects. Most of them had grown into normal childhood. A few had even displayed tiny flashes of promise, but
nothing worth a full-scale follow-up.
Then there had been those whose minds and bodies had
been horribly distorted and twisted by the original surgical
manipulations, for which they each shared the blame. Unfortunate failures such as those had been made public by the
government and had raised such an emotional outcry among
the scientifically unsophisticated public that the government
had been able to legalize its witch hunt against the Society.


36
ALAN DEAN FOSTER

Most of the subject children had been recovered by the
government, raised in special homes, and restored to normality. Where possible, the genetic alterations performed by
the Society’s surgeons had been corrected to enable all the
children to live a normal life.
If we cannot improve upon the normal, thought Haithness,
then we do not deserve to explore and master the universe.
Nature helps those who help themselves. Why should we not
employ our learning and knowledge to give evolution a boost?
From the far corner of the darkened room, a man called
out. “Brora reports that a government shuttle has landed at
Calaroom shuttleport.”
“Could be the usual load of agricultural specialists,” Cruachan said thoughtfully.
“Possible,” agreed the individual manning the communications console, “but can we afford that risk?”
“I hate to order evacuation on such slim evidence. Any
word on how many passengers?”
“Hard to say,” the man ventured, listening intently to his
receiver. “Brora says at least a dozen he doesn’t recognize.”
“That’s a lot of agricultural specialists, Cruachan,” Haithness pointed out.
“It is.” He called across to the communications specialist.
“Tell Brora to pull back and prepare for departure. We can’t
take chances. Push evac time from a month to tonight.”
“Tonight?” The voice of the communicator had a dubious
ring. “I won’t have half the equipment broken down by then.”
“New communications equipment we can buy,” Cruachan
reminded him. “Replacements for ourselves are not available.”
The man at the com console nodded and turned back to his
station, speaking softly and hurriedly into the pickup. Cruachan returned his attention to the computer screen.
Information emerged.  . . 
   . Next were descriptions of cerebral index and figures for cortical energy displacement.
Oh, yes; Cruachan remembered now. Unpredictable, that
Number Twelve. Patterns in brain activity suggesting paranormal activity but nothing concrete. Particularly fascinat-


37

ing had been the amount of activity emerging from the left
side of the cerebrum, usually detected only in females. That
by itself was not reason enough for excitement, but there were
also continuous signs of functioning in at least two sections
of brain that were not normally active, the “dead” areas of
the mind. That activity, like the child himself, had also been
unpredictable.
And yet, despite such encouraging evidence, the case history of Number Twelve was devoid of the usual promising
developments. No hint of telepathy, psychokinesis, pyrokinesis, dual displacement, or any of the other multitude of
abilities the Society had hoped to bring to full flower in its
experimental children.
Still, Number Twelve at least exhibited a possible something.
“Well, this one certainly shows more promise than the last
dozen or so,” Haithness had to admit. “It’s been so long since
we had contact with him, I’d nearly forgotten those activity
readings. We need to get to this one as quickly as possible.
Where’s he situated?”
Nyassa-lee tapped keys below the readout, bringing forth
answers. “Where in the Commonwealth is that?” Haithness
grumbled.
“Trading world,” Cruachan put in, thinking hard. “Centrally located but unimportant in and of itself. A stopover
world, low in native population.”
“You won’t mind going there once you’ve seen this,”
Nyassa-lee assured them both. Her fingers moved delicately
over the keyboard a second time, and fresh information glowed
on screen. “This is recent, from the local operative who relocated the subject. It appears that the child has definitely displayed one Talent, possibly two. Furthermore, he has done so
in public and apparently without any specialized training.”
“Without training,” Cruachan whispered. “Remarkable, if
true.”
Nyassa-lee tapped the screen. “This operative has been reliable in the past and particularly noteworthy for the accuracy
of his observations. The Talent in question is a telepathic


38

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

variant of some sort. The operative is not a scientifically
trained observer, of course, and he is even less certain of the
second one, though its potential value may be even greater.”
“What is it?” Haithness asked.
“I’ve been hard put to find a name for it. Basically, it
seems that the child may be an emolterator.”
The other woman looked confused. “I don’t remember
that on the list of possible Talents.”
“It wasn’t there. It’s an original. Original with this child, it
seems,” Cruachan said. Nyassa-lee nodded. “It means that
he may be able to influence the actions of others. Not mind
control, nothing as strong as that. It would be more subtle.
One possessing such an ability would have to utilize it very
carefully. If this report is true . . .” His voice and thoughts
drifted for a moment as he studied the readout.
“It seems the child’s Talents have gone unnoticed by the
authorities and that he has developed naturally. All without
even the most rudimentary training. The signs certainly point
to powerful potentials waiting to be unlocked.”
“Either the child has grown up unaware of these Talents,”
Nyassa-lee said, studying new information as it appeared on
the screen, “or else he is precociously clever.”
“It may be just natural caution,” Haithness put in. “It will
be interesting to find out which is the case.”
“Which we will do,” Cruachan said firmly. “It’s been a
long time since we’ve had a subject as promising as this one
come back to us. He could be the one we’ve searched for all
these years.”
“It had better not be a repeat of the last time we located a
subject with these figures,” Haithness cautioned, then indicated the new figures materializing on the screen. “Look at
those neurological potentials. Remember the only other
child who showed numbers like that?”
“Of course, I remember,” Cruachan said irritably. “We won’t
lose this one the way we lost that girl—what the devil was the
little monster’s name?”
“Mahnahmi,” Nyassa-lee reminded him. “Yes, if this boy’s



39

anything like that one, we’re going to have to be extremely
careful. I couldn’t take a repeat of that experience.”
“Neither could I, frankly,” Cruachan admitted. “Our mistake was in trying to regain control over her directly. End result: the girl vanishes again, and two more of the Society go
to a premature end. And we’re still not sure how she accomplished it.”
“We’ll run across her again someday, when our methods
are improved,” Haithness said coolly. “Then we’ll deal with
her properly.”
“I’m not sure I’d want to chance it.” Nyassa-lee looked
back at the screen. “Meanwhile, it would be good to keep in
mind the fact that the potential of this Number Twelve theoretically exceeds even that of the girl.”
“True,” Cruachan admitted, studying the figures, “but it’s
clear that his development has been much slower. We should
have plenty of time to cope with any maturing Talent and
make certain it is safely contained, for the child’s benefit as
well as our own, of course.”
“Of course,” Haithness agreed calmly. “I am curious to
know how you propose to accomplish that. You know how
volatile a Talent can become if stressed.”
“Yes, the girl gave us an impressive demonstration of that,
didn’t she?” Nyassa-lee’s fingers brought forth fresh information from the console.
Another call sounded from across the room. “Brora says
he’s now convinced that the new arrivals at the port have
nothing to do with the agricultural station. They have not
stopped by the Agri section of government house; they are
gathering instead in the subterranean quarter.”
“Tell Brora to speed things up,” Cruachan replied. “I definitely want the installation broken down by midnight.”
“Yes, sir,” the communicator responded briskly.
“You didn’t answer my question,” Haithness reminded the
tall man. “How are we going to handle this one? If we try direct control as we did with the girl, we risk the same consequences. There is no way of predicting how a subject may
react.”

40

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“Remember that the girl was still in infancy when we encountered her. We wrongly mistook her age for harmlessness. There was no reason to appeal to in her case—she was
too young. I never expected that to work against us.”
“It doesn’t matter. The important thing is that he is still unskilled in the use of his Talent. That is also what makes him
dangerous.” Haithness indicated the figures on the screen.
“Look at those. Undisciplined or not, we must handle this
Number Twelve with extreme caution. We need a check of
some kind, something strong enough to mute any juvenile
emotional reactions.”
Nyassa-lee glanced back and up at her colleague. “But we
cannot wait.”
“I agree with you there. This may be our last chance to
gain control and direction over a subject with such potential.
We don’t want to waste our chance.”
“I am aware of the considerations and risks,” Cruachan assured them both. “I do not intend that we should try, as we
did with the girl, to gain control directly. Instead, we will try
to obtain control over someone who exercises control over
the subject. Is there anyone who fits the requisite pattern?”
Nyassa-lee turned back to her keyboard. There was a
pause before she replied, “One. It appears that the subject
was purchased from government control by an elderly woman.
She has raised the boy as her own.”
“Surrogate mother,” Haithness murmured. “That’s good.
It is virtually made to order. We could not hope for a stronger
emotional bond.”
There was no warmth in the voice of Haithness. Only one
thing mattered to her: the success of the experiment. Time
was running out for the Society, she knew; they had no way
of knowing when the authorities might close in on them forever. They needed a success now, and this boy might be their
last chance.
“I see one possible drawback,” Cruachan said while pondering the information glowing on the screen. “The woman
in question, the surrogate mother, is of an advanced age,

41

though apparently healthy.” He nudged Nyassa-lee, who
obediently made room for him on the edge of the chair.
Cruachan fingered controls and frowned when the information he sought did not appear on the screen. “No detailed
medical information on her. It could be difficult.”
Haithness shrugged indifferently. “It does not matter what
her condition is. We have to proceed regardless.”
“I know, I know,” Cruachan replied impatiently. “Our
course is set, then. We will not go from here to Loser’s World
in hopes of relocating subject Number Fifty-six. Instead, we
will establish standard mobile operations aboard the ship.
Once we are certain we have escaped pursuit, we will plot
course for this Moth. Then we should have enough time to
proceed as planned.”
“It will be necessary to isolate the subject from the mother.”
Haithness was thinking out loud. “Given the nature of the
subject’s observed Talents, if our information is accurate, it
may be that within a limited geographical area he might be
able to trace our activities. We will naturally need an uninterrupted period with the surrogate,” she hesitated only briefly,
“to persuade her to cooperate with us.” A thin smile did little
to alter her expression.
Cruachan nodded. “That should not be difficult to arrange.
Fortunately for us, Moth is lightly populated. Technology is
not unknown, but the level varies widely according to location. We should be able to establish ourselves and the necessary equipment at a sufficient distance from the metropolis
where the subject and his parent are living to ensure our privacy and standard security.”
The communicator turned from his instrumentation and
interrupted them without hesitation. “Brora reports that at least
half of the newly arrived agricultural experts are armed.”
“That’s that, then,” Cruachan murmured with a resigned
sigh. Another hurried move, another dash to still another
strange world.
“Nyassa-lee, make certain that this information is transferred to ship storage. Haithness, you—”
“I know what needs to be done, Cruachan.” She turned


42

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

from him and calmly began transferring data from main storage to a portacube.
The communicator leaned back in his chair and frowned
at his instruments. “I won’t have time to break down much
and move it out to the shuttle.”
“It doesn’t matter, Osteen,” Cruachan assured him. “We
have some duplicate equipment already aboard. I don’t like
abandoning more than we have to any more than you do.” He
indicated the expensive electronics with which the room had
been paneled. “But we don’t have a choice now. Regardless,
something promising, truly promising, has come to our notice. After all these years, it appears that we have relocated
one of the most promising of all the subject children.”
“That’s good news indeed, sir.” Osteen was one of the few
young men in the Meliorare Society. Cruachan would have
prefered a man with more vision as prime communicator,
but such individuals were scarce. Osteen at least was loyal
and efficient. It was not his fault that he was intellectually inferior to the Society’s original membership. But then, such a
collection of visionary minds was not likely to join together
again in Cruachan’s lifetime, he knew.
Unless . . . unless the Society could put forth a shining
testament to their noble ideals in the person of a single successful subject. This boy, perhaps, might be their vindication. They had to get to him quickly. During the past several
years, they had had less and less time in which to work as the
Commonwealth closed in on the remnants of the Society.
Their survival rate did not bode well for the future: natural
attrition was beginning to damage the cause as much as government interference.
The three of them, along with the sharp-eyed Brora, who
had sounded the latest warning, represented the largest surviving group from the original membership. The trust of all
who had perished devolved upon them, Cruachan thought.
They must not fail with this boy.
And he must not fail them.




4
Lit was,
oneliness had never bothered Flinx before. He knew what
of course—the condition had been with him all his
short life. In the past, he’d always been able to distance himself from its pain, but this feeling—this empty aloneness—
was different from any loneliness he’d ever experienced
before. It was a physical reality, stabbing at him, creating an
ache in a mysterious, new part of his brain. It was different
not only from his own loneliness but from the aloneness he’d
occasionally sensed in others via his unpredictable Talent.
In fact, the experience was so radically new that he had
nothing to compare it with. Yet it was loneliness; of that he
was certain. Loneliness and something else equally intense and
recognizable: hunger. A gnawing, persistent desire for food.
The feelings were so bright and uncomplicated that Flinx
couldn’t help but wonder at their source. They beat insistently on his mind, refusing to fade away. Never before had
such emotions been so open to him, so clear and strong.
Normally, they would begin to fade, but these grew not
weaker but stronger—and he did not have to strain to hold
them at bay. They kept hammering at him until his mind finally gave in and woke him up.
Flinx rubbed at his eyes. It was pouring outside the shop,
and the narrow window over the bed admitted the dim light
of Moth’s multiple moons, which somehow seeped through
the nearly unbroken cloud cover. Flinx had rarely seen the
bright rust-red moon called Flame or its smaller companions, but he’d spent his years of study well, and he knew
where the light came from.



44

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

Slipping silently from the bed, he stood up and pulled on
pants and shirt. A glow light bathed the kitchen and dining
area in soft yellow. Across the way, ragged snores came from
the vicinity of Mother Mastiff’s bedroom. The loneliness he
sensed was not hers.
The feeling persisted into wakefulness. Not a dream, then,
which had been his first thought. The back of his head hurt
with the strength of it, but though the actual pain was beginning to fade, the emotion was still as strong as it had been in
sleep.
He did not wake Mother Mastiff as he inspected the rest of
the kitchen area, the bathroom, and the single narrow closet.
Quietly, he opened the front door and slipped out into the
stall. The shutters were locked tight, keeping out weather and
intruders alike. The familiar snoring provided a comforting
background to his prowling.
Flinx had grown into a lithe young man of slightly less than
average height and mildly attractive appearance. His hair was
red as ever, but his dark skin now hid any suggestion of freckles. He moved with a gracefulness and silence that many of
the older, more experienced marketplace thieves might have
envied. Indeed, he could walk across a room paved with broken glass and metal without making a sound. It was a technique he had picked up from some of Drallar’s less reputable
citizens, much to Mother Mastiff’s chagrin. All a part of his
education, he had assured her. The thieves had a word for
it: “skeoding,” meaning to walk like a shadow. Only Flinx’s
brighter than normal hair made the professional purloiners
cluck their tongues in disapproval. They would have welcomed
him into their company, had he been of a mind to make thievery his profession. But Flinx would steal only if absolutely
necessary, and then only from those who could afford it.
“I only want to use my ability to supplement my income,”
he had told the old master who had inquired about his future
intentions, “and Mother Mastiff’s, of course.”
The master had laughed, showing broken teeth. “I understand, boy. I’ve been supplementin’ my income in that manner goin’ on fifty years now.” He and his colleagues could not



45

believe that one who showed such skill at relieving others of
their possessions would not desire to make a career of it, especially since the youth’s other prospects appeared dim.
“Yer goin’ into the Church, I suppose?” one of the other
thieves had taunted him, “t’become a Counselor First?”
“I don’t think the spiritual life is for me,” Flinx had replied.
They all had a good laugh at that.
As he quietly opened the lock on the outside door, he
thought back to what he had learned those past few years. A
wise man did not move around Drallar late at night, particularly on so wet and dark a one. But he couldn’t go back to
sleep without locating the source of the feelings that battered
at him. Loneliness and hunger, hunger and loneliness, filled
his mind with restlessness. Who could possibly be broadcasting twin deprivations of such power?
The open doorway revealed a wall of rain. The angled
street carried the water away to Drallar’s efficient underground drainage system. Flinx stood in the gap for a long
moment, watching. Suddenly an intense burst of emptiness
made him wince. That decided him. He could no more ignore that hot pleading than he could leave an unstamped
credcard lying orphaned in the street.
“That curiosity of yours will get ye into real trouble someday, boy,” Mother Mastiff had told him on more than one occasion. “Mark me word.”
Well, he had marked her word. Marked it and filed it. He
turned away from the door and skeoded back to his little
room. It was early summer, and the rain outside was relatively warm. Disdaining an underjacket, he took a slickertic
from its wall hook and donned it; thus suitably shielded from
the rain, he made his way back to the stall, out into the street,
and closed the main door softly behind him.
A few lights like hibernating will-o’-the-wisps glowed
faintly from behind unshuttered shop fronts on the main avenue where the idling wealthy night-cavorted in relative safety.
On the side street where Mother Mastiff plied her trade, only
a rare flicker of illumination emerged from behind locked
shutters and windows.


46

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

As water cascaded off his shoulders, Flinx stood there and
searched his mind. Something sent him off to his right. There
was a narrow gap between Mother Mastiff’s shop and that of
old lady Marquin, who was on vacation in the south, and by
turning sideways, he could just squeeze through.
Then he was standing in the service alleyway that ran behind the shops and a large office building. His eyes roved
over a lunar landscape of uncollected garbage and refuse: old
plastic packing crates, metal storage barrels, honeycomb
containers for breakables, and other indifferently disposed of
detritus. A couple of fleurms scurried away from his boots.
Flinx watched them warily. He was not squeamish where the
omnipresent fleurms were concerned, but he had a healthy
respect for them. The critters were covered in a thick, silvery
fur, and their little mouths were full of fine teeth. Each animal was as big around as Flinx’s thumb and as long as his
forearm. They were not really worms but legless mammals
that did very well in the refuse piles and composting garbage
that filled the alleys of Drallar to overflowing. He had heard
horror stories of old men and women who had fallen into a
drunken stupor in such places—only their exposed bones remained for the finding.
Flinx, however, was not drunk. The fleurms could inflict
nasty bites, but they were shy creatures, nearly blind, and
greatly preferred to relinquish the right of way when given
the choice.
If it was dark on the street in front of the shop, it was positively stygian in the alley. To the east, far up the straightaway,
he could make out a light and hear intermittent laughter. An
odd night for a party. But the glow gave him a reference point,
even if it was too far off to shed any light on his search.
The continuing surge of loneliness that he felt did not
come from that distant celebration, nor did it rise from the
heavily shuttered and barred doorways that opened onto the
alley. The emotions Flinx was absorbing came from somewhere very near.
He moved forward, picking his way between the piles of


47

debris, taking his time so as to give the fleurms and the redblue carrion bugs time to scurry from his path.
All at once something struck with unexpected force at his
receptive mind. The mental blow sent him to his knees.
Somewhere a man was beating his wife. No unique circumstance, that, but Flinx felt it from the other side of the city.
The woman was frightened and angry. She was reaching for
the tiny dart gun she kept hidden in her bedroom dresser and
was pointing its minuscule barrel at the man. Then it was the
husband’s turn to be frightened. He was pleading with her,
not in words that Flinx could hear but via an emotional
avalanche that ended in an abrupt, nonverbal scream of
shock. Then came the emptiness that Flinx had grown to recognize as death.
He heard laughter, not from the party up the alley but from
one of the lofty crystal towers that reared above the wealthy
inurbs where the traders and transspatial merchants made
their homes. And there was plotting afoot; someone was going
to be cheated.
Far beyond the city boundaries in the forest to the west:
happiness and rejoicing, accompanied by a new liquid sensation of emergence. A baby was born.
Very near, perhaps in one of the shops on Mother Mastiff’s
own street, an argument was raging. It involved accounts and
falsification, waves of acrimonious resentment passing between short-term partners. Then the private grumblings of
someone unknown and far away across the city center, someone plotting to kill, and kill more than one time, but plotting
only—the kind of fantasizing that fills spare moments of every
human brain, be it healthy or sick.
Then all the sensations were gone, all of them, the joyful
and the doomed, the debaters and lovers and ineffectual
dreamers. There was only the rain.
Blinking, he staggered to his feet and stood swaying unsteadily on the slope of the alley. Rain spattered off his slickertic, wove its way down the walls of the shops and the office
building, to gurgle down the central drains. Flinx found himself staring blankly up the alley toward the distant point of


48

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

light that marked the location of the party. Abruptly, the
emotions of everyone at the party were sharp in his mind;
only now he felt no pain. There was only a calm clarity and
assurance.
He could see this woman anxiously yet uncertainly trying
to tempt that man, see another criticizing the furniture, still
another wondering how he could possibly live through the
next day, feel laughter, fear, pleasure, lust, admiration, envy:
the whole gamut of human emotions. They began to surge
toward him like the storm he had just weathered, threatening
the pain again, threatening to overwhelm him—
 , he ordered himself. Stop it—easy.
By careful manipulation of a piece of his mind he hadn’t
even been aware existed before, he discovered he was able to
control the intensity of the emotions that threatened to drown
him—not all of which had been human, either. He had felt at
least two that were bizarre, yet recognizable enough for him
to identify. They were the feelings of a mated pair of ornithorpes. It was the first time he had sensed anything from a
nonhuman.
Slowly, he found he was able to regulate the assault, to
damp it down to where he could manage it, sort out the individual feelings, choose, analyze—and then they were gone
as suddenly as they had struck, along with all the rest of the
blaze of emotion he had sucked in from around the city.
Hesitantly, he tried to focus his mind and bring back the
sensations. It was as before. Try as he might, his mind stayed
empty of any feelings save his own. His own—and one other.
The loneliness was still there, nagging at him. The feeling
was less demanding now, almost hesitant. The hunger was
there, too.
Flinx took a step forward, another, a third—and something
alive quickly scuttled out of his path, shoving aside empty
containers and cans, plastic and metal clinking in the damp
alley. He strained to see through the dimness, wishing now
that he had had the presence of mind to bring a portable light
from the shop. He took a cautious step toward the pile, ready


49

to jump up and clear should the fleurms or whatever prove
unexpectedly aggressive.
It was not a fleurm. For one thing, it was too long: nearly
a meter. It was thicker, too, though not by much. He thought
of the snakelike creatures that roamed the temperate forests
to the south of Drallar. Some of them were poisonous. Occasionally, they and other forest predators made their way into the
city under cover of rain and darkness to hunt out the small
creatures that infested the urban trash heaps. It was rare, but
not unheard of, that a citizen encountered such an intruder.
Flinx leaned close to the pile, and as he did so the hunger
faded. Simultaneously, the feeling of loneliness intensified;
the strength of it almost sent him reeling back against the shop
wall. He was certain it came from the snakelike unknown.
The bump of curiosity—which Mother Mastiff was at
such pains to warn him about—quickly overcame his natural
caution. All he felt was amazement that such powerful mental projections could arise from so lowly a creature. Furthermore, there was no anger in the animal, no rudimentary
danger signals. Only that persistent loneliness and the fleeting sense of hunger.
The creature moved again. He could see the bright, flashing red eyes even in the alley’s faint light. Not a true reptile,
he was sure. A cold-blooded creature would have been reduced to lethargy by the cool night air. This thing moved too
rapidly.
Flinx took a step back, away from the pile. The creature
was emerging. It slithered onto the wet pavement and then
did something he did not expect. Snakes were not supposed
to fly.
The pleated wings were blue and pink, bright enough for
him to identify even in the darkness. No, the snake-thing certainly was not lethargic, for its wings moved in a blur, giving
the creature the sound and appearance of a gigantic bee. It
found a place on his shoulder in a single, darting movement.
Flinx felt thin, muscular coils settle almost familiarly around
his shoulder. The whole thing had happened too fast for him
to dodge.


50

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

But the creature’s intent was not to harm. It simply sat,
resting against his warmth, and made no move to attack. The
speed of the approach had paralyzed Flinx, but only for a
moment. For as soon as it had settled against him, all that
vast loneliness, every iota of that burning need had fled from
the snake. At the same time, Flinx experienced a clarity
within his own mind that he had never felt before. Whatever
the creature was, wherever it had come from, it not only had
the ability to make itself at home, it seemed to make its new
host feel comfortable as well.
A new sensation entered Flinx’s mind, rising from the
snake. It was the first time he had ever experienced a mental
purr. He sensed no intelligence in the creature, but there was
something else. In its own way, the empathic communication
was as clear as speech, the emotional equivalent of an ancient
Chinese ideograph—a whole series of complex thoughts expressed as a single projection. Simple, yet efficient.
The small arrowhead-shaped head lifted from Flinx’s shoulder, its bright little eyes regarding him intently. The pleated
wings were folded flat against the side of the body, giving the
creature a normal snakelike appearance. Flinx stared back,
letting his own feelings pour from him.
Slowly, the creature relaxed. The single long coiled muscle of itself, which had been squeezing Flinx’s shoulder with
instinctive strength, relaxed, too, until it was only maintaining
a gentle grip, just enough to hold its position. Pins and needles started to run down Flinx’s arm. He ignored them. The
animal’s head lowered until it moved up against Flinx’s neck.
The snake was sound asleep.
Flinx stood there for what felt like an eternity, though
surely it was not even half that long. The strange apparition
that the night had brought slept on his shoulder, its small
head nestled in the hollow of shoulder bone and neck tendon.
The animal shivered once. Flinx knew it could not be drawing full warmth from his body because the slickertic formed
a layer between them. Better to get the poor thing inside, he
thought, suddenly aware of how long he had been standing
there in the rain. His new companion needed rest as well as


51

warmth. How he knew that, he could not have explained; but
he knew it as clearly as he recognized his own exhaustion.
Flinx did not for a moment debate the snake’s future. Its
presence on his shoulder as well as in his mind was too natural for him to consider parting with it—unless, of course,
some owner appeared to claim it. Clearly, this was no wild
animal. Also, Flinx was well-read, and if this creature was
native to the Drallarian vicinity, it was news to him. He had
never seen or heard of such an animal before. If it was some
kind of valuable pet, its owner would surely come looking
for it, and soon. For now, though, the snake was clearly as
much an orphan as Flinx himself had once been. Flinx had
experienced too much suffering in his own life to ignore it in
anything else, even in a lowly snake. For a while, it was his
charge, much as he was Mother Mastiff’s.
She had wanted to know his name on that first day long
ago. “What do I call you?” he wondered aloud. The sleeping
snake did not respond.
There were thousands of books available to Flinx via the
library chips he rented from Central Education. He had only
read a comparative few, but among them was one with which
he had particularly identified. It was pre-Commonwealth—
precivilization, really—but that hadn’t mitigated its impact
on him. Those characters with the funny names; one of them
was called—what? Pip, he remembered. He glanced back
down at the sleeping snake. That’ll be your name unless we
learn otherwise one day.
As he started back for the shop, he tried to tell himself that
he would worry about that proverbial “one day” if and when
it presented itself, but he could not. He was already worried
about it, because although he had only had contact with the
creature for less than an hour, it seemed a part of him. The
thought of returning the snake to some indifferent, offworld
owner was suddenly more than he could bear. Since he had
been an infant, he couldn’t recall becoming so deeply attached to another living creature. Not even Mother Mastiff
had such a lock on his feelings.
Feelings. This creature, this snake-thing, it understood



52

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

what he was feeling, understood what it meant to have the
emotions of strangers flood unbidden into one’s mind, interrupting one’s life and making every waking moment a potential abnormality. That was what made it special. He knew
it, and the snake knew it, too. No longer were they individuals; they had become two components of a larger whole.
I will not give you up, he decided then and there in the
cold morning rain. Not even if some wealthy, fatuous offworlder appears to lay claim to you. You belong with me. The
snake dozed on, seemingly oblivious to any decisions the
human might make.
The street fronting the shop was still deserted. The lock
yielded to his palm, and he slipped inside, glad to be out of
the weather. Carefully, he relocked the door. Then he was
back in the dining area where the glow light still shone
softly. Using both hands, he unraveled the snake. It did not
resist as he slid the coils from his shoulder. From the bedroom to his right came Mother Mastiff’s steady snores, a
drone that matched the patter of rain on the roof.
Gently, he set the snake down on the single table. In the
glow lamp’s brighter light he could see its true colors for the
first time. A bright pink and blue diamondback pattern ran
the length of the snake’s body, matching the pleated wings.
The belly was a dull golden hue and the head emerald green.
“Exquisite,” he murmured to the snake. “You’re exquisite.”
The creature’s eyes—no, he corrected himself, Pip’s eyes—
opened in lazy half sleep. It seemed to smile at him. Mental
projection, Flinx thought as he slipped out of the slickertic
and hung it on its hook.
“Now where can I keep you?” he whispered to himself as
he glanced around the small living area. The stall out front
was out of the question. Mother Mastiff surely had customers suffering from snake phobias, and they might not take
kindly to Pip’s presence—besides, the stall was unheated. By
the same token, he didn’t think Mother Mastiff would react
with understanding if the snake playfully sprang out at her
from one of the kitchen storage cabinets while she was trying to prepare a meal.


53

His own room was spartan: There was only the small computer terminal and chip readout, the single clothes closet he
had rigged himself, and the bed. The closet would have to do.
Carrying the snake into his room, Flinx set it down on the
foot of the bed. Then he made a pile of some dirty clothes on
the closet floor. Pip looked clean enough; most scaled creatures were dirt-shedders, not collectors. He lifted the snake
and set it down gently in the clothes, careful not to bruise the
delicate wings. It recoiled itself there, seemingly content.
Flinx smiled at it. He didn’t smile often.
“Now you stay there, Pip,” he whispered, “and in the morning we’ll see about scrounging something for you to eat.” He
watched the snake for several minutes before fatigue returned with a rush. Yawning, he pushed his own clothes off
the bed, set his boots on the drypad, and climbed back into
bed. A few droplets of water had crawled under the edge of
the slickertic. He brushed them from his hair, sighed deeply,
and lapsed into a rich, undisturbed sleep.
Once the flow of mental energy from the human in the bed
had smoothed out and the snake was certain its new symbiote was not about to enter a disturbing REM period, it quietly uncoiled itself and slithered out of the closet. Silently, it
worked its way up one of the bed legs, emerging next to the
single battered pillow.
The animal rested there for a long moment, gazing through
double lidded eyes at the unconscious biped. Inside itself,
the snake was warm and comfortable. The hunger was still
there, but it had received an indication of sorts that it would
soon be fed.
The bed was very warm, both the thermal blanket and the
symbiote’s mass exuding comfortable, dry heat. The snake
slithered across the pillow until it was resting against the
back of the human’s head. It stretched itself once, the wings
flexing and retracting. Then it coiled itself tightly into the
convenient pocket formed by the symbiote’s neck and shoulder. Soon its own brain waves matched those of the human as
it drifted into its own variety of sleep.



5
Mother Mastiff was careful not to wake the boy as she
slowly began backing out of his room. Her eyes, alert and
fearful, remained fixed on the alien thing curled up against
his head. There was no telling what it might do if startled
into wakefulness.
How the invader had penetrated her tight little home, she
had no idea. No time to worry about that now. Her thoughts
went to the little gun, the delicate, ladylike needler she kept
under her pillow. No, too chancy—the snake was much too
close to the boy’s head, and she was not as good a shot as she
had been twenty years ago.
There was also the possibility the invader might not even
be dangerous. She certainly did not recognize it. In the
ninety plus years she had spent on Moth, she had seen nothing like it. For one thing, there was no hint of fur anywhere
on its body. Only scales. That immediately identified it as a
non-native. Well, maybe. Moth was home to a few creatures—
deep-digging burrowers—that did not sport fur. This didn’t
look like a burrower to her, but she was no zoologist, nor had
she ever traveled far outside the city limits.
Yet she felt certain it came from offworld. Something she
couldn’t put a mental finger on marked the beast as alien, but
that didn’t matter. What did was that it had somehow penetrated to the boy’s room, and she had better do something
about it before it woke up and decided the matter for her.
Get it away from him, she told herself. Away from his
head, at least. Get it away, keep it occupied, then wake the
boy and have him make a run for the gun under her pillow.




55

The broom she hefted had a light metal handle and wire
bristles. Taking it out of storage, she re-entered Flinx’s room
and reached past his head with the broom’s business end.
The metal bristles prodded the invader.
The snake stirred at the touch, opened its eyes, and stared
at her. She jabbed at it again, harder this time, trying to work
the bristles between the snake’s head and the boy’s exposed
neck. It opened its mouth, and she instinctively jerked back,
but it was only a yawn. Still sleepy, then, she thought. Good,
its reactions would be slowed. Leaning forward again, she
reached down and shoved hard on the broom. Several of the
snake’s coils went rolling over to the side of the bed, and for
the first time she had a glimpse of its brilliant coloring.
Again, she shoved with the broom, but the snake was no
longer on the bed. It hovered in midair, its wings moving so
rapidly they were no more than a blue-pink blur. They generated a rich, vibrant humming sound in the small room.
Aghast and uncertain how to attack this new threat, Mother
Mastiff backed away, holding the broom defensively in front
of her. Awakened by the last shove of the broom, the boy
blinked sleepily at her. “Mother? What is it?”
“Hush, be quiet!” she warned him. “I don’t know how this
thing got into your room, but—”
Flinx sat up quickly. He glanced up at the hovering snake,
admiring it for the first time in daylight, and bestowed a reassuring grin on Mother Mastiff.
“Oh, that. That’s just Pip.”
The broom dipped slightly, and she stared narrowly at her
charge. “Ye mean, ye know what it be?”
“Sure,” he said cheerfully. “I, uh, heard something last
night, so I went outside to investigate.” He gestured with a
thumb at the snake. “It was back in the garbage, cold and
hungry. Hey, I bet he’s still hungry, and—”
“I’ll bet it is, too,” she snapped, “and I’ll not have some
scaly, gluttonous carrion eater crawling about my house. Get
out!” she yelled at it. “Shoo!” She swung the broom at the
snake once, twice, a third time, forcing Flinx to duck the flying bristles. Each time, the snake dodged nimbly in the air,


56

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

displaying unexpected aerial agility. Once it darted straight
to its left, then backward, then toward the ceiling.
“Don’t!” Flinx shouted, suddenly alarmed. “It might think
you’re trying to hurt me.”
“A guardian angel with beady eyes and scales? Mockmush, boy, it knows well what I’m swinging at!”
In fact, the snake was well aware the new human had no
intention of harming its symbiote, for it could feel the honest
affection and warmth flowing between them. It did not worry
on that score. Conversely, no love flowed toward it from the
new person, and the shiny thing that was being thrust at it
was hard to avoid in the small, enclosed space.
“Please, Mother,” Flinx pleaded anxiously, scrambling out
of bed and dragging the blanket with him, “stop it. I don’t
know how it’ll react.”
“We’re going to find out, boy,” she told him grimly. The
broom struck, missed, bounced off the far wall. She cocked
her arms for another swing.
The snake had been patient, very patient. It understood the
bond between the two humans. But the broom had backed it
into a corner, and the hard bristles promised danger if they
connected solidly with the snake’s wings. It opened its mouth.
There was a barely perceptible squirting sound. A thin, tight
stream of clear liquid shot forward. It sparkled in the light
and impacted on the broom as it was swinging forward. As
Mother Mastiff recovered and brought the broom back for
yet another strike, she heard a faint but definite hissing that
did not come from the snake. She hesitated, frowning, then
realized the noise was coming from the broom. A glance
showed that approximately half of the metal bristles had
melted away. Something was foaming and sizzling as it methodically ate its way down the broom.
She dropped the weapon as if the metal handle had
abruptly become red hot, her expression fearful. The liquid
continued to sputter and hiss as it ate away the metal. Soon it
had worked its way through the last stubble and was beginning to eat holes in the metal handle itself.
“Boy, get out of the room while ye have the chance,” she


57

called huskily, staring wide-eyed at the snake while continuing to back toward her own bedroom. “If it can do that to
metal, there’s no telling what—”
Flinx laughed, then hurriedly put a hand to his mouth and
forced himself to be understanding. “I’m sorry, Mother,” he
said apologetically. “It’s just that Pip would never hurt me.
And he’s just proved that he wouldn’t hurt anyone close to
me, either.”
“How do ye know that?” she sputtered.
“You know,” he replied, sounding puzzled, “I don’t know
how I know it. But it’s true. Here, see?” He extended his left
arm.
Still keeping a wary eye on the woman, who continued to
block the exit, the snake zipped down to land on the proffered perch. In an instant, it had multiple coils wrapped around
the human’s shoulder. Then the snake relaxed, the pleated
wings folding up to lie flat against the gleaming body.
“See?” Flinx lowered his arm and gently rubbed the back
of the snake’s head. “He’s just naturally friendly.”
“Naturally ugly, ye mean,” Mother Mastiff snorted. Bending, she picked up the remnant of the broom and inspected it.
All the bristles were gone, along with several centimeters of
handle. A weak crackling still came from the raw edges of
the tube where the metal had dissolved, though the extraordinarily corrosive liquid seemed to have largely spent itself.
She showed the remains of the broom to Flinx, still nervous about getting too near the thing wrapped around his
shoulder. “See that? Imagine what it would do to your skin.”
“Oh, Mother, can’t you see?” Flinx spoke with all the exasperation of the young for the aged. “He was protecting
himself, but because he senses that you’re important to me,
he was careful not to spit any of it on you.”
“Lucky thing for it,” she said, some of her normal bravado
returning. “Well, it can’t stay here.”
“Yes, it can,” Flinx argued.
“No, it can’t. I can’t have some lethal varmint like that
fluttering and crawling all over the place, frightening off the
customers.”


58

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“He’ll stay with me all the time,” Flinx assured her soothingly. His hand continued to caress the snake’s head. Its eyes
closed contentedly. “See? He’s just like any other house pet.
He responds to warmth and affection.” Flinx brought forth
his most mournful, pleading expression. It had the intended
affect.
“Well, it won’t get any warmth or affection from me,”
Mother Mastiff grumbled, “but if you’re determined to keep
it . . .”
“I think,” Flinx added, throwing fuel on the fire, “he would
become very upset if someone tried to separate us.”
Mother Mastiff threw up her hands, simultaneously signifying acquiescence and acceptance. “Oh, Deity, why couldn’t
ye stumble over a normal pet, like a cat or a saniff ? What
does the little monster eat, anyways?”
“I don’t know,” Flinx admitted, remembering the hunger
he had sensed the night before and resolving to do something
about it soon. He had been hungry himself and knew more of
the meaning of that word than most people. “Aren’t most
snakes carnivorous?”
“This one certainly looks like it,” she said.
Reaching down, Flinx gently ran a forefinger along the
edge of the snake’s mouth until he could pry it open. The
snake opened one eye and looked at him curiously but did
not raise any objection to the intrusion. Mother Mastiff held
her breath.
Flinx leaned close, inspecting. “The teeth are so small I
can’t tell for sure.”
“Probably swallows its food whole,” Mother Mastiff told
him. “I hear that’s the way of it with snakes, though this be
no normal snake and I wouldn’t care to make no predictions
about it, much less about its diet.”
“I’ll find out,” Flinx assured her. “If you don’t need me to
help in the shop today—”
“Help, hah! No, go where ye will. Just make sure that
creature goes with ye.”
“I’m going to take him around the marketplace,” Flinx


59

said excitedly, “and see if anyone recognizes him. There’s
sure to be someone who will.”
“Don’t bet your blood on it, boy,” she warned him. “It’s
likely an offworld visitor.”
“I thought so, too,” he told her. “Wouldn’t that be interesting? I wonder how it got here?”
“Someone with a grudge against me brought it, probably,”
she muttered softly. Then, louder, she said, “There be no
telling. If ’tis an escaped pet and a rare one, ye can be sure its
owner will be stumbling about here soonest in search of it.”
“We’ll see.” Flinx knew the snake belonged right where it
was, riding his shoulder. It felt right. He could all but feel the
wave of contentment it was generating.
“And while I’m finding out what he is,” he added briskly,
“I’ll find out what he eats, too.”
“Ye do that,” she told him. “Fact be, why not spend the
night at it? I’ve some important buyers coming around suppertime. They were referred to me through the Shopkeeper’s
Association and seem especial interested in some of the
larger items we have, like the muriwood table. So ye take that
awful whatever-it-be,” and she threw a shaky finger in the direction of the snake, “and stay ye out ’til well after tenth
hour. Then I’ll think about letting the both of ye back into my
house.”
“Yes, Mother, thank you.” He ran up to give her a kiss. She
backed off.
“Don’t come near me, boy. Not with that monster sleeping
on your arm.”
“He wouldn’t hurt you, Mother. Really.”
“I’d feel more confident if I had the snake’s word on it as
well as yours, boy. Now go on, get out, be off with the both
of ye. If we’re fortunate, perhaps it will have some homing
instinct and fly off when you’re not looking.”
But Pip did not fly off. It gave no sign of wishing to be
anywhere in the Commonwealth save on the shoulder of a
certain redheaded young man.
As Flinx strolled through the marketplace, he was startled
to discover that his ability to receive the emotions and feel-


60

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

ings of others had intensified, though none of the isolated
bursts of reception matched in fury that first overpowering
deluge of the night before. His receptivity had increased in
frequency and lucidity, though it still seemed as unpredictable as ever. Flinx suspected that his new pet might have
something to do with his intensified abilities, but he had no
idea how that worked, anymore than he knew how his Talent
operated at the best of times.
If only he could find someone to identify the snake! He
could always work through his terminal back home, but requests for information were automatically monitored at Central, and he was afraid that a query for information on so rare
a creature might trigger alarm on the part of curious authorities. Flinx preferred not to go through official channels. He
had acquired Mother Mastiff’s opinion of governmental bureaucracy, which placed it somewhere between slime mold
and the fleurms that infested the alleys.
By now, he knew a great many inhabitants of the marketplace. Wherever he stopped, he inquired about the identity and
origin of his pet. Some regarded the snake with curiosity, some
with fear, a few with indifference. But none recognized it.
“Why don’t you ask Makepeace?” one of the vendors
eventually suggested. “He’s traveled offworld. Maybe he’d
know.”
Flinx found the old soldier sitting on a street corner with
several equally ancient cronies. All of them were pensioners.
Most were immigrants who had chosen Moth for their final
resting place out of love for its moist climate and because it
was a comparatively cheap world to live on, not to mention
the laxity of its police force. On Moth, no one was likely to
question the source of one’s pension money. For several of
Makepeace’s comrades, this was the prime consideration.
The other aged men and women studied the snake with
nothing more than casual interest, but Makepeace reacted far
more enthusiastically. “Bless my remaining soul,” he muttered as he leaned close—but not too close, Flinx noted—for
a better look. Pip raised his head curiously, as if sensing
something beyond the norm in this withered biped.


61

“You know what he is?” Flinx asked hopefully.
“Aye, boy. Those are wings bulging its flanks, are they
not?” Flinx nodded. “Then it’s surely an Alaspinian miniature dragon.”
Flinx grinned at the old man, then down at Pip. “So that’s
what you are.” The snake looked up at him as if to say, I’m
well aware of what I am, and do you always find the obvious
so remarkable?
“I thought dragons were mythical creatures,” he said to
Makepeace.
“So they are. It’s only a name given from resemblance,
Flinx.”
“I suppose you know,” Flinx went on, “that he spits out a
corrosive fluid.”
“Corrosive!” The old man leaned back and roared with
laughter, slapping his legs and glancing knowingly at his
attentive cronies. “Corrosive, he says!” He looked back at
Flinx.
“The minidrag’s toxin is, my boy, a venomous acid known
by a long string of chemical syllables which this old head
can’t remember. I was a soldier-engineer. Biochemistry was
never one of my favorite subjects. I’m more comfortable
with mathematical terms than biological ones. But I can tell
you this much, though I never visited Alaspin myself.” He
pointed at the snake, which drew its head back uncertainly.
“If that there thing was to spit in your eye, you’d be a kicking, quivering mess on the ground inside a minute—and
dead in not much more than that.
“I also remember that there’s no known antidote for several of the Alaspinian toxins, of which that minidrag of yours
wields the most potent. A corrosive, neurological poison—
aye, who wouldn’t remember hearing about that? You say
you know it’s corrosive?”
Flinx had an image of the dissolved end of the broomstick, the metal melted away like cheese before a hot blade.
He nodded.
“Just make sure you never get to know of it personally,


62

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

lad. I’ve heard tell of such creatures being kept as pets, but
it’s a rare thing. See, the associational decision’s all made by
the snake. The would-be owner has no choice in the matter.
You can’t tame ’em. They pick and choose for themselves.”
He gestured toward Flinx’s shoulder. “Looks like that one’s
sure settled on you.”
“He’s more than welcome,” Flinx said affectionately. “He
feels natural there.”
“Each to his own,” an elderly woman observed with a
slight shudder. Affirmative nods came from others in the
group.
“And there’s something else, too.” The old soldier was
frowning, struggling to remember long-dormant knowledge.
“What you just said about it feeling ‘natural’ there reminded
me. They say those flying snakes have funny mental quirks
all their own. Now me, I wouldn’t be able to say for certain if
that’s so—I’m only relating hearsay, didn’t read it off no
chip. But the stories persist.”
“What kind of stories?” Flinx asked, trying not to appear
overanxious.
“Oh, that the snakes are empathic. You know, telepathic on
the emotional level.” He scratched his head. “There’s more to
it than that, but I’m damned if I can remember the rest of it.”
“That’s certainly interesting,” Flinx said evenly, “but pretty
unlikely.”
“Yeah, I always thought so myself,” Makepeace agreed.
“You wouldn’t have noticed anything like that since being
around this one, of course.”
“Not a thing.” Flinx was an expert at projecting an aura of
innocence; in this case, it glowed from his face, not his mind.
“Thanks a lot for your time, Mr. Makepeace, sir.”
“You’re more than welcome to it, boy. Old knowledge dies
unless somebody makes use of it. You watch yourself around
that thing. It’s no saniff, and it might could turn on you.”
“I’ll be careful,” Flinx assured him brightly. He turned and
hurried away from the gaggle of attentive oldsters.
Makepeace was rubbing his chin and staring after the


63

youngster as he vanished into the swirling crowd. “Funny.
Wonder where the little flying devil came from? This is one
hell of a long way from Alaspin. That reminds me of the
time . . .”
Flinx glanced down at his shoulder. “So you’re poisonous,
huh? Well, anyone could have guessed that from the little
demonstration you gave with Mother’s broom this morning.
If you spit in my eye, I’ll spit in yours.”
The snake did not take him up on the offer. It stared at him
a moment, then turned its head away and studied the street
ahead, evidently more interested in its surroundings than in
its master’s indecipherable words.
Maybe miniature dragons don’t have much of a sense of
humor, Flinx mused. Probably he would have ample opportunity to find out. But at least he knew what his pet was.
Glancing up beyond the fringe of the slickertic hood, he
wondered where the snake’s home world lay. Alaspin, old
Makepeace had called it, and said it was far away.
The morning mist moistened his upturned face. The cloud
cover seemed lighter than usual. If he was lucky, the gloom
would part sometime that night and he would have a view of
Moth’s fragmented ice rings, of the moon Flame, and beyond
that, of the stars.
Someday, he thought, someday I’ll travel to far places as
Makepeace and the others have. Someday I’ll get off this
minor wet world and go vagabonding. I’ll be a free adult,
with nothing to tie me down and no responsibilities. I’ll lead
a relaxed, uncomplicated life of simple pleasures. He glanced
down at his new-found companion. Maybe someday they
would even travel to the snake’s home world of Alaspin,
wherever it might be.
Sure you will, he thought bitterly. Better be realistic, like
Mother Mastiff says. You’re stuck here forever. Moth’s your
home, and Moth’s where you’ll spend the rest of your days.
Count yourself fortunate. You’ve a concerned mother, a warm
home, food. . . .
Food. Surely the flying snake was hungrier than ever. “We’d

64

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

better get you something to eat,” he told Pip, who gazed up
at him with fresh interest.
He checked his credcard. Not much money there. Not that
there ever was. Well, he could manage. Trouble was, he had
no idea what Alaspinian minidrags liked to eat. “I wonder
what you’d settle for,” he murmured. The snake did not respond. “If it’s live food only, then I don’t think there’s much
I can do to help you. Not on a regular basis, anyway. Let’s try
here, first.”
They entered a stall well known to Flinx. Most of the
booths and tables were unoccupied, since it was between
mealtimes. As it developed, finding suitable food for the
minidrag turned out to be less of a problem than he had
feared. Much to Flinx’s surprise, the flying snake was omnivorous. It would eat almost anything he set in front of it,
but raw meat seemed to be a special favorite. Flinx cut the
meat into small chunks, which the snake gulped down whole.
Flinx helped himself to an occasional bite. When times were
bad, he and Mother Mastiff had existed on far less savory
items.
Pip was fond of any kind of fruit or berry, though it shied
away from vegetables. Something else they had in common,
Flinx thought. Oddly enough, the snake would even lap up
milk. Flinx was sure he could supply enough variety to keep
his pet both happy and alive. Maybe it would even eat table
scraps. Perhaps that would weaken Mother Mastiff’s antagonism. As he experimented further, he discovered that the
snake was particularly fond of anything with a high iron content, such as raisins or flakes of guarfish. Had he been a biochemist equipped with a field laboratory, he might have
learned that the minidrag’s blood contained an extraordinary
amount of hemoglobin, vital to transport the oxygen necessary to sustain the snake’s hummingbirdlike flight.
When Pip had swollen to twice his normal diameter, Flinx
stopped trying new foods on his pet. He relaxed in the booth,
sipping mulled wine and watching the lights of the city wink
to life. It wouldn’t be too bad to live out his life on Moth, he


65

admitted to himself. Drallar was never dull, and now he had
a special companion with whom to share its excitement.
Yes, the flying snake had filled a definite void in his life as
well as in some mysterious, deeper part of himself. But he
still longed for the stars and the magical, unvisited worlds
that circled them.
Be realistic, he ordered himself.
He waved to some acquaintances as they strolled past the
restaurant. Older men and women. Sometimes Mother Mastiff worried that he preferred the company of adults to
youngsters his own age. He couldn’t help it. It wasn’t that he
was antisocial, merely that he chose his friends carefully. It
was the immaturity of those his own age that drove him into
the company of adults.
A fleeting emotion from one of those to whom he had
waved reached back to him as the group rounded a corner,
laughing and joking in easy camaraderie. Flinx snatched at
it, but it was gone. He sat back in his booth, the wine making
him moody. Better to have no Talent at all, he thought, than
an unmanageable one that only teases.
He paid the modest bill, slipping his card into the table’s
central pylon. Outside, the evening rain had begun. Pip rode
comfortably on his shoulder beneath the slickertic, only its
head exposed. It was sated, content. Ought to be after all you
ate, Flinx thought as he gazed fondly down at his pet.
Rain transformed the brilliant scales of the snake’s head
into tiny jewels. The moisture did not seem to bother the
snake. I wonder, Flinx thought. Is Alaspin a wet world, also?
I should have asked old Makepeace. He’d probably have
known. People lucky enough to travel learn everything sooner
or later.
Suddenly a stinging, serrated burst of emotion—hammer
blow, unexpected, raw—doubled him over with its force. It
was like a soundless screaming inside his head. Flinx was
feeling the naked emotion behind a scream instead of hearing the scream itself. He had never experienced anything like
it before, and despite that, it felt sickeningly familiar.
A bundled-up passer-by halted and bent solicitously over

66

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

the crumpled youngster. “Are you all right, son? You—” He
noticed something and quickly backed off.
“I—I’m okay, I think,” Flinx managed to gasp. He saw
what had made the man flinch. Pip had been all but asleep on
his master’s shoulder only a moment before. Now the snake
was wide awake, head and neck protruding like a scaly
periscope as it seemed to search the night air for something
unseen.
Then the last vestiges of that desperate, wailing cry vanished, leaving Flinx’s head aching and infuriatingly empty.
Yet it had lingered long enough for him to sort it out, to identify it.
“Listen, son, if you need help, I can—” the stranger started
to say, but Flinx did not wait to listen to the kind offer. He
was already halfway down the street, running at full speed
over the pavement. His slickertic fanned out like a cape behind him, and his boots sent water flying over shop fronts
and pedestrians alike. He did not pause to apologize, the
curses sliding off him as unnoticed as the rain.
Then he was skidding into a familiar side street. His heart
pounded, and his lungs heaved. The street appeared untouched, unaltered, yet something here had been violated,
and the moment of it had touched Flinx’s mind. Most of the
shops were already shuttered against the night. There was no
sign of human beings in that damp stone canyon.
“Mother!” he shouted. “Mother Mastiff!” He pounded on
the lock plate with his palm. The door hummed but did not
open—it was locked from inside.
“Mother Mastiff, open up. It’s me, Flinx!” No reply from
the other side.
Pip danced on his shoulder, half airborne and half coiled
tight to its master. Flinx moved a dozen steps away from the
door, then charged it, throwing himself into the air sideways
and kicking with one leg as Makepeace had once shown him.
The door gave, flying inward. It had only been bolted, not
locksealed.
He crouched there, his eyes darting quickly around the
stall. Pip settled back onto his shoulder, but its head moved



67

agitatedly from side to side, as if it shared its master’s nervousness and concern.
The stall looked undisturbed. Flinx moved forward and
tried the inner door. It opened at a touch. The interior of the
living area was a shambles. Pots and pans and food had been
overturned in the kitchen. Clothing and other personal articles lay strewn across floor and furniture. He moved from the
kitchen-dining area to his own room, lastly to Mother Mastiff’s, knowing but dreading what he would find.
The destruction was worse in her room. The bed looked as
if it had been the scene of attempted murder or an uncontrolled orgy. Across the bed, hidden from casual view, a
small curved door blended neatly into the wall paneling. Few
visitors would be sharp-eyed enough to notice it. It was just
wide enough for a man to crawl through.
It stood ajar. A cold breeze drifted in from outside.
Flinx dropped to his knees and started through, not caring
what he might encounter on the other side. He emerged from
the slip-me-out into the alley and climbed to his feet. The
rain had turned to mist. There was no hint that anything unusual had occurred here. All the chaos was behind him, inside.
Turning, he ran two or three steps to the north, then
stopped himself. He stood there, panting. He had run long
and hard from the street where the scream had struck him,
but he was too late. There was no sign that anyone had even
been in the alley.
Slowly, dejectedly, he returned to the shop. Why? he cried
to himself. Why has this happened to me? Who would want
to kidnap a harmless old woman like Mother Mastiff ? The
longer he thought about it, the less sense it made.
He forced himself to take an inventory out front. There
was no sign of anything missing. The shop’s stock seemed to
be intact. Not thieves, then, surprised in the act of burglary.
Then what? If not for the ample evidence that there had been
a struggle, he would not even have suspected that anything
was amiss.



68

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

No, he reminded himself, not quite true. The lockseal on
the front door was dead. It would have taken half the thieves
in Drallar to drag Mother Mastiff from her shop while it
stood unsealed. He thought of thieves a second time, knowing he would not be staying here long. His mind full of dark
and conflicting thoughts, he set about repairing the lock.



6

"Pssst! Boy! Flinx-boy!”
Flinx moved the door aside slightly and gazed out into the
darkness. The man speaking from the shadows operated a little shop two stalls up the side street from Mother Mastiff’s,
where he made household items from the hardwoods that
Moth grew in abundance. Flinx knew him well, and stepped
out to confront him.
“Hello, Arrapkha.” He tried to search the man’s face, but it
was mostly hidden by the overhanging rim of his slickertic.
He could feel nothing from the other man’s mind. A fine and
wondrous Talent, he thought sarcastically to himself.
“What happened here? Did you see anything?”
“I shouldn’t be out like this.” Arrapkha turned to glance
worriedly up the street to where it intersected the busy main
avenue. “You know what people say in Drallar, Flinx-boy.
The best business is minding one’s own.”
“No homilies now, friend,” Flinx said impatiently. “You’ve
been neighbor to my mother for many years, and you’ve
watched me grow up. Where is she?”
“I don’t know.” Arrapkha paused to gather his thoughts.
Flinx held back his anxiety and tried to be patient with the
man—Arrapkha was a little slow upstairs but a good soul.
“I was working at my lathe, feeling good with myself. I’d
only just sold a pair of stools to a programmer from the Welter Inurb and was counting my good fortune when I thought
I heard noises from your house.” He smiled faintly. “At first,
I thought nothing of it. You know your mother. She can fly

70

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

into a rage at any time over nothing in particular and make
enough noise to bring complaints from the avenue stores.
“Anyhow, I finished turning a broya post—it will be a fine
one, Flinx-boy, fashioned of number-six harpberry wood—”
“Yes, I’m sure,” Flinx said impatiently. “I’m sure it will
be a fine display stand, as all your work is, but what about
Mother Mastiff ?”
“I’m getting to that, Flinx-boy,” Arrapkha said petulantly.
“As I said, I finished the post, and since the noise continued,
I grew curious. It seemed to be going on a long time even for
your mother. So I put down my work for a moment and
thought to come see what was going on. I mediate for your
mother sometimes.
“When I was about halfway from my shop to yours, the
noise stopped almost entirely. I was about to return home
when I saw something. At least, I think I did.” He gestured
toward the narrow gap that separated Mother Mastiff’s shop
from the vacant shop adjoining hers.
“Through there I thought I saw figures moving quickly up
the alley behind your home. I couldn’t be certain. The opening is small, it was raining at the time, and it’s dark back
there. But I’m pretty sure I saw several figures.”
“How many?” Flinx demanded. “Two, three?”
“For sure, I couldn’t say,” Arrapkha confessed sadly. “I
couldn’t even for certain tell if they were human or not. More
than two, surely. Yet not a great number, though I could have
missed seeing them all.
“Well, I came up to the door quickly then and buzzed.
There was no answer, and it was quiet inside, and the door
was locked, so I thought little more of it. There was no reason to connect shapes in the alleyway with your mother’s arguing. Remember, I only heard noise from the shop.
“As it grew dark I started to worry, and still the shop
stayed closed. It’s not like Mother Mastiff to stay closed up
all day. Still, her digestion is not what it used to be, and
sometimes her liver gives her trouble. Too much bile. She
could have been cursing her own insides.”


71

“I know,” Flinx said. “I’ve had to listen to her complaints
lots of times.”
“So I thought best not to interfere. But I have known both
of you for a long time, Flinx-boy, just as you say, so I
thought, when I saw you moving about, that I ought to come
and tell you what I’d seen. It’s clear to me now that I should
have probed deeper.” He struck his own head. “I’m sorry.
You know that I’m not the cleverest man in the marketplace.”
“It’s all right, Arrapkha. There’s no blame for you in this
matter.” Flinx stood there in the mist for a long moment,
silent and thinking hard.
Arrapkha hesitantly broke in on his contemplation. “So
sorry I am, Flinx-boy. If there’s anything I can do to help, if
you need a place to sleep tonight, ay, even with the devil
thing on your shoulder, you are welcome to share my home.”
“I’ve spent many a night out on my own, sir,” Flinx told
him, “but the offer’s appreciated. Thank you for your help. At
least now I have a better idea of what happened, though not
for the life of me why. Could you see if Mother Mastiff was
among those running down the alley? She’s not here.”
“So I guessed from your look and words. No, I cannot say
she was one of them. I saw only shapes that seemed to be
human, or at least upright. But they seemed to run with difficulty.”
“Maybe they were carrying her.”
“It may be, Flinx-boy, it may be. Surely she would not go
off on her own with strangers without leaving you so much
as a message.”
“No, she wouldn’t,” Flinx agreed, “and if she went with
the people you saw, it wasn’t because they were her friends.
The inside of the house is all torn up. She didn’t go with
them quietly.”
“Then surely for some reason she’s been kidnapped,” Arrapkha concurred. “Fifty years ago, I might could give a reason for such a thing. She was a beauty then, Mother Mastiff,
though she has not aged gracefully. Grace was not a part of
her, not even then. A hard woman always, but attractive. But


72

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

for this to happen now—” He shook his head. “A true puzzle.
Did she have access to much money?”
Flinx shook his head rapidly.
“Um. I thought not. Well, then, did she owe anyone any
dangerous amounts?”
“She owed a lot of people, but no great sums,” Flinx
replied. “At least, nothing that she ever spoke to me about
and nothing I ever overheard talk of.”
“I do not understand it, then,” Arrapkha said solemnly.
“Nor do I, friend.”
“Perhaps,” Arrapkha suggested, “someone wished a private conversation with her and will bring her back in the
morning?”
Flinx shook his head a second time. “I think that since she
didn’t go with them voluntarily, she won’t be allowed to
come back voluntarily. Regardless, one thing she always told
me was not to sit around and stare blankly at the inexplicable
but always to try and find answers. If she does come walking
freely home tomorrow, then I can at least try to meet her
coming.”
“Then you’re determined to go out after her?” Arrapkha
lifted bushy black eyebrows.
“What else can I do?”
“You could wait. You’re a nice young fellow, Flinx-boy.”
He waved toward the distant avenue. “Most everyone in the
marketplace who knows you thinks so, also. You won’t lack
for a place to stay or food to eat if you decide to wait for her.
Your problem is that you’re too young, and the young are always overanxious.”
“Sorry, Arrapkha. I know you mean well for me, but I just
can’t sit around here and wait. I think I’d be wasting my time
and, worse, maybe hers as well. Mother Mastiff doesn’t have
much time left to her.”
“And what if her time, excuse me, has already fled?” Arrapkha asked forcefully. Subtlety was not a strong trait of the
marketplace’s inhabitants. “Will you involve yourself then in
something dangerous which has chosen to spare you?”


73

“I have to know. I have to go after her and see if I can
help.”
“I don’t understand,” Arrapkha said sadly. “You’re a smart
young man, much smarter than I. Why risk yourself ? She
wouldn’t want you to, you know. She’s not really your
mother.”
“Mother or mother-not,” Flinx replied, “she’s the only
mother I’ve ever known. There’s more to it than simple biology, Arrapkha. The years have taught me that much.”
The older man nodded. “I thought you might say something like that, Flinx-boy. Well, I can at least wish you luck.
It’s all I have to give you. Do you have credit?”
“A little, on my card.”
“If you need more, I can transfer.” Arrapkha started to pull
out his own card.
“No, not now, anyway. I may need such help later.” He
broke into a broad smile. “You’re a good friend, Arrapkha.
Your friendship is as solid as your woodwork.” He turned.
“Did you see which direction these figures took?”
“That’s little to start on.” He pointed to the north. “That
way, up the alley. They could have turned off any time. And
in the weather”—he indicated the clouds hanging limply
overhead—“they’ll have left no trail for you to follow.”
“Perhaps not,” Flinx admitted. “We’ll see.”
“I expect you will, Flinx-boy, since you feel so strongly
about this. All I can do, then, is wish luck to you.” He turned
and strode back up the street toward his shop, keeping the
slickertic tight around his head and neck.
Flinx waited until the rain had swallowed up the older man
before going back inside and closing the door behind him.
He wandered morosely around the living area, salvaging this
or that from the mess and returning things to their proper
places. Before long, he found himself in Mother Mastiff’s
room. He sat down on the bed and stared at the ajar slip-meout that led to the alley.
“What do you think, Pip? Where did she go, and who took
her, and why? And how am I going to find her? I don’t even
know how to start.”


74

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

He shut his eyes, strained, tried to sense the kinds of emotions he knew she must be generating, wherever she had
been taken. There was nothing. Nothing from Mother Mastiff, nothing from anyone else. His Talent mocked him. He
started fixing up the bedroom, hoping that contact with familiar objects might trigger some kind of reaction in his
mind. Something, anything, that would give him a start on
tracking her down. Pip slipped off his shoulder and slithered
across the bed, playing with covers and pillows.
There were gaps—missing clothing—in the single closet,
Flinx noted. Whoever had abducted her evidently intended to
keep her for a while. The sight cheered him because they
would not have troubled to take along clothing for someone
they intended to kill immediately.
Pip had worked its way across the bed to the night table
and was winding its sinuous way among the bottles and containers there. “Back off that, Pip, before you break something. There’s been enough damage done here today.” The
irritation in his voice arose more out of personal upset than
any real concern. The minidrag had yet to knock over anything.
Pip reacted, though not to his master’s admonition. The
snake spread luminous wings and fluttered from the tabletop
to the slip-me-out. It hovered there, watching him. While Flinx
gaped at his pet, it flew back to the night table, hummed over
a bottle, then darted back to the opening.
Flinx’s momentary paralysis left him, and he rushed to the
end table. The thin plasticine bottle that had attracted Pip
was uncapped. It normally held a tenth liter of a particularly
powerful cheap perfume of which Mother Mastiff was inordinately fond. Now he saw that the bottle was empty.
If Mother Mastiff had retained enough presence of mind
to remember that the Drallarian gendarmery occasionally
employed the services of tracking animals—for the first time
hope crowded despair from Flinx’s thoughts. Those animals
could track odors even through Moth’s perpetual dampness.
If an Alaspinian minidrag possessed the same ability . . .



75

Was he completely misinterpreting the flying snake’s actions? “Pip?”
The flying snake seemed to accept the mention of its name
as significant, for it promptly spun in midair and darted
through the slip-me-out. Flinx dropped to his hands and
knees and crawled after. In seconds, he was in the alley
again. As he climbed to his feet, he searched for his pet. It
was moving eastward, almost out of sight.
“Pip, wait!” The snake obediently halted, hovering in
place until its master had caught up. Then it took off up the
alley again.
Flinx settled into a steady run. He was an excellent runner
and in superb condition, on which he had always prided himself. He resolved to follow the flying snake until one or the
other of them dropped.
Any moment he expected the snake to pause outside one
of the innumerable faceless structures that peppered the commercial sections of Drallar. But while the minidrag twisted
and whirled down alleys and up streets, not once did it hesitate in its steady flight. Soon Flinx found his wind beginning
to fail him. Each time he stopped, the snake would wait impatiently until its master caught up again.
Drallar was the largest city on Moth, but it was a village
compared to the great cities of Terra or the underground
complexes of Hivehom and Evoria, so Flinx was not surprised that when Pip finally began to slow, they had reached
the northwestern outskirts of the metropolis. Here the buildings no longer had to be built close to one another. Small
storage structures were scattered about, and individual homes
of blocked wood and plastic began to blend into the first phalanx of evergreen forest. Pip hesitated before the trees, zooming in anxious circles, soaring to scan the treetops. It ignored
Flinx’s entreaties and calls until finally satisfied, whereupon
the snake turned and dropped down to settle once again on
the familiar perch of his master’s shoulder.
Turning a slow circle, Flinx fought to pick up even a fragment of lingering emotion. Once again, his efforts met with
failure. It seemed clear that whoever had carried off Mother



76

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

Mastiff had taken her into the forest and that the olfactory
trail that had led Pip so far had finally dissipated in the
steady onslaught of mist and rain. On a drier world or in one
of Moth’s few deserts, things might have been different, but
here Pip had come to a dead end.
After a moment’s thought, Flinx started away from the
trees. In addition to the storage buildings and homes, several
small industrial complexes were visible nearby, including two
of the ubiquitous sawmills that ringed the city and processed
Moth’s most prolific crop. Flinx wandered among them until
he located a public com station on a service street. He stepped
inside and slid the spanda-wood door shut behind him. Even
after curing, spanda retained a significant coefficient of expansion. When he closed the door, it sealed itself against the
elements, and only the ventilation membranes would keep
him from suffocating. He took out his battered credcard and
slid it into the receptacle on the unit, then punched the keyboard. A pleasant-looking middle-aged woman appeared on
the small viewscreen. “Yes, sir. What can I do for you?”
“Is there a Missing Persons Bureau in the Drallar Municipal Strata?”
“Just a moment, please.” There was a pause while she
glanced at something out of range of the pickup. “Human or
alien?”
“Human, please.”
“Native or visitor?”
“Native.”
“You wish connection?”
“Thank you, yes.” The woman continued to stare at him
for a moment, and Flinx decided she was fascinated by the
coiled shape riding his shoulder. The screen finally flashed
once and then cleared.
This time, the individual staring back at him was male,
bald, and bored. His age was indeterminate, his attitude
barely civil. Flinx had never liked bureaucrats. “Yes, what
is it?”
“Last night,” he declared, “or early this morning”—in his
rush through the city streets he’d completely lost track of the



77

time—“I—my mother disappeared. A neighbor saw some
people running away down an alley, and our house was all
torn apart. I don’t know how to start looking for her. I think
she’s been taken out of the city via the northwest quadrant,
but I can’t be sure.”
The man perked up slightly, though his voice sounded
doubtful. “I see. This sounds more like a matter for the police than for Missing Persons.”
“Not necessarily,” Flinx said, “if you follow my meaning.”
“Oh.” The man smiled understandingly. “Just a moment.
I’ll check for you.” He worked a keyboard out of Flinx’s
view. “Yes, there were a number of arrests made last night,
several of them including women. How old is your mother?”
“Close to a hundred,” Flinx said, “but quite lively.”
“Not lively enough to be in with the group I was thinking
of,” the clerk responded. “Name?”
Flinx hesitated. “I always just called her Mother Mastiff.”
The man frowned, then studied his unseen readout. “Is
Mastiff a first name or last name? I’m assuming the ‘Mother’
is an honorific.”
Flinx found himself staring dumbly at the clerk. Suddenly,
he was aware of the enormous gaps that made up much of his
life. “I—I don’t know, for sure.”
The bureaucrat’s attitude turned stony. “Is this some kind
of joke, young man?”
“No, sir,” Flinx hastened to assure him, “it’s no joke. I’m
telling you the truth when I say that I don’t know. See, she’s
not my natural mother.”
“Ah,” the clerk murmured discreetly. “Well, then, what’s
your last name?”
“I—” To his great amazement, Flinx discovered that he
was starting to cry. It was a unique phenomenon that he had
avoided for some time; now, when he least needed it, it afflicted him.
The tears did have an effect on the clerk, though. “Look,
young man, I didn’t mean to upset you. All I can tell you is
that no woman of that advanced an age is on last night’s arrest recording. For that matter, no one that old has been re-



78

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

ported in custody by any other official source. Does that help
you at all?”
Flinx nodded slowly. It helped, but not in the way he’d
hoped. “Th-thank you very much, sir.”
“Wait, young man! If you’ll give me your name, maybe I
can have a gendarme sent out with—” The image died as
Flinx flicked the disconnect button. His credcard popped
from its slot. Slowly, wiping at his eyes, he put it back inside
his shirt. Would the clerk bother to trace the call? Flinx decided not. For an instant, the bureaucrat had thought the call
was from some kid pulling a joke on him. After a moment’s
reflection, he would probably think so again.
No one of Mother Mastiff’s age arrested or reported in.
Not at Missing Persons, which was bad, but also not at the
morgue, which was good because that reinforced his first
thoughts: Mother Mastiff had been carried off by unknown
persons whose motives remained as mysterious as did their
identity. He gazed out the little booth’s window at the looming, alien forest into which it seemed she and her captors had
vanished, and exhaustion washed over him. It was toasty
warm in the com booth.
The booth’s chair was purposely uncomfortable, but the
floor was heated and no harder. For a change, he relished his
modest size as he worked himself into a halfway comfortable
position on the floor. There was little room for Pip in the
cramped space, so the flying snake reluctantly found itself a
perch on the com unit. Anyone entering the booth to make a
call would be in for a nasty shock.
It was well into morning when Flinx finally awoke, stiff
and cramped but mentally rested. Rising and stretching, he
pushed aside the door and left the com booth. To the north
lay the first ranks of the seemingly endless forest, which ran
from Moth’s lower temperate zone to its arctic. To the south
lay the city, friendly, familiar. It would be hard to turn his
back on it.
Pip fluttered above him, did a slow circle in the air, then
rose and started northwestward. In minutes, the minidrag
was back. In its wordless way, it was reaffirming its feelings


79

of the night before: Mother Mastiff had passed that way.
Flinx thought a moment. Perhaps her captors, in order to
confuse even the most unlikely pursuit, had carried her out
into the forest, only to circle back into the city again.
How was he to know for certain? The government couldn’t
help him further. All right, then. He had always been good at
prying information from strangers. They seemed to trust him
instinctively, seeing in him a physically unimposing, seemingly not-too-bright youngster. He could probe as facilely
here as in the marketplace.
Leaving the booth and the sawmill block, he began his
investigation by questioning the occupants of the smaller
businesses and homes. He found most houses deserted, their
inhabitants having long since gone off to work, but the
industrial sites and businesses were coming alive as the
city’s commercial bloodstream began to circulate. Flinx confronted the workers as they entered through doors and gates,
as they parked their occasional individual transports, and as
they stepped off public vehicles.
Outside the entrance to a small firm that manufactured
wooden fittings for kitchen units, he encountered someone
not going to work but leaving. “Excuse me, sir,” he said for
what seemed like the hundred thousandth time, “did you by
any chance see a group of people pass through this part of
town last night? They would have had an upset old lady with
them, perhaps restrained somehow.”
“Now that’s funny of you to mention,” the man said unexpectedly. “See, I’m the night guard at Koyunlu over there.”
He gestured at the small building that was filling up with
workers. “I didn’t see no old woman, but there was something of a commotion late last night over that way.” He
pointed at the road which came to a dead end against the
nearby trees.
“There was a lot of shouting and yelling and cursing. I
took a look with my nightsight—that’s my job, you know—
and I saw a bunch of people getting out of a rented city
transport. They were switching over to a mudder.”
The watchman appeared sympathetic. “They weren’t po-



80

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

tential thieves or young vandals, so I didn’t watch them for
long. I don’t know if they were the people you’re looking
for.”
Flinx thought a moment, then asked, “You say that you heard
cursing. Could you tell if any of it was from a woman?”
The man grinned. “I see what you’re thinking, son. No,
they were too far away. But I tell you this: someone in that
bunch could swear like any dozen sewer riders.”
Flinx could barely contain his excitement. “That’s them;
that’s her! That’s got to be her!”
“In fact,” the watchman continued, “that’s really what made
it stick in my mind. Not that you don’t see people switching
transports at night—you do, even way out here. It’s just a bad
time to go mudding into the woods, and when it is done, it’s
usually done quietly. No need that I can see for all that yelling
and shouting.”
“It was them, all right,” Flinx murmured decisively. “It
was her swearing—or her kidnappers swearing at her.”
“Kidnap—” The man seemed to notice Flinx’s youth for
the first time. “Say, son, maybe you’d better come along with
me.”
“No, I can’t.” Flinx started to back up, smiling apologetically. “I have to go after them. I have to find her.”
“Just hold on a second there, son,” the watchman said.
“I’ll give a call to the police. We can use the company coms.
You want to do this right and proper so’s—”
“They won’t do anything,” Flinx said angrily. “I know
them.” On an intimate basis, he could have added, since he’d
been arrested for petty theft on more than one occasion. He
was probably on their question-list right now. They would
hold him and keep him from going after Mother Mastiff.
“You wait, son,” the watchman insisted. “I’m not going to
be part of something—” As he spoke, he reached out a big
hand. Something bright blue-green-pink hissed threateningly.
A triangular head darted menacingly at the clutching hand.
The man hastily drew it back.
“Damn,” he said, “that’s alive!”


81

“Very alive,” Flinx said, continuing to back away. “Thanks
for your help, sir.” He turned and dashed toward the city.
“Boy, just a minute!” The watchman stared after the retreating figure. Then he shrugged. He was tired. It had been
a long, dull night save for that one noisy bunch he’d seen,
and he was anxious to be home and asleep. He sure as hell
didn’t need trouble himself with the antics of some kid.
Pushing the entire incident from his thoughts, he headed
toward the company transport stop.
Once he was sure he was out of sight of the watchman,
Flinx paused to catch his breath. At least he knew with some
certainty that Mother Mastiff had been kidnapped and taken
out of the city. Why she had been carried off into the great
northern forest he could not imagine.
In addition to the hurt at the back of his mind, a new ache
had begun to make itself felt. He had had nothing to eat since
the previous night. He could hardly go charging off into
Moth’s vast evergreen wilderness on an empty stomach.
Prepare yourself properly, then proceed. That’s what Mother
Mastiff had always taught him. I’ll go home, he told himself.
Back to the shop, back to the marketplace. The kidnappers
had switched to a mudder. Such a vehicle was out of Flinx’s
financial reach, but he knew where he could rent a stupava
running bird. That would give him flexibility as well as
speed.
His legs still throbbed from the seemingly endless run
across the city the previous day, so he used public transport
to return home. Time was more important than credits. The
transport chose a main spoke avenue and in minutes deposited him in the marketplace.
From the drop-off, it was but a short sprint to the shop. He
found himself half expecting to see Mother Mastiff standing
in the entrance, mopping the stoop and waiting to bawl him
out for being gone for so long. But the shop was quiet, the
living space still disarranged and forlorn. Nonetheless, Flinx
checked it carefully. There were several items whose positions he had memorized before leaving; they were undisturbed.


82

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

He began to collect a small pile of things to take with him.
Some hasty trading in the market produced a small backpack
and as much concentrated food as he could cram into it. Despite the speed of his bargaining, he received full value for
those items he traded off from Mother Mastiff’s stock. With
Pip riding his shoulder, few thought to cheat him. When anyone tried, the minidrag’s reactions instantly alerted its master
and Flinx simply took his trade elsewhere.
Flinx switched his city boots for less gaudy but more
durable forest models. His slickertic would serve just as well
among the trees as among the city’s towers. The outright sale
of several items gave his credcard balance a healthy boost.
Then it was back to the shop for a last look around. Empty.
So empty without her. He made certain the shutters were
locked, then did the same to the front door. Before leaving,
he stopped at a stall up the street.
“You’re out of your mind, Flinx-boy,” Arrapkha said from
the entrance to his stall, shaking his head dolefully. The shop
smelled of wood dust and varnish. “Do you know what the
forest is like? It runs from here to the North Pole. Three
thousand, four thousand kilometers as the tarpac flies and
not a decent-sized city to be found.
“There’s mud up there so deep it could swallow all of
Drallar, not to mention things that eat and things that poison.
Nobody goes into the north forest except explorers and herders, hunters and sportsmen—crazy folk from offworld who
like that sort of nowhere land. Biologists and botanists—not
normal folk like you and me.”
“Normal folk didn’t carry off my mother,” Flinx replied.
Since he couldn’t discourage the youngster, Arrapkha
tried to make light of the situation. “Worse for them that they
did. I don’t think they know what they’ve gotten themselves
into.”
Flinx smiled politely. “Thanks, Arrapkha. If it wasn’t for
your help, I wouldn’t have known where to begin.”
“Almost I wish I’d said nothing last night,” he muttered
sadly. “Well, luck to you, Flinx-boy. I’ll remember you.”


83

“You’ll see me again,” Flinx assured him with more confidence than he truly felt. “Both of us.”
“I hope so. Without your Mother Mastiff, the marketplace
will be a duller place.”
“Duller and emptier,” Flinx agreed. “I have to go after her,
friend Arrapkha. I really have no choice.”
“If you insist. Go, then.”
Flinx favored the woodworker with a last smile, then spun
and marched rapidly toward the main avenue. Arrapkha
watched until the youngster was swallowed up by the crowd,
then retreated to his own stall. He had business to attend to,
and that, after all, was the first rule of life in the marketplace.
Flinx hadn’t gone far before the smells of the market were
replaced by the odors, heavy and musky, of locally popular
native transport animals. They were usually slower and less
efficient than mechanized transport, but they had other advantages: they could not be traced via their emissions, and
they were cheap to rent and to use.
In a licensed barn, Flinx picked out a healthy-looking stupava. The tall running bird was a good forager and could live
off the land. It stood two and a half meters at its bright orange crest and closely resembled its far more intelligent
cousins, the ornithorpes, who did not object to the use of ignorant relatives as beasts of burden. Flinx haggled with the
barn manager for a while, finally settling on a fair price. The
woman brought the bird out of its stall and saddled it for
the youngster. “You’re not going to do anything funny with
this bird, now?”
“Just going for a little vacation,” Flinx answered her
blithely. “I’ve finished my studies for the year and owe myself the time off.”
“Well, Garuyle here will take you anywhere you might
want to go. He’s a fine, strong bird.” She stroked the tall
bird’s feathers.
“I know.” Flinx put his right foot in the first stirrup, his left
in the second, and threw his body into the saddle. “I can see
that from his legs.”
The woman nodded, feeling a little more relaxed. Evi-



84

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

dently, her youthful customer knew what he was doing. She
handed him the reins.
“All right, then. Have a pleasant journey.”
Flinx had indeed ridden such birds before, but only within
the city limits and not for any length of time. He snapped the
reins, then gave the bird a serious whistle. It hooted back and
started off, its long legs moving easily. Guiding it with gentle tugs of the reins and sharp whistles, Flinx soon had the
stupava moving at a respectable rate up the first spoke avenue, jostling aside irritated pedestrians and avoiding faster
public vehicles. The stupava seemed undisturbed by Pip’s
presence, a good sign. It would not do to head into the great
forest on an easily spooked mount.
In a gratifyingly short time, Flinx found they had retraced
his frenzied marathon of the night before. A sawmill passed
by on his left, the com booth that had sheltered him somewhere behind it. Then only the forest loomed ahead. Trees, a
hundred meters tall and higher soared above scattered smaller
trees and bushes. Where the pavement vanished there was
only a muddy trail. The stupava wouldn’t mind that—its
splayed, partially webbed feet would carry them over the bogs
and sumps with ease.
“Heigh there!” he shouted softly at the bird, following the
command with a crisp whistle. The stupava cawed once,
jerked its head sharply against the bridle, and dashed off into
the woods. The regular flap-flap from beneath its feet gave
way to an irregular whacking sound broken by occasional
splashes as it spanned a deeper puddle. Sometimes they
touched thick moss or fungi and there was no sound at all. In
no time, the immense trees formed a solid wall of bark and
green behind Flinx, and the city that was his home was for
the first time completely out of his sight.



7
Joppe the Thief thought for sure he had found himself a
couple of fleurms. The man and woman he was stalking so
intently looked to be in their midthirties. Their dress was casual, so casual that one not interested in it might not have
identified them as offworlders. Their presence in that part of
Drallar’s marketplace late at night proved one of two things
to Joppe: either they had a great deal of confidence in their
ability to pass unnoticed, or they were simply ignorant. Joppe
guessed they were searching for a little excitement.
That was fine with Joppe. He would happily provide them
with some excitement, something really memorable to relate
to the neighbors back home on some softer world like Terra
or New Riviera. They did not look like the kind who would
be awkward about it. If they were, then they might have more
than merely an interesting encounter to talk about.
Joppe was hungry. He had not made a strike in over a
week. He regarded the strolling, chatting couple with the eye
of a covetous farmer examining a pair of his prize meat animals.
As it was still comparatively early, not all the lights had
been extinguished in that part of the marketplace, but enough
of the shops had closed to give Joppe hope. The nature of his
work required privacy. He did not rush himself. Joppe had an
instinctive feel for his work. He had to balance waiting for
more shopkeepers to retire against the possibility of the couple’s realizing their error and turning back toward the more
brightly lit sections of the market.
The couple did not seem inclined to do that. Joppe’s hopes


86

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

continued to rise. He could hear them clearly, talking about
some sight seen earlier in the day. Joppe’s hand closed around
the handle of the little needler in his pocket, and he started
forward, closing the distance between himself and his prey.
By now the couple had reached the end of the cul-de-sac
and had stopped in front of the last shop, which was shuttered and dark. They seemed to be debating something. Then
the man bent to the shop’s door and took several objects from
his pockets. He started manipulating something out of
Joppe’s view.
The thief slowed, the needler only halfway out of his holster pocket, and stared in confusion. What were they up to?
He moved a little nearer, still clinging to the shadows. He
was close enough to see that the door was sealed with a palm
lock, which required the imprint of all five of the shop owner’s
fingers, in proper sequence, to release. The little black disk
that the tourist had attached to the palm lock was a very expensive, sophisticated device for decoding and solving such
locks. The man’s fingers roved over the keys, and he examined the readout with the attitude of someone who not only
knew exactly what he was doing but who had done it frequently.
While the man worked at the door, his companion stood
watching him, hands on hips, obviously intent on what he
was doing. Abruptly, she glanced away from her husband,
and Joppe found himself staring straight at her.
The matronly giggle she had affected all evening was
abruptly gone from her voice. Suddenly, nothing about her
seemed soft. The unexpected transformation, accomplished
solely by a change in posture and tone, was shocking. “I’m
sorry we had to waste your evening, friend, but we needed a
good screen to keep away the rest of the rabble. Thanks for
that. Now turn around, call it a bad day, and look elsewhere.
We don’t have time for you right now. Oh, and leave that gun
where it won’t do you or anyone else any harm, okay?” Then
she smiled pleasantly.
Too startled to react, Joppe just stood there, his hand still
clutching the needler. He could take this one, he thought mo-


87

mentarily. However, something in her stance held him back.
The proximity of a weapon was clearly implied, as was the
intent to use it. Her companion had paused in his work and
crouched before the doorway in a waiting position.
This was all very wrong, Joppe thought. He was not an especially imaginative individual, but he was an intent observer, and he was good at putting things together.
Here stood an offworld couple dressed for an evening out,
calmly working a lock decoder on an unprepossessing stall
doorway at the end of a side street on a dark and damp night.
That, plus the way the woman had spoken to him, did not
add up.
Joppe let go of the needler and took his hand from his
pocket. Slowly, his fingers spread so that they could see he
held nothing in them. He nodded once, smiled a twisted,
fleeting smile at the woman, and backed away. She returned
his smile. He backed away until the shadows engulfed him
once again and he stood behind a protective stone wall. He
sucked in a deep breath and let it out. His pulse was racing.
Unable to restrain his curiosity, he turned and just peeked
around the edge of the wall. The woman had not budged, and
was still staring after him. The man had returned to his work.
Joppe was well out of his depth, and he knew it. Without
another backward glance, he turned and jogged off toward
the main avenue, disappointed with his luck and still hungry
for a strike. As to the purpose of the peculiar couple, he gave
it not another thought. Such folk operated on a level far
above that of Joppe and his ilk and were better forgotten.
“Sensible, that one,” the woman said thoughtfully. She
turned her attention from the distant street to her companion’s work. “I thought he might give us trouble.”
“Better that he didn’t,” her companion agreed. “We don’t
need to fool with such silliness. Not now.” His fingertips
danced lightly over the keys set into the black disk.
“How you coming?” the woman asked, peering over his
shoulder.
“How does it look like I’m coming?”
“No need to be sarcastic,” she said easily.



88

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“It’s an updated twenty-six,” he informed her. “I didn’t expect anyone in this slum would take the trouble and expense
to keep updating something like this. Someone sure likes his
privacy.”
“Don’t you?”
“Very funny.” Suddenly, the disk emitted a soft beep, and
the numbers on the readout froze. “That’s got it.” The man’s
tone was relaxed, methodical. There was no pleasure in his announcement, only a cool, professional satisfaction. He touched
buttons set at five points spaced evenly around the black disk.
It beeped again, twice. The illuminated numbers vanished
from the readout. Unsealing the disk, he slid it back inside
his coat. There were a number of pockets inside that coat, all
filled with the kinds of things that would raise the hackles of
any police chief. The man put a hand on the door and pushed.
It moved aside easily. After a last, cursory glance up the narrow street, the two of them stepped inside.
The center section of the man’s ornate belt buckle promptly
came to life, throwing a narrow but powerful beam of light.
It was matched a moment later by a similar beam projected
from his companion’s brooch. They wandered around the
stall, noting the goods on display and occasionally sniffing
disdainfully at various overpriced items. Inspection led them
to an inner door and its simpler locking mechanism.
Both stood just inside the second doorway and gazed
around the living area. “Someone put up a hell of a fight,” the
man commented softly.
“The boy—or his adoptive mother, do you think?” The
woman moved in, stooping to examine an overturned end
table and the little silver vase that had tumbled from it. The
vase was empty. She carefully replaced it where it had fallen.
“Maybe both of them.” Her companion was already inspecting the larger of the two bedrooms. They went through
the area methodically: kitchen, bedrooms, even the hygiene
facilities.
When they had finished—and it did not take them very
long—and when fingerprinted samples of air and dust and
tiny bits of hopefully significant detritus had been relegated



89

to the safety of tiny storage vials, the man asked his companion, “What do you think? Wait for them here?”
The woman shook her head as she glanced around the
kitchen-dining area. “They obviously left under duress—and
you know what that suggests.”
“Sure, that’s occurred to me. No way it couldn’t. But
there’s no guarantee.”
She laughed, once. “Yeah, there’s no guarantee, but what
do you think?”
“The same as you. I’m just saying we shouldn’t jump to
conclusions.”
“I know, I know. Isn’t it odd, though, that both of them are
missing? That surely suggests something other than a common break-in.”
“I said I concurred.” The man’s tone was a mite testy.
“What now?”
“The shopkeeper up the street who watched us break in,”
she said. He nodded agreement.
They retraced their steps, leaving nothing disturbed save
the air and the dust. The palm lock snapped tight behind
them as they stepped back out into the street, giving no hint
that it had been foiled. The couple strolled back up the little
side street until they stood before Arrapkha’s doorway. They
thumbed the buzzer several times.
After the third try, the man leaned close to the little
speaker set above the buzzer. “It’s been a long, hard day for
us, sir, and we’re both very tired. We mean you no harm, but
we are empowered to take whatever steps we think advisable
to carry out our assignment. Those steps will include making
our own entrance if you don’t let us in.
“We saw you watching us as we let ourselves into the old
woman’s shop. I promise you we can let ourselves into your
place just as easily. You might also like to know that we have
an automon trained on the alley behind your shop. If you
have a slip-me-out in your back wall, it won’t do you a bit of
good. So why not be pleasant about this”—he smiled in case
the shopkeeper had a video pickup hidden somewhere—


90

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“and come on out? If you prefer, we can chat here on the
street, in full view of your other neighbors.”
They waited a suitable time. The woman looked at her
companion, shrugged, and withdrew a small, thimble-shaped
object from an inside breast pocket. The door opened immediately. The man nodded, then smiled. The woman put the
thimble-thing away and moved back.
Arrapkha stepped outside, closing the door behind him,
and looked hesitantly from one visitor to the other. “What
can I do for you, lady and sir, this night? Your insistence
moved me to concern despite the fact that I am closed now
for more than—”
“Skip the banter,” the man said crisply. “We know you
were watching us. You know that we’re not here to buy”—he
glanced at the sign above the doorway—“woodwork. Or do
you deny having watched us?”
“Well, no,” Arrapkha began, “but I—”
“And you didn’t call the police,” the man continued easily,
“because the police often ask questions you’d rather not answer, right?”
“Sir, I assure you that I—”
“We’re looking for the old woman and the boy who live in
that shop.” The man glanced briefly back toward Mother
Mastiff’s stall. “You wouldn’t happen to know where they
are, would you?”
Arrapkha shook his head, his expression blank. “No, sir, I
would not.”
“There are signs of a struggle inside. This is a small street.
You didn’t hear anything, see anything?”
“A struggle? Dear me,” Arrapkha muttered, showing signs
of distress. “Well, you know, even though this is a small
street, it can still be very noisy here, even at night. We don’t
always pay close attention.”
“I’ll bet,” the woman muttered. “Just like you didn’t pay
attention to all the noise we weren’t making while we were
letting ourselves into your neighbor’s shop?”
Arrapkha favored her with a wan smile.


91

“We haven’t time for these games,” the man said impatiently, reaching into his pants pocket.
“Please, sir and lady.” A look of genuine concern came over
Arrapkha’s face. “You said that you wouldn’t do anything—”
“We won’t.” The man’s hand paused a moment as he saw
the shopkeeper’s nervous stare. “Even if we have to, we
probably won’t.” He slowly withdrew his hand to bring out a
small folder. Arrapkha let out a relieved sigh, and studied the
contents of the folder. His eyes widened.
The visitor slipped the little case back into his pocket.
“Now, then,” he said pleasantly, “I tell you again that we
mean you no harm, nor have we any intention of harming the
old woman and her boy. Quite the contrary. If they’ve been
the victims of violence, as seems probable, we need to know
everything you know, so that if they’re still alive, we can help
them. Regardless of what you may think of us personally and
what we stand for, you must realize that if they’ve met with
ill fortune, they’re bound to be better off in our care than in
the hands of whoever carried them away. You can see that,
surely.”
“Besides,” his companion added matter-of-factly, “if you
don’t tell us what you know, we’ll escort you to a place in
city center where you’ll be strapped into a machine, and
you’ll end up telling us, anyway. It won’t hurt you, but it will
waste our time. I don’t like wasted time.” She stared into his
eyes. “Understand?”
Arrapkha nodded slowly.
“The old woman you seek—Mother Mastiff ?” The man
nodded encouragingly. “I think I saw her carried off by several figures. I couldn’t even tell you if they were human or
alien. It was dark and misty.”
“Isn’t it always here?” the man muttered. “Go on.”
“That’s all I know, all I saw.” Arrapkha shrugged. “Truly.”
He pointed down the street toward the gap that separated
Mother Mastiff’s shop from the one next to hers. “Through
there I saw struggling shapes in the alley. It still confuses me.
She is a very old woman, quite harmless.”


92

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“How long ago was this?” the man asked him. Arrapkha
told him. “And the boy? What of the boy?”
“He returned home that same night. He often goes off by
himself until quite late. At least he’s been doing so for as
long as I’ve known him, which is most of his life.”
“Long solo walks through this city? At his age?” the
woman asked. Arrapkha tried not to show his surprise at the
woman’s seemingly casual remark. These people knew a
great deal in spite of how far they had come from.
“He’s not your average youth,” Arrapkha informed them,
seeing no harm in doing so. “He’s grown up largely on his
own here.” He waved toward the brighter lights and the noise
that drifted in from the main avenue. “If you let it, Drallar
will mature you quickly.”
“I’m sure.” The man nodded. “You were saying about the
boy?”
“He came back that night, saw what had happened, and
was very upset. He’s an emotional type, though he fights not
to show it, I think. Mother Mastiff is all he has.”
Still the couple did not respond, remaining maddeningly
uninformative. Arrapkha went on. “He vowed to find her. I
don’t think he has much chance.”
“He went after her, then?” the woman asked eagerly. “How
long ago?”
Arrapkha told her. She muttered in some language that
Arrapkha did not recognize, then added in the more familiar
Commonwealth lingua franca to her companion, “Only a
couple of days. We missed them by a lousy couple of days.”
“It’s happened before,” the man reminded her, seeming
unperturbed. His attention returned to Arrapkha. “Which
way did the boy intend to go?”
“I have no idea,” the shopkeeper said.
“You know,” the man said pleasantly, “maybe we just
ought to all take that little jaunt downtown and visit the machine.”
“Please, sir, I tell you truly everything. You have believed
my words until now. Why should it be different because the


93

facts no longer please you? That is not my fault. What reason
would I have for suddenly lying to you?”
“I don’t know,” the man said in a more conversational
tone. “What reason would you?”
“No reason.” Arrapkha felt his few wits deserting him.
“Please, I don’t understand what’s happening here. It’s all
very confusing to me. What is all this interest suddenly in
poor old Mother Mastiff and this Flinx-boy?”
“We’d only confuse you further by telling you, wouldn’t
we?” the man said. “So you have no idea how the boy intended to begin his search?”
“None at all because that is all that he told me,” Arrapkha
confessed. “He said only that he was determined to find her.
Then he left.”
“Well, that’s wonderful. That’s just wonderful,” the man
declared sardonically. “All that work, all that research, and
we get them narrowed down to one modest-sized city. Now we
get to start all over again with a whole damn world to cover.”
“It’s not that bad,” the woman soothed. “The native population is thin outside the city.”
“It’s not that which worries me.” The man sounded tired.
“It’s our happy competitors.”
“I think we’ll run into them simultaneously.” The woman
gestured at Arrapkha as if he weren’t there. “We’ve learned
all we can from this one.”
“Yes. One more thing, though.” He turned to Arrapkha
and handed him a small blue metal box. A single button
marred its otherwise smooth, vitreous surface. “This is a
sealed-beam, high-intensity, low-power transmitter,” he explained to the shopkeeper. “If either the woman or the boy
should return here, all you have to do is push that button
once. That will summon help, both for them and for you. Do
you understand?”
“Yes,” Arrapkha said slowly. He accepted the metal box,
then turned it over in his hand and inspected it.
“There is a reward—a considerable reward,” the woman
added, “for anyone who assists us in bringing this matter to
a speedy and successful resolution.” She looked past him,


94

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

into the little woodworking shop. “I don’t know what kind of
a life you make for yourself here, but it can’t be much. This
isn’t exactly the high-rent district. The reward would amount
to more, much more, than you’re likely to clear in an entire
year.”
“It sounds nice,” Arrapkha admitted slowly. “It would be
very nice to make a lot of money.”
“All right, then,” the man said. “Remember, the people
who’ll show up here in response to a signal from the cube
won’t necessarily include us, but they’ll be people familiar
with our mission. We’ll follow as quickly as we’re able.
You’re certain you understand all this, now?”
“I understand.”
“Fine.” The man did not offer to shake Arrapkha’s hand.
“Your help is appreciated, and I’m sorry if we upset you.”
Arrapkha shrugged. “Life is full of tiny upsets.”
“So it is,” the man agreed. He turned to his companion.
“Let’s go.” They ran back toward the main avenue, leaving
Arrapkha standing in front of his shop.
After several hours, Arrapkha put away his woodworking
tools, cleaned himself, and prepared to retire. The blue metal
cube sat on the stand next to his bed. Arrapkha studied it for
a moment. Then he picked it up and walked into the bathroom. Without ceremony or hesitation, he dropped it into the
waste-disposal unit and thumbed the “flush” control. He
wondered how it would affect the cube, if it would send any
kind of signal, and if those on the receiving end of such a
signal would interpret it properly.
Feeling much better, he slipped into bed and went to sleep.



8
The 
forest was full of revelations for the thoroughly urbanized Flinx.The first few nights were hard. The silence hit
him with unexpected force, and he found sleeping difficult.
Pip spent those nights in uneasy rest, sensing its master’s discomfort. Only the stupava, its head bobbing methodically
with its soft snores, was content.
By the fourth night, Flinx slept soundly, and by the fifth,
he was actually enjoying the silence. I’ve been deceived by
circumstances and fate, he thought. This is much better than
city life. True, he missed the color, the excitement, the evershifting landscape of beings from dozens of worlds parading
through the marketplace and the wealthy inurbs, the smells
of different foods and the sounds of sinister bargains being
consummated. Nor did the forest offer him any opportunity
to practice his skills: there wasn’t anything to steal. The woods
gave freely of their bounty. It was all too easy, somehow.
He had almost relaxed when the squook surprised him. It
shot out of its hole in the ground, startling the stupava and
nearly causing it to buck Flinx off. The squook was, like its
near-relative the canish, a hyperactive ground-dwelling carnivore. It was somewhat larger, boasting claws the length of
Flinx’s own fingers. The slim, brown-and-black-striped body
was built low to the ground. It spent the majority of its life
burrowing, searching out other, herbivorous burrowers, but
it occasionally would erupt from its hole in an attempt to
snag and drag down some larger prey.
The critter had evidently mistaken the comparatively light
footsteps of the stupava for those of a much smaller animal.


96

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

The bird squawked and wrenched at its reins while Flinx
fought to bring it under control. At its master’s surge of
alarm, Pip had instantly leaped clear and now hovered menacingly over the occupied burrow.
The squook favored the minidrag with an impressive snarl
but could only glare at its airborne nemesis. Though the riding bird was clearly afraid of it, the squook still had a healthy
respect for the bird’s long, powerfully muscled legs. Still, if
it could just get its teeth around one of those legs, it could
bring the large meal to the ground.
But it wasn’t so sure about the human perched on the
bird’s back. Though uncommon thereabouts, humans were
not unknown to the inhabitants of that part of the great forest. A squook could kill a human, but the reverse was also
true. And then there was that peculiar and utterly unfamiliar
humming thing that darted through the air overhead. That
made three opponents, one alien and unpredictable, the other
two potentially dangerous. Letting out a last, disgruntled
snarl, the squook backed into its burrow and expanded to fill
the opening. With only its muzzle showing, it sat there and
set up a steady warning bark.
Flinx finally got the stupava back under control and urged
it forward. The angry calls of the squook receded slowly behind him.
There had been no real danger, he thought. On the other
hand, if he had lost his saddle and fallen off—he recalled
clearly the long, toothy snout of the carnivore and watched
the forest with more respect.
Nothing else emerged to menace them. They encountered
nothing larger than the many soaring rodents which inhabited that part of the forest. Pip amused itself by flying circles
around them, for they were natural gliders rather than true
fliers. They could do nothing but squeak angrily at the intruder as it executed intricate aerial maneuvers in their midst.
Those that chattered and complained the loudest, the flying
snake selected for lunch.
“That’s enough, Pip,” Flinx called out to the gallivanting
minidrag one day. “Leave them alone and get down here.”



97

Responding to the urgency of its master’s mind, the flying
snake stopped tormenting the flying rodents and zipped down
to wrap itself gently around Flinx’s neck.
The inn they were approaching was one of hundreds that
formed an informal backwoods network in the uninhabited
parts of the vast forests. Such establishments provided temporary home to hardwood merchants and cutters, sightseers,
fishermen and hunters, prospectors, and other nomadic
types. There were more inns than a casual observer might expect to find because there were more nomads. They liked the
endless forest. The trees concealed many people and a comparable quantity of sin.
Flinx tethered the stupava in the animal compound, next
to a pair of muccax. The inn door sensed his presence and
slid aside, admitting him. Smoke rose from a central chimney, but the stone fireplace was more for atmosphere than for
heating. The latter was handled by thermal coils running beneath the inn floors. Many of the structures dotting the forest
were rustic only in appearance, their innards as modern in
design and construction as the shuttleport outside Drallar.
The offworlder tourists who came to Moth to sample the delights of its wilderness generally liked their rough accommodations the same as their liquor: neat.
“Hello.” The innkeeper was only a few years older than
Flinx. “You’re out by yourself ?” He glanced at Pip. “That’s
an interesting pet you have.”
“Thanks,” Flinx said absently, ignoring the first comment.
“What time do you serve midday meal?” He looked longingly toward the nearby dining room, calculating what remained on his credcard. At the present rate, he would starve
before he could catch up to his quarry.
“You don’t want a room, then?”
“No, thanks.” He would sleep in a tube tent in the forest,
as usual. Exhaustion made him sleep as soundly these days
as any soft bed.
“What about your animal?” The innkeeper gestured toward
the animal compound outside.
“He’ll be all right.”


98

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

The young innkeeper looked indifferent. A pleasant-enough
sort, Flinx thought, but sheltered—like so many of his potential friends back in Drallar.
“You can get a meal here anytime. We’re all autoserve
here. This isn’t a fancy place. We can’t afford a live kitchen.”
“The machines will be fine for me,” Flinx told him. He
walked through the entry area and on into the dining room.
Other people were already seated about, enjoying their food.
There was a young touring couple and one solitary man far
back in a corner. After the usual curious glance at Pip, they
ignored the newcomer.
Flinx walked over to the autochef, his mouth watering.
Living off the land was fine for the stupava, but occasionally
he needed something neither stale nor dehydrated. He made
his selections from the extensive list, inserted his card, and
waited while it processed the request. Two minutes later he
picked up his meal, chose a table, and dug into the roast,
fried tuber, and crisp green vegetable. Two tall cups of domestic coffee-substitute washed it down.
The innkeeper strolled in. He chatted a moment with the
couple, then sauntered over to Flinx’s table. Despite his desire for solitude, Flinx didn’t feel much like arguing, so he
said nothing when the ’keeper pulled over a chair and sat
down nearby.
“Excuse me,” the young man said cheerfully. “I don’t see
many people my own age here, let alone anyone younger
traveling on his own—certainly never with so interesting a
companion.” He pointed to Pip.
The flying snake had slithered down from Flinx’s neck and
was sprawled across the table, gulping down green seeds.
They complemented a steady diet of arboreal rodents. The
seeds really weren’t necessary, but the minidrag was not one
to pass up a meal that couldn’t fight back.
“What are you doing out here all by yourself ?”
A real diplomat, this one, Flinx thought to himself. “I’m
looking for a friend,” he explained, chewing another chunk
of roast.


99

“No one’s left any messages for you here if that’s what
you’re wondering,” the innkeeper said.
“The friends I’m looking for don’t like to leave messages,” Flinx said between mouthfuls. “Maybe you’ve seen
them,” he asked without much hope. “A very old woman is
traveling with them.”
“We don’t get many very old people out this way,” the
innkeeper confessed. “They stay closer to the city. That’s
what’s so funny.” Flinx stopped in midchew. “There was a
group in here just recently that might be the friends you’re
looking for.”
Flinx swallowed carefully. “This old woman is short, a
good deal shorter than me. She’s close to a hundred.”
“Except for her mouth, which is a lot younger?”
“You’ve seen her!” The meal was suddenly forgotten.
“Five days ago,” the innkeeper said. Flinx’s heart sank. The
distance between them was increasing, not growing shorter.
“Did you happen to see which way they went?”
“Their mudder took off almost due north. I thought that
was odd, too, because the line of inns most tourists follow
runs pretty much northwest from here, not north. There are a
few lodges due north, of course, up in the Lakes District, but
not many. They were a funny bunch, and not just because the
old woman was with them. They didn’t look like sightseers
or fishermen.”
Trying not to show too much anxiety, Flinx forced himself
to finish the rest of his meal. It wasn’t that he didn’t appreciate the help, but the talkative youth seemed just the type to
blab to anyone who might be curious about a visiting stranger,
including the forest patrol. Flinx did not want anyone slowing his pursuit with awkward questions—especially since
he intended to increase his speed as soon as feasible and like
as not by methods the police would frown upon. Nor had he
forgotten the watchman in Drallar whose helpfulness had
nearly turned to interference.
“You’ve been a big help,” he told the other.
“What’s all this about?” the innkeeper persisted as Flinx


100

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

finished the last of his food and let Pip slide up his proffered
arm and onto his shoulder. “What’s going on?”
Flinx thought frantically. What could he say to keep this
loudmouthed innocent from calling up the patrol? “They’re
on vacation—my great-grandmother and some other relatives. They argue a lot.” The innkeeper nodded knowingly. “I
wasn’t supposed to be able to go along,” Flinx continued
with a wink. “But I slipped away from my studies, and I’ve
sort of been playing at trailing them. You know. When they
get to the lodge where they’ll be spending the rest of the
month, I’m going to pop in and surprise them. Once I land in
their laps, they can hardly send me home, can they?”
“I get it.” The innkeeper smiled. “I won’t tell anyone.”
“Thanks.” Flinx rose. “Food’s good.” He gathered up Pip
and headed for the door.
“Hey,” the innkeeper called out at a sudden thought, “what
lodge are your relatives headed for?” But Flinx was already
gone.
Outside, he hurriedly mounted his stupava and turned it
into the woods. Five days, he thought worriedly. Two more at
this pace and they would be ten ahead of him. The stupava
was doing its best, but that was not going to be good enough.
Somehow he had to increase his speed. He reined in and let the
bird catch its breath as he extracted a ten-centimeter-square
sheet of plastic from his backpack. It was half a centimeter
thick and had cost him plenty back in the marketplace, but
he could hardly have risked this journey without it. A series
of contact switches ran down the left side of the plastic. He
touched the uppermost one, and the sheet promptly lit up.
Additional manipulation of the controls produced a map of
the forest, and further adjustments zoomed in on a blowup of
his immediate surroundings.
He entered the name of the inn where he had had his
hasty meal. Instantly, the map shifted position. It was as if he
were flying above an abstract landscape. When the image
settled, he widened the field of view, expanding the map
until it included several other inns and a small town that he
had unknowingly skirted the previous day. He touched con-


101

trols, and the map zoomed in on the town. On its fringe was
a small wood-processing plant, several minor commercial
structures, a forest service station, and a communications
supply-and-repair terminal. He thought about trying the forest service station first, then decided that of all the structures
it was the one most likely to be manned around the clock.
That left the communications depot. He turned off the map,
replaced it carefully in his pack, and chucked the reins. The
bird whistled and started forward.
Night was falling, and soon the sun would have settled
completely behind the shielding clouds. One thing he could
count on was the absence of moon—even Flame’s maroon
glow could not penetrate the cloud cover that night.
Though he had completely missed the town, it was not far
off. The buildings were scattered across a little knoll—the
driest land around—and remained hidden by trees until he
was right on top of them. Most of the homes and apartments
were located across the knoll. To his left was a low, rambling
structure in which a few lights shone behind double-glazed
windows: the forest station. The communications depot was
directly ahead of him. He slid easily off the back of the
stupava, tied it to a nearby log, and waited for midnight.
A single, three-meter-high fence ran around the depot, enclosing the servicing yard. Flinx could make out the silhouettes of several large vehicles designed for traveling through
the dense forest with a full complement of crew and equipment. Flinx wasn’t interested in them. They were too big, too
awkward for his needs. Surely there had to be something better suited to his purpose parked inside the machine-shed beyond. There had better be. He doubted that the sawmill or
smaller commercial buildings would have anything better to
offer.
He made certain the stupava’s bonds were loose. If he
failed, he would need the riding bird in a hurry, and if he succeeded, the stupava would grow restless before too long and
would break free to find its way back to Drallar and its barn.
That was another reason Flinx had chosen the riding bird
over the toadlike muccax: a muccax had no homing instinct.


102

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

With Pip coiled firmly around his left shoulder, he made
his way down through the night mist. The yard was not
paved, but the ground there had been packed to a comparative dryness and he was able to move silently along the
fence. He carefully made a complete circuit of both yard and
buildings. No lights were visible, nor did he see any suggestion of alarm beams. Though he had circumvented antitheft
equipment before, this would be the first time he had tried to
break into a government-owned facility.
The fence arched outward at the top, a design that would
make climbing over it difficult, and he could clearly see
transmitter points positioned atop each post, ready to set off
the alarm if anything interrupted their circuit. Flinx lowered
his gaze to the back gate. The catch there appeared to be
purely mechanical, almost too simple. He could open it without any special tools. The catch to the catch was a duplicate
of the units that ran along the crest of the fence. He could not
open the latch without interrupting the beam and setting off
the alarm.
Cutting through the mesh of the fence itself was out of the
question. The meal was sensitized: any nonprogrammed disruption of its structure would sound the alarm as surely as if
he had tried to knock a section over with a dozer.
Nudging Pip aside, Flinx slipped off his backpack and
hunted through it. In addition to the concentrated foods and
basic medical supplies, he carried equipment that would
have shocked the innkeeper who had chatted with him earlier
that day. He didn’t need long to find what he was looking for.
From the pack he extracted one of several odd lengths of
wire. A single contact switch was spliced to its center. Making certain the switch was open, he looped one end of the
wire carefully around the tiny transmitter point on the left
side of the gate latch. Gently, he formed the wire into an arch
and brought it across the long latch to loop it over the transmitter on the opposite side. A minuscule LED on the wire’s
switch glowed a satisfying green.
Then out of the backpack Flinx took a small, oddly
formed piece of dull metal, inserted it into the gate lock, and


103

turned it a couple of times. In the heat from his hand, the
metal softened and flowed obediently. The latch clicked.
Holding the metal tool with only two fingers, Flinx lowered
the heat it was absorbing until it resolidified, and then turned
it. He heard a second, softer click from the latch. He pulled
it free, put a hand on the gate, and pushed. It moved two meters inward, swaying slightly on its supports. He hesitated.
No audible alarm ran through the night. He hoped that a
rural community would have no need of silent alarms. Still,
he gathered up his tools and backpack and retreated hastily
to the forest.
He waited until half an hour had passed without anyone’s
appearing to check the gate or the yard, then he crept back to
the fence. The gate still sat ajar. The glass fiber, looped from
terminal to terminal, permitted the alarm beam to flow uninterrupted, but there would be a problem when he had to open
the gate farther than the length of the wire allowed.
He slipped easily into the maintenance yard. Pip flew over
the fence and hovered just above its master’s tousled hair.
Flinx searched the yard. There was still no hint that his intrusion had been detected. The machine shed lay directly in
front of him, doorless and open to the night. He used the
huge repair vehicles for cover as he made his way into the
shed. Among the equipment and supplies were a pair of twopassenger mudders. His heart beat a little faster. The compact vehicles had flared undersides and enclosed cabs to
protect pilot and passenger in side-by-side comfort.
He tried them both. Jumping the simple electric engines
was easy enough. He grew anxious when the fuel gauge on
the first machine didn’t react, indicating an empty storage
cell, but the second mudder showed a ninety-five-percent
charge. That was better than good; it was critical, because he
doubted he would have access to recharge stations where he
was going.
Since the depot remained peaceful, Flinx gambled his success thus far to resolve one additional difficulty: the mudder’s government markings. In a storage cabinet, he found
dozens of cans of catalytic bonding paint. He chose a couple


104

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

of cans of brown. After a moment’s thought, he went back to
the cabinet and selected an additional canister of red. He had
never had a personal transport of his own—as long as he was
going to add a little art, he might as well put some flash into
it. Besides, that would be more in keeping with the character
of a sixteen-year-old boy. The trees would still conceal it well.
When he had finished spraying the mudder, he climbed
into the pilot’s seat. Pip settled into the empty one alongside.
The controls were simple and straightforward, as he’d expected. His right hand went to the little steering wheel, his
left to the jump he had installed beneath the dash. The engine
came to life, its steady hum little louder than Pip’s. A nudge
on the accelerator sent the mudder forward. The single,
wide-beam searchlight mounted on its nose remained dark.
It would stay that way until he was sure he was safe.
He drove into the yard, and still there was no sign of concern from the nearby buildings. At the gate, he left the craft
on hover and jumped out. Patching his remaining passfibers
onto the first, he was able to open the gate wide enough for
the mudder to pass through. He was so fearful of being spotted that he nearly forgot to duck as he drove through the
gap—the fibers that served to fool the alarm system almost
decapitated him.
Then he was out through the gate, on the smooth surface
bordering the depot. In moments, he was concealed by the
forest. A touch on a dash control locked the transparent plastic dome over his head, shutting out the mist. Another control
set the craft’s heater to thrumming. For the first time since he
had left Drallar, he was warm.
He held the mudder’s speed down until he was well away
from the town. Then he felt safe in turning on the searchlight.
The high-power beam pierced the darkness and revealed
paths between the trees. Now he was able to accelerate, and
soon the mudder was skipping along over the moist earth.
Too fast, perhaps, for night-driving, but Flinx wanted to
make up time on his quarry. And he was a little drunk with
success.
It wouldn’t have been that easy in Drallar, he told himself.


105

Out here, where there wasn’t much to steal, he had succeeded
because thieves were scarce.
The underside of the mudder was coated with a special hydrophobic polyresin that allowed it to slide across a moist
but solid surface with almost no friction, propelled by the
single electric jet located in the vehicle’s stern. It also made
very little noise; not that he could detect any sign of pursuit.
The mudder’s compass control kept him headed north.
It was midmorning before Flinx finally felt the need to
stop. He used daylight and the canister of red paint to decorate the brown vehicle, adding decorative stripes to side and
front. It took his mind off his problems for a little while.
Then he was traveling again, in a craft no casual observer
would ever have mistaken for a sober government vehicle.
The night before there had been a touch of a mental tingle
of almost painful familiarity. As usual, it vanished the instant
he sought to concentrate on it, but he felt sure that that touch
had reached out to him from somewhere to the north.
Confident and comfortable, he soared along with the dome
retracted. Suddenly, the air turned gray with thousands of
furry bodies no bigger than his little finger. They swarmed
about him on tiny membranous wings, and he swatted at
them with his free hand as he slowed the car to a crawl. They
were so dense he couldn’t see clearly.
Pip was delighted, both with the opportunities for play
and for dining. Soon the storm of miniature fliers became so
thick that Flinx had to bring the mudder to a complete halt
for fear of running into something ahead. At least now he
could use both hands to beat at them.
He hesitated to close the protective dome for fear of panicking the dozens that would inevitably be trapped inside.
Besides, except for blocking his view, they weren’t bothering
him. Their square little teeth were designed for cracking the
hulls of nuts and seeds, and they showed no interest in live
flesh. They had large bright-yellow eyes, and two thin legs
suitable for grasping branches. Flinx wondered at them, as
well as how long it would be before they moved on and he
could resume his journey.


106

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

Suddenly, the air was full of whooshing sounds. The earth
erupted head-sized round shapes. Flinx saw long thin snouts
full of needlelike teeth and multiple arms projecting from
narrow bodies. The whooshing noise was composed of a
long series of explosive popping sounds.
He squinted through the mass of fliers and saw one creature after another emerge from vertical burrows. The poppers were black-bodied with yellow and orange variolitic
colorings. They became airborne by inflating a pair of sausageshaped air sacs attached to their spines—by regulating the
amount of air in the sacs, the animals could control not only
their altitude but their direction. They lit into the swarm of
fliers, utilizing long, thin snouts to snatch one after another
from the air. Once a popper had made several catches, it
would deflate its air sacs and settle parachutelike to the
ground. They always seemed to land directly above their respective burrows, down which they would promptly vanish.
When neither the cloud of fliers nor attacking poppers
showed any signs of thinning, Flinx made the decision to
move forward. He traveled slowly, picking his way through
the trees. He had traveled nearly a kilometer before the
swarms started to disperse, and eventually he passed into
open forest once again. A backward glance showed a solid
wall of gray, black, and yellow-orange shifting like smoke
among the trees. It took a moment before he realized something was missing from the mudder.
“Pip?” The minidrag was not coiled on the passenger seat,
nor was it drifting on the air currents above the mudder.
It took Flinx several worried minutes before he located his
pet lying on its belly in the storage compartment behind the
seats, swollen to three times its usual diameter. It had thoroughly gorged itself on the tasty little gray fliers. Flinx was
convinced that his currently immobile companion did not
look at all well.
“That’ll teach you to make a durq of yourself,” he told his
pet. The minidrag moved once, slowly, before giving up totally on the effort. It would be a while before it flew again,
even to its master’s shoulder.

107

Flinx continued northward, hardly pausing to sleep. Two
days had passed since he had appropriated the mudder.
Given the likely laxity of rural bureaucratic types, it might
be some time before its absence was remarked upon. By the
time someone figured out that a real theft had been pulled
off, Flinx would be two hundred kilometers away, and the
local authorities would have no way of knowing which direction he had taken. Skimming along just above the surface,
a mudder left no trail. Its simple electric jet emitted practically no waste heat to be detected from the air. But Flinx did
not expect any kind of elaborate pursuit, not for a single,
small, comparatively inexpensive vehicle.
He continued to wonder about all the effort and expense
someone was going through to abduct a harmless old woman.
The implausibility of the whole situation served only to
heighten his anxiety and did nothing to dampen his anger or
determination.
Several days went by before he detected the change in the
air. It was an alien feeling, something he couldn’t place. The
omnipresent dampness remained, but it had become sharper,
more direct in his nostrils. “Now what do you suppose that
is, Pip?” he murmured aloud. The flying snake would not
have answered had it been able. All its efforts and energies
were still directed to the task of digesting fur, meat, and bone.
The mudder moved up a slight hill. At its crest a gap in the
trees revealed a scene that took Flinx’s breath away. At first,
he thought he had somehow stumbled onto the ocean. No, he
knew that couldn’t be. No ocean lay north from Drallar, not
until one reached the frozen pole or unless one traveled east
or west for thousands of kilometers.
Though the body of water looked like an ocean, he recognized it for what it was: a lake, one of the hundreds that occupied the territory from his present position northward to
the arctic. No sunlight shone directly on it, for the clouds
were as thick here as they were in distant Drallar, but enough
light filtered through to create a glare—a glare that exploded
off that vast sheet of water to reflect from the cloud cover
overhead and bounced again from the water.


108

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

The-Blue-That-Blinded, Flinx thought. He knew enough
of Moth’s geography to recognize the first of the lakes which
bore that collective description. The lake itself he could not
put a name to, not without his map. It was only one of hundreds of similarly impressive bodies of fresh water whose
names he had had no need to memorize during his readings,
for he had never expected to visit that part of the world.
The glare imprisoned between surface and clouds brought
tears to his eyes as he headed the mudder toward the water’s
edge. The lake blocked his path northward. He needed to
know whether to skirt it to the east or the west or to attempt
a crossing. He had no way of figuring out what his quarry
had done.
The weather was calm. Only a modest chop broke the
otherwise smooth expanse before him. A mudder could travel
over water as well as land, provided its charge held out; if
not, the vehicle would sink quickly.
Flinx decided that the first thing he needed was some advice. So he turned to his map, which showed a single, isolated lodge just to the east. He headed for it.
The building came into view ten minutes later, a large
rambling structure of native stone and wood. Boats were tied
up to the single pier out back. Several land vehicles were
parked near the front. Flinx tensed momentarily, then relaxed.
None of the craft displayed government markings. Surely his
theft had been discovered by now, but it was likely that the
search would tend more in the direction of populated areas
to the south—toward Drallar—rather than into the trackless
north.
Nevertheless, he took a moment to inspect the assembled
vehicles carefully. All four were deserted. Two of them were
tracked—strictly land transportation. The others were mudders, larger and fancier than his own, boasting thickly upholstered lounges and self-darkening protective domes. Private
transport, he knew. More comfortable than his own craft but
certainly no more durable. There was no sign of riding animals. Probably anyone who could afford to travel this far
north could afford mechanized transportation.



109

Flinx brought the mudder to a stop alongside the other vehicles and took the precaution of disconnecting the ignition
jumper. It wouldn’t do to have a curious passer-by spy the
obviously illegal modification. The mudder settled to the
ground, and he stepped out over the mudguard onto the surface.
The parking area had not been pounded hard and smooth,
and his boots picked up plenty of muck as he walked up to
the wooden steps leading inside. Suction hoses cleaned off
most of the mud. The steps led onto a covered porch populated by the kind of rustic wooden furniture so popular with
tourists who liked to feel they were roughing it. Beyond was
a narrow hall paneled with peeled, glistening tree trunks,
stained dark.
Flinx thought the inn a likely place to obtain information
about lake conditions, but before that, something equally important demanded his attention. Food. He could smell it
somewhere close by, and he owed himself a break from the
concentrates that had been fueling him for many days. His
credcard still showed a positive balance, and there was no
telling when he would be fortunate enough to encounter honest cooking again. Nor would he have to worry about curious
stares from other patrons—Pip, still unable to eat, would not
be dining with him this time. He inhaled deeply. It almost
smelled as if the food were being prepared by a live chef instead of a machine.
Flinx found his way to the broad, exposed-beam dining
room. The far wall had a fire blazing in a rock fireplace. To
the left lay the source of the wonderful aroma: a real kitchen.
A couple of furry shapes snored peacefully nearby. An older
couple sat near the entrance. They were absorbed in their
meal and didn’t even turn to look up at him. Two younger
couples ate and chatted close by the fireplace. In the back corner was a group of oldsters, all clad in heavy north-country
attire.
He started down the few steps into the dining room, intending to question someone in the kitchen about the possi-


110

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

bility of a meal. Suddenly, something hit his mind so hard he
had to lean against the nearby wall for support.
Two younger men had entered the dining room from a far,
outside door. They were talking to the group of diners in the
far corner. No one had looked toward Flinx; no one had said
a word to him.
He tottered away from the wall, caught and balanced himself at the old couple’s table. The man looked up from his
plate at the uninvited visitor and frowned.
“You feeling poorly, son?”
Flinx didn’t answer, but continued to stare across the
room. Faces—he couldn’t make out faces beneath all that
heavy clothing. They remained hidden from his sight—but
not from something else.
He spoke sharply, unthinkingly.
“Mother?”


9
One of the bundled figures spun in its chair to gape at him.
Her eyes were wide with surprise as well as with a warning
Flinx ignored. She started to rise from her seat.
The rest of the group gazed at the young man standing
across the room. One of the younger men put a hand on
Mother Mastiff’s shoulder and forced her back into her chair.
She promptly bit him. The man’s companion pulled something
out of a coat pocket and started toward Flinx. The group’s
stunned expressions, brought on by Flinx’s unexpected appearance, had turned grim.
Flinx searched the floor and walls nearby, found the switch
he was hunting for, and stabbed at it. The lights in the dining
room went out, leaving only the dim daylight from the far windows to illuminate the room.
What a fantastic Talent he possessed, he thought as he
dove for cover. It had reacted sharply to Mother Mastiff’s
presence—after he had all but tripped over her.
The room filled with screams from the regular guests,
mixed with the curses of those Flinx had surprised. He did
not try to make his way toward the table where Mother Mastiff was being held; he had been through too many street
fights for that. Keeping the layout of the dining room in his
mind, he retreated and dropped to a crawl, taking the long
way around the room toward the table in an attempt to sneak
behind her captors. Three had been seated at the table with
her, plus the two who had arrived later. Five opponents.
“Where is he—somebody get some lights!” Very helpful
of them, Flinx mused, to let him know their location. He


112

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

would have to make use of the information quickly, he knew.
Soon one of the guests, or a lodge employee, would have the
lights back on, robbing him of his only advantage.
A sharp crackling richocheted around the room, accompanied by a brief flash of light. One of the other guests screamed
a warning. Flinx smiled to himself. With everyone hugging
the floor, that ought to keep the lights off a little longer.
A second bolt split the air at table level, passing close
enough to set his skin twitching. Paralysis beam. Though
Flinx took some comfort from this demonstration of his opponent’s intent not to shoot to kill, he did not stop to think
why they might take such care. The kidnappers continued to
fire blindly through the darkness. With those nerve-petrifying
beams filling the room, no employee was likely to take a stab
at a light switch.
Grateful once more for his small size, Flinx kept moving
on his belly until he reached the far wall. At the same time,
the random firing ceased. Imagining one of his opponents
feeling along the walls in search of a light switch, Flinx readied himself for a hurried crawl past the glow of the fireplace.
Then someone let out a violent curse, and he heard the sound
of chair and table going over very close by. Flinx’s hand went
to his boot. He rose to a crouching position, waiting.
Again, he heard the sound of stumbling, louder and just
ahead. He put his hand on a nearby chair and shoved it into
the darkness. A man appeared in the glow from the fireplace,
and a flash enveloped the chair. Flinx darted in behind the
man and used the stiletto as old Makepeace had instructed
him. The man was twice Flinx’s size, but his flesh was no
tougher than anyone else’s. He exhaled once, a sharp wheeze,
before collapsing in a heap. Flinx darted forward, out of the
illuminating glare of the fire.
“Erin,” a voice called uncertainly, “you okay?” Several
new flashes filled the air, striking the stone around the fireplace where Flinx had stood moments earlier. If the intent of
those shots was to catch Flinx unaware, they failed; on the
other hand, they did force him to hug the floor again.
Moments later, the lights winked back on, shockingly


113

bright. Flinx tensed beneath the table that sheltered him, but
he needn’t have worried. The party of travelers had fled,
along with the remaining paralysis-beam wielder and Mother
Mastiff.
Flinx climbed to his feet. The other guests remained cowering on the floor. There was no hint of what had brought the
lights back to life, and he had no time to think about it.
The door at the far end of the room was ajar. It led out onto
a curving porch. He hurried to it but paused just inside to
throw a chair out ahead of him. When no one fired on it, he
took a deep breath and jumped out, rolling across the porch
and springing out of the roll into a fighting crouch.
There was no enemy waiting to confront him—the porch
was deserted. The beach off to the left was not. Two mudders
were parked on the shore. As Flinx watched helplessly, the
travelers he had sought for so long piled into the two crafts.
Heedless now of his own safety, he charged down the steps
onto the slight slope leading toward the lake shore. The first
mudder was already cruising across the wave tops. By the
time he reached the water’s edge and sank exhausted to his
knees, the useless knife held limply in his right hand, both
craft were already well out on the lake surface itself.
Fighting for breath, Flinx forced himself erect and started
back up the slope. He would have to go after them quickly. If
he lost sight of them on the vast lake, he would have no way
of knowing on which far shore they would emerge. He staggered around the front of the lodge and grabbed at the entrance to his mudder. A supine and unsettled shape stared
back at him. Pip looked distinctly unhappy. It flittered once,
then collapsed back onto the seat.
“Fine help you were,” Flinx snapped at his pet. The minidrag, if possible, managed to look even more miserable.
Clearly, it had sensed danger to Flinx and had tried to go to
his aid, but simply couldn’t manage to get airborne.
Flinx started to climb into the cab when a voice and a hand
on his shoulder restrained him. “Just a minute.” Flinx tensed,
but a glance at Pip showed that the flying snake was not reacting defensively.


114

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“I can’t,” he started to say as he turned. When he saw who
was confronting him, he found himself able only to stare.
She seemed to tower over him, though in reality she was
no more than a couple of centimeters taller. Black hair fell in
tight ringlets to her shoulders. Her bush jacket was tucked
into pants that were tucked into low boots. She was slim but
not skinny. The mouth and nose were child-sized, the cheekbones high beneath huge, owl-like brown eyes. Her skin was
nearly as dark as Flinx’s, but it was a product of the glare
from the nearby lake and not heredity. She was the most
strikingly beautiful woman he had ever seen.
He tracked down his voice and mumbled, “I have to go
after them.” The hand remained on his shoulder. He might
have thrown it off, and might not.
“My name’s Lauren Walder,” she said. “I’m the general
manager at Granite Shallows.” Her voice was full of barely
controlled fury as she used her head to gesture toward the
lake. Ringlets flew. “What have you to do with those idiots?”
“They’ve kidnapped my mother, the woman who adopted
me,” he explained. “I don’t know why, and I don’t much care
right now. I just want to get her back.”
“You’re a little out-numbered, aren’t you?”
“I’m used to that.” He pointed toward the dining-room
windows and the still-open porch doorway. “It’s not me lying
dead on your floor in there.”
She frowned at him, drawing her brows together. “How do
you know the man’s dead?”
“Because I killed him.”
“I see,” she said, studying him in a new light. “With
what?”
“My stiletto,” he said.
“I don’t see any stiletto.” She looked him up and down.
“You’re not supposed to. Look, I’ve got to go. If I get too
far behind them—”
“Take it easy,” she said, trying to soothe him. “I’ve got
something I have to show you.”
“You don’t seem to understand,” he said insistently. “I’ve



115

no way to track them. I won’t know where they touch land
and—”
“Don’t worry about it. You won’t lose them.”
“How do you know?”
“Because we’ll run them down in a little while. Let them
relax and think they’ve escaped.” Her fingers tightened on
his shoulder. “I promise you we’ll catch them.”
“Well . . .” He spared another glance for Pip. Maybe in a
little while the flying snake would be ready to take to the air.
That could make a significant difference in any fight to come.
“If you’re sure . . .”
She nodded once, appearing as competent as she was
beautiful. Lodge manager, he thought. She ought to know
what she was talking about. He could trust her for a few minutes, anyway.
“What’s so important to show me?” he asked.
“Come with me.” Her tone was still soaked with anger.
She led him back into the lodge, across the porch and back
into the dining room. Several members of her staff were
treating one of the women who had been dining when the
lights had gone out and the guns had gone off. Her husband
and companions were hovering anxiously over her; and she
was panting heavily, holding one hand to her chest.
“Heart condition,” Lauren explained tersely.
Flinx looked around. Tables and chairs were still overturned, but there was no other indication that a desperate
fight had been fought in the room. Paralysis beams did not
damage inanimate objects. The man he had slain had been
moved by lodge personnel. He was glad of that.
Lauren led him toward the kitchen. Lying next to the doorway were the pair of furry shapes he had noticed when he
had first entered the room. Up close, he could see their round
faces, twisted in agony. The short stubby legs were curled
tightly beneath the fuzzy bodies. Their fur was a rust red except for yellow circles around the eyes, which were shut
tight. Permanently.
“Sennar and Soba.” Lauren spoke while gazing at the dead
animals with a mixture of fury and hurt. “They’re wervils—



116

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

or were,” she added bitterly. “I raised them from kittens.
Found them abandoned in the woods. They liked to sleep
here by the kitchen. Everybody liked to feed them. They
must have moved at the wrong time. In the dark, one of
those”—she used a word Flinx didn’t recognize, which was
unusual in itself—“must have mistaken them for you. They
were firing at anything that moved, I’ve been told.” She
paused a moment, then added, “You must have the luck of a
pregnant Yax’m. They hit just about everything in the room
except you.”
“I was down on the floor,” Flinx explained. “I only stand
up when I have to.”
“Yes, as that one found out.” She jerked a thumb in the direction of the main hall. Flinx could see attendants wrapping
a body in lodge sheets. He was a little startled to see how big
his opponent had actually been. In the dark, though, it’s only
the size of your knife that matters.
“They didn’t have to do this,” the manager was murmuring, staring at the dead animals. “They didn’t have to be so
damned indiscriminate. Four years I’ve coddled those two.
Four years. They never showed anything but love to anyone
who ever went near them.” Flinx waited quietly.
After a while, she gestured for him to follow her. They
walked out into the main hall, down a side corridor, and entered a storeroom. Lauren unlocked a transparent wall case
and removed a large, complex-looking rifle and a couple of
small, wheel-shaped plastic containers. She snapped one of
them into the large slot set in the underside of the rifle. The
weapon seemed too bulky for her, but she swung it easily
across her back and set her right arm through the support
strap. She added a pistol to her service belt, then led him
back out into the corridor.
“I’ve never seen a gun like that before.” Flinx indicated
the rifle. “What do you hunt with it?”
“It’s not for hunting,” she told him. “Fishing gear. Each of
those clips”—and she gestured at the wheel-shapes she had
handed over to Flinx—“holds about a thousand darts. Each
dart carries a few milliliters of an extremely potent neuro-



117

toxin. Prick your finger on one end . . .” She shrugged meaningfully.
“The darts are loaded into the clips at the factory in Drallar, and then the clips are sealed. You can’t get a dart out
unless you fire it through this.” She patted the butt of the
rifle, then turned a corner. They were back in the main hallway.
“You use a gun to kill fish?”
She smiled across at him. Not much of a smile but a first,
he thought. “You’ve never been up to The-Blue-That-Blinded
before, have you?”
“I’ve lived my whole life in Drallar,” he said, which for all
practical purposes was the truth.
“We don’t use these to kill the fish,” she explained. “Only
to slow them up if they get too close to the boat.”
Flinx nodded, trying to picture the weapon in use. He
knew that the lakes of The-Blue-That-Blinded were home to
some big fish, but apparently he had never realized just how
big. Of course, if the fish were proportional to the size of the
lakes . . . “How big is this lake?”
“Patra? Barely a couple of hundred kilometers across. A
pond. The really big lakes are farther off to the northwest,
like Turquoise and Hanamar. Geographers are always arguing over whether they should be called lakes or inland seas.
Geographers are damn fools.”
They exited from the lodge. At least it wasn’t raining,
Flinx thought. That should make tracking the fleeing mudders a little easier.
Flinx jumped slightly when something landed heavily on
his shoulder. He stared down at it with a disapproving look.
“About time.” The flying snake steadied himself on his master but did not meet his eyes.
“Now that’s an interesting pet,” Lauren Walder commented,
not flinching from the minidrag, as most strangers did. Another point in her favor, Flinx thought. “Where on Moth do
you find a creature like that?”
“In a garbage heap,” Flinx said, “which is what he’s turned

118

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

himself into. He overate a few days ago and still hasn’t digested it all.”
“I was going to say that he looks more agile than that landing implied.” She led him around the side of the main lodge
building. There was a small inlet and a second pier stretching
into the lake. Flinx had not been able to see it from where he
had parked his mudder.
“I said that we’d catch up to them.” She pointed toward the
pier.
The boat was a single concave arch, each end of the arch
spreading out to form a supportive hull. The cabin was located atop the arch and was excavated into it. Vents lined the
flanks of the peculiar catamaran. Flinx wondered at their
purpose. Some heavy equipment resembling construction
cranes hung from the rear corners of the aft decking. A similar, smaller boat bobbed in the water nearby.
They mounted a curving ladder and Flinx found himself
watching as Lauren shrugged off the rifle and settled herself
into the pilot’s chair. She spoke as she checked readouts and
threw switches. “We’ll catch them inside an hour,” she assured Flinx. “A mudder’s fast, but not nearly as fast over
water as this.” A deep rumble from the boat’s stern; air whistled into the multiple intakes lining the side of the craft, and
the rumbling intensified.
Lauren touched several additional controls whereupon the
magnetic couplers disengaged from the pier. She then moved
the switch set into the side of the steering wheel. Thunder
filled the air, making Pip twitch slightly. The water astern
began to bubble like a geyser as a powerful stream of water
spurted from the subsurface nozzles hidden in the twin hulls.
The boat leaped forward, cleaving the waves.
Flinx stood next to the pilot’s chair and shouted over the
roar of the wind assailing the open cabin. “How will we know
which way they’ve gone?”
Lauren leaned to her right and flicked a couple of switches
below a circular screen, which promptly came to life. Several
bright yellow dots appeared on the transparency. “This shows
the whole lake.” She touched other controls. All but two dots



119

on the screen turned from yellow to green. “Fishing boats
from the other lodges that ring Patra. They have compatible
instrumentation.” She tapped the screen with a fingernail.
“That pair that’s stayed yellow? Moving, nonorganic, incompatible transponder. Who do you suppose that might be?”
Flinx said nothing, just stared at the tracking screen. Before long, he found himself staring over the bow that wasn’t
actually a bow. The twin hulls of the jet catamaran knifed
through the surface of the lake as Lauren steadily increased
their speed.
She glanced occasionally over at the tracker. “They’re moving pretty well—must be pushing their mudders to maximum. Headed due north, probably looking to deplane at
Point Horakov. We have to catch them before they cross, of
course. This is no mudder. Useless off the water.”
“Will we?” Flinx asked anxiously. “Catch them, I mean.”
His eyes searched the cloud-swept horizon, looking for the
telltale glare of diffused sunlight on metal.
“No problem,” she assured him. “Not unless they have
some special engines in those mudders. I’d think if they did,
they’d be using ’em right now.”
“What happens when we catch them?”
“I’ll try cutting in front of them,” she said thoughtfully. “If
that doesn’t make them stop, well—” she indicated the rifle
resting nearby. “We can pick them off one at a time. That
rifle’s accurate to a kilometer. The darts are gas-propelled,
you see, and the gun has a telescopic sight that’ll let me put
a dart in somebody’s ear if I have to.”
“What if they shoot back?”
“Not a paralysis pistol made that can outrange that rifle,
let alone cover any distance with accuracy. The effect is dispersed. It’s only at close range that paralysis is effective on
people. Or lethal to small animals,” she added bitterly. “If
they’ll surrender, we’ll take them in and turn them over to the
game authorities. You can add your own charges at the same
time. Wervils are an endangered species on Moth. Of course,
I’d much prefer that the scum resist so that we can defend
ourselves.”

120

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

Such bloodthirstiness in so attractive a woman was no surprise to Flinx. He’d encountered it before in the marketplace.
It was her motivation that was new to him. He wondered how
old she was. Probably twice his own age, he thought, though
it was difficult to tell for sure. Time spent in the wilderness
had put rough edges on her that even harsh city life would be
hard put to equal. It was a different kind of roughness; Flinx
thought it very becoming.
“What if they choose to give themselves up?” He knew
that was hardly likely, but he was curious to know what her
contingency for such a possibility might be.
“Like I said, we take them back with us and turn them over
to the game warden in Kalish.”
He made a short, stabbing motion with one hand. “That
could be awkward for me.”
“Don’t worry,” she told him. “I’ll see to it that you’re not
involved. It’s not only the game laws they’ve violated. Remember that injured guest? Ms. Marteenson’s a sick woman.
The effect of a paralysis beam on her could be permanent. So
it’s not just the game authorities who’ll be interested in these
people.
“As to you and your mother, the two of you can disappear.
Why has she been kidnapped? For ransom?”
“She hasn’t any money,” Flinx replied. “Not enough to
bother with, anyway.”
“Well, then, why?” Lauren’s eyes stayed on the tracker, occasionally drifting to scan the sky for signs of rain. The jet
boat had a portable cover that she hoped they wouldn’t have
to use. It would make aiming more difficult.
“That’s what I’d like to know,” Flinx told her. “Maybe
we’ll find out when we catch up with them.”
“We should,” she agreed, “though that won’t do Sennar
and Soba any good. You’ve probably guessed by now that my
opinion of human beings is pretty low. Present company excepted. I’m very fond of animals. Much rather associate with
them. I never had a wervil betray me, or any other creature of
the woods, for that matter. You know where you stand with



121

an animal. That’s a major reason why I’ve chosen the kind of
life I have.”
“I know a few other people who feel the way you do,”
Flinx said. “You don’t have to apologize for it.”
“I wasn’t apologizing,” she replied matter-of-factly.
“Yet you manage a hunting lodge.”
“Not a hunting lodge,” she corrected him. “Fishing lodge.
Strictly fishing. We don’t accommodate hunters here, but I
can’t stop other lodges from doing so.”
“You have no sympathy for the fish, then? It’s a question
of scales versus fur? The AAnn wouldn’t like that.”
She smiled. “Who cares what the AAnn think? As for the
rest of your argument, it’s hard to get cozy with a fish. I’ve
seen the fish of this lake gobble up helpless young wervils
and other innocents that make the mistake of straying too far
out into the water. Though if it came down to it”—she adjusted a control on the instrument dash, and the jet boat
leaped to starboard—“I’m not sure I wouldn’t prefer the
company of fish to that of people either.”
“It’s simple, then,” Flinx said. “You’re a chronic antisocial.”
She shrugged indifferently. “I’m me. Lauren Walder. I’m
happy with what I am. Are you happy with what you are?”
His smile faded. “I don’t know what I am yet.” He dropped
his gaze and brooded at the tracker, his attention focused on
the nearing yellow dot that indicated their quarry.
Odd thing for a young man like that to say, she thought.
Most people would’ve said they didn’t know who they were
yet. Slip of the tongue. She let the remark pass.
The gap between pursued and pursuer shrank rapidly on
the tracker. It wasn’t long before Flinx was able to gesture
excitedly over the bow and shout, “There they are!”
Lauren squinted and saw only water and cloud, then glanced
down at the tracker. “You’ve got mighty sharp eyes, Flinx.”
“Prerequisite for survival in Drallar,” he explained.
A moment later she saw the mudders also, skittering along
just above the waves and still headed for the northern shore.
Simultaneously, those in the mudders reacted to the appear-


122

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

ance of the boat behind them. They accelerated and for a moment moved out of sight again. Lauren increased the power.
This time they didn’t pull away from the jet boat.
She nodded slightly. “I thought so. Standard mudder engines, no surprises. I don’t think they’re hiding anything
from us.” She glanced at her companion. “Think you can
drive this thing for a little while?”
Flinx had spent the past half hour studying the controls as
well as the image on the tracker. The instrumentation was no
more complex than that of his mudder. On the other hand, he
was used to driving over land. “I think so,” he said. This was
not the time for excessive caution.
“Good.” She slid out of the pilot’s chair and waited until
he slipped in and took control over the wheel. “It’s very responsive,” she warned him, “and at the speed we’re traveling,
even a slight turn of the wheel will send us shooting off in
another direction. So watch it.”
“I’ll be okay,” he assured her. He could feel the vibration
of the engine through the wheel. The sensation was exhilarating.
A flash of light suddenly marked the fleeing mudders, but
it dissipated well shy of the jet boat’s bow. Flinx maintained
the gap between the three craft. The flash was repeated; it did
no more damage to the boat or its crew than would a flashlight beam.
“No long-range weapons,” Lauren murmured. “If they
had ’em, now’d be the time to use ’em.” Flinx saw she was
hefting the dart rifle. It was nearly as tall as she was. She settled it onto a vacant bracket and bent over to peer through the
complex telescopic sight. In that position, it resembled a
small cannon more than a rifle.
Two more flares of light shot from the mudders, futile
stabs at the pursuing jet boat. “I can see them,” Lauren announced as she squinted through the sight. “They look confused. That’s sensible. I don’t see anything but hand weapons.
Two of them seem to be arguing. I don’t think they expected
this kind of pursuit.”



123

“They didn’t expect to see me in the dining room, either,”
Flinx said confidentially. “I’ll bet they’re confused.”
She looked over from the sight. “You’re sure they weren’t
looking for you to follow?”
“I doubt it, or I’d never have come this close to them.”
She grunted once and returned her eyes to the sight. “At
this range, I can pick their teeth.” She moved the rifle slightly.
“Hold her steady, please.” She pushed the button which took
the place of a regular trigger. The gun went phut! and something tiny and explosive burst from the muzzle.
“Warning shot,” she explained. “There—someone’s pulling
the dart out. I put it in the back of the pilot’s chair. Now
they’re gathering around and studying it, except the driver, of
course. Now they’re looking back at us. One of them’s keeping two hands on a little old lady. Your mother?”
“I’m sure,” Flinx said tightly.
“She’s giving the one restraining her fits, trying to bite
him, kicking at him even though it looks like her feet are
bound at the ankles.”
“That’s her, all right.” Flinx couldn’t repress a grin. “What
are they doing now?”
Lauren frowned. “Uh oh. Putting up some kind of transparent shield. Now the regular vehicle dome over that. The
dome we can penetrate. I don’t know about the shield-thing.
Well, that’s no problem. Go to port.”
“Port?” Flinx repeated.
“To your left,” she said. “We’ll cut around in front of them
and block their course. Maybe when they see that we can not
only catch them but run circles around them, they’ll be willing to listen to reason.”
Flinx obediently turned the wheel to his left and felt the
catamaran respond instantly.
“Okay, now back to star—to your right, not too sharply.”
The boat split the water as he turned the wheel.
Suddenly, everything changed. A new sound, a deep humming, became audible.
“Damn,” Lauren said in frustration, pointing upward.
Flinx’s gaze went toward the clouds. The skimmer that had



124

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

appeared from out of the northern horizon was of pretty
good size. It was certainly more than big enough to hold its
own crew in addition to the mudders’ occupants. If there was
any doubt as to the skimmer’s intent, it was quickly eliminated as the versatile craft dipped low, circled once, and then
settled toward the first mudder as it strove to match the
smaller vehicle’s speed.
“If they get aboard, we’ll lose them permanently,” said a
worried Flinx. “Can you pick them off as they try to transfer?” Already the skimmer’s crew had matched velocity with
the mudder and was dropping a chute ladder toward the
water.
Lauren bent over the rifle again. Her finger hesitated over
the button; then she unexpectedly pulled back and whacked
the butt of the gun angrily. “Lovely people. They’re holding
your mother next to the base of the chute. I can’t get a clear
shot.”
“What are we going to do? We can’t just keep circling
them like this!”
“How the hell should I know?” She abandoned the rifle
and rushed to a storage locker amidships. “Mudders, paralysis pistols, kidnapping, and now a skimmer sent out from the
north. Who are these people, anyway?”
“I don’t know,” Flinx snapped. “I told you before that I
don’t understand any of this.” He hesitated, trying to watch
her and keep the jet boat circling the still-racing mudders
and the skimmer hovering above them. “What are you going
to do now?”
The device she had extracted from the storage locker was
as long as the dart rifle but much narrower. “When I give the
word,” she said tightly, “I want you to charge them and pull
aside at the last moment. I don’t think they’ll be expecting a
rush on our part. They’re much too busy transferring to the
skimmer.”
“What are you going to try and do?” he asked curiously.
“Disable the skimmer?”
“With a dart gun? Are you kidding?” she snorted. “Just do
as I say.”


125

“So long as what you say continues making sense,”
he agreed, a bit put off by her tone.
“You’re wasting time. Do it!”
He threw the wheel hard over. The catamaran spun on the
surface so sharply that the portside hull lifted clear of the
water. A high rooster tail obscured them from sight for a
moment.
In seconds, they were on top of the mudder and the skimmer drifting steadily above it. Activity on both craft intensified as the jet boat bore down on the mudder. As Lauren
suspected, the last thing their opponents were expecting was
a broadside charge. A couple of shots passed behind the onrushing boat, hastily dispatched and imperfectly aimed.
“Hard to port!” Lauren shouted above the roar of the engine. Those still on board the mudder had hunched down in
anticipation of a collision. Flinx leaned on the wheel. Engine
screaming, the catamaran spun to its left, nearly drowning
those starting up the chute ladder toward the skimmer.
Lauren must have fired at least once, Flinx thought as the
jet boat sped away. He turned the wheel, and they started
back toward their quarry in a wide arc. To his surprise, the
woman put the peculiar-looking weapon back in the storage
locker and returned to the bracket-held dart rifle. “Now let’s
go back and take our best shots.”
“A one-shot gun?” he murmured. “I didn’t even hear it go
off. What was the purpose of that crazy charge?” He wrestled with the wheel.
“That charge was our insurance, Flinx.” She gestured back
toward the storage locker where she had repositioned the
narrow gun. “That gun was a Marker. We use it to help track
injured fish that break their lines.” She nodded toward the
skimmer. “I think I hit it twice. The gun fires a capsule which
holds a specially sensitized gel. Epoxied bonder, sticks to
anything on contact, and it’s not water soluble. As long as
they don’t think to check the underside of their skimmer for
damage, and there’s no reason for them to do so since it’s operating perfectly, they’ll never see the gel. It’s transparent,
anyway. Now we can track them.”



126

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“Not with this boat, surely.”
“No. But there’s a skimmer back at the lodge. Would’ve
taken too long to ready it or we’d be on it now instead of on
this boat. Wish we were. No reason to expect a skimmer to
show up suddenly to help them, though.” She gestured
toward the mudder.
“As long as they don’t get too far ahead of us, we’ll be able
to follow them—just like we did with this boat. But if we can
hurt them now . . .” She looked back through the telescopic
sight. “Ah, they’ve taken your mother up on a hoist. Strapped
in. I’m sure she didn’t make it easy for them.”
“She wouldn’t,” Flinx murmured affectionately.
“Clear shooting now,” Lauren said delightedly. A loud
beeping sounded from the tracking unit.
“What’s that?” Flinx gave the device a puzzled glance.
Lauren uttered a curse and pulled away from the rifle. A
quick glance at the screen and Flinx found himself shoved
none too gently out of the pilot’s chair. He landed on the deck
hard.
“Hey, what’s—!”
Lauren wasn’t listening to him as she wrenched the wheel
hard to starboard. Flinx frantically grabbed for some support
as the boat heeled over. He could just see the port hull rising
clear of the water as something immense and silvery-sided
erupted from the lake’s surface.


10
Screams and shouts came from the vicinity of the mudders
and the skimmer. A violent reactive wave nearly capsized the
jet boat; only Lauren’s skillful and experienced maneuvering
kept them afloat.
Flinx saw a vast argent spine shot through with flecks of
gold that shone in the diffused sunlight. It looked like a huge
pipe emerging from beneath the waves, and it turned the sunlight to rainbows. Then it was gone, not endless as he first
believed. Another wave shook the catamaran as the monster
submerged once again. Flinx pulled himself up to where he
could peer over the edge of the cabin compartment.
The mudders had vanished completely, sucked down in a
single gulp by whatever had materialized from the depths of
the lake. The skimmer itself just missed being dragged down
by that great gulf of a mouth. It hovered above the disturbed
section of lake where its companion craft had been only a
moment ago. Then someone on the skimmer apparently made
a decision, for it rose another twenty meters toward the
clouds and accelerated rapidly northward.
“They’re leaving,” Flinx shouted. “We have to get back to
the lodge, get the skimmer you mentioned, and hurry after
them before—”
“We have to get out of here alive first.” Lauren followed
her announcement with another curse as her hands tore at the
wheel. The silver mountain lifted from the lake just starboard of the jet boat. Flinx was gifted with a long, uncomfortable view down a throat wide enough to swallow several
mudders intact. Or a jet boat. The jaws slammed shut, send127


128

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

ing a heavy spray crashing over the gunwales. The monster
was so close Flinx could smell its horrid breath. Then it was
sinking back into the waters boiling behind the catamaran.
Something moved on his shoulder, and he reached up to
grasp at the muscular form that was uncoiling. “No, Pip!
Easy . . . this one’s too big even for you.” The snake struggled
for a moment before relaxing. It bobbed and ducked nervously, however, sensing a threat not only to its master but to
itself. Yet it responded to the pressure of Flinx’s restraining
fingers and held its position.
For a third time, the penestral struck, snapping in frustration at the spot where the jet boat had been only seconds
earlier. Thanks to the tracker, which had first warned Lauren
of the nightmare’s approach, they were able to avoid its upward rush.
“This won’t do,” she murmured. “It’ll keep working us
until I make a mistake. Then it’ll take us the way it took the
poor souls still stuck on those mudders.” She studied the
tracker intently. “It’s circling now. Trying to cut us off from
shallow water and the shore. We’ll let it think we’re headed
that way. Then we’ll reverse back into deep water.”
“Why?”
She ignored the question. “You didn’t care for it when I
had to shove you away from the wheel a few minutes ago, did
you? Here, it’s all yours again.” She reached down and half
pulled, half guided him back into the pilot’s chair. “That’s
enough.” She threw the wheel over, and the boat seemed to
spin on its axis. Flinx grabbed for the wheel.
“It’ll follow us straight now instead of trying to ambush us
from below and will try to hit us from astern. Keep us headed
out into the lake and let me know when it’s tangent to our
square.” She indicated the red dot on the tracking screen that
was closing on them from behind.
“But shouldn’t we—?”
She wasn’t listening to him as she made her way back to
the pair of gantrylike structures protruding from the rear of
the boat. She took a seat behind one, stretched it out so the
arm hung free over the water, then checked controls.



129

“When I tell you,” she shouted back at him over the roar of
the engine and the spray, “go hard a-port. That’s left.”
“I remember,” he snapped back at her. His attention was
locked to the tracker. “It’s getting awfully close.”
“Good.” She positioned herself carefully in the seat, touched
a switch. Flexible braces snapped shut across her waist, hips,
shoulders and legs, pinning her to the seat in a striped cocoon.
“Awfully close,” Flinx reiterated.
“Not ready yet,” she murmured. “A fisherman has to be
patient.” The water astern began to bubble, a disturbance
more widespread than a mere boat engine could produce.
“Now!” she shouted.
Flinx wrenched the wheel to his left. Simultaneously, the
surface of the lake exploded behind them. With both hands
on the wheel, there was nothing Flinx could do except cry
out as Pip left its perch and launched itself into the air. A
muffled explosion sounded from the stern, and a moment
later its echo reached him as the harpoon struck the penestral
just beneath one of the winglike fins that shielded its gills.
The soaring monster displaced the lake where the jet boat
had been before Flinx had sent it screaming into a tight turn.
A distant crump reached the surface as the harpoon’s delayed
charge went off inside the guts of the penestral. Polyline
spewed from a drum inside the ship’s hull, a gel coating
eliminating dangerous heat buildup where line rubbed the
deck.
“Cut the engine,” came the command from astern.
“But then we won’t have any—” he started to protest.
“Do it,” she ordered.
Flinx sighed. He was not a good swimmer. He flicked the
accelerator until their speed dropped to nothing. The jet engine sank to an idle. Instantly, the catamaran began moving
in reverse. The twin hulls were pointed aft as well as forward, and the boat moved neatly through the water as it was
towed backward. The retreating polyline slowed from a blur
to where Flinx could count space markings as it slid off the


130

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

boat. Meanwhile, Lauren had reloaded the harpoon gun and
was watching the surface carefully.
She called back to him. “Where’s the penestral?”
“Still moving ahead of us, but I think it’s slowing.”
“That’s to be expected. Keep your hands on the accelerator and the wheel.”
“It’s still slowing,” he told her. “Slowing, slowing—I can’t
see it anymore. I think it’s under the boat!”
“Go!” she yelled, but at that point he didn’t need to be told
what to do; he had already jammed the accelerator control
forward. The jet boat roared, shot out across the lake. An instant later a geyser erupted behind them as the penestral tried
to swallow the sky. Flinx heard the harpoon gun discharge a
second time.
This time, the penestral was struck just behind one crystallike eye the size of a telescope mirror. It collapsed back into
the water like a tridee scene running in reverse, sending up
huge waves over which the retreating catamaran rode with
ease. The waves were matched in frequency if not intensity
by the palpitations of Flinx’s stomach.
This time, the fish didn’t sink back into the depths. It
stayed on the surface, thrashing convulsively.
“Bring us back around,” Lauren directed Flinx. She was
sweating profusely as she reloaded the harpoon cannon for
the third time. Only the autoloading equipment made it possible for one person to manipulate the heavy metal shaft and
its explosive charge.
This harpoon was slightly smaller and thinner than the
two that had preceded it. As the boat swung back toward the
penestral, Flinx heard the gun go off again. Several minutes
passed. The penestral stopped fighting and began to sink.
Lauren touched another button. There was a hum as a
compressor located inside the catamaran started up, pumping air through the plastic line that ran to the hollow shaft of
the last harpoon. She unstrapped herself from the chair and
began to oversee the reeling in of the colossal catch. “Air’ll
keep it afloat for days,” she said idly, exchanging seats with
Flinx once again. “Too big for darts, this one.”


131

“Why bother with it?” Flinx stared as the silver-sided
mountain expanded and drew alongside the catamaran.
“You might be right—it’s not much of a fish. Bet it doesn’t
run more than fifteen meters.” Flinx gaped at her. “But there
are hungry people in Kaslin and the other towns south of the
lake, and the penestral’s a good food fish—lean and not fatty.
They’ll make good use of it. What they don’t eat they’ll
process for resale further south. The credit will go to the
lodge.
“Besides, we have guests staying with us who come up to
Patra regularly, twice a year for many years, and who in all
that time have never seen anything bigger than a five-meter
minnow. Your first time and you’ve participated in a catch.
You should feel proud.”
“I didn’t catch it,” he corrected her quickly. “You did.”
“Sorry, modesty’s not permitted on this lake. Catching
even a penestral’s a cooperative effort. Dodging is just as important as firing the gun. Otherwise, we end up on his trophy
wall.” She jabbed a thumb in the direction of the inflated
bulk now secured to the side of the catamaran.
A weight settled gently onto Flinx’s left shoulder. “I’d
hoped you hadn’t gone off to try and attack it,” he said to the
minidrag as it slipped multiple coils around his arm. “It’s
good to know you have some instinct for self-preservation.”
The flying snake stared quizzically back at him, then closed
its eyes and relaxed.
Flinx inspected what he could see of the penestral while
the jet boat headed back toward the southern shore. “Those
people in the mudders, they didn’t stand a chance.”
“Never knew what hit them,” Lauren agreed. “I’m sure
they weren’t carrying any kind of tracking equipment. No
reason for it. If our tracker had been out of order, we’d have
joined the mudders in the penestral’s belly.”
A quick death at least, Flinx thought. Death was a frequent visitor to the unwary in the Drallarian marketplace, so
he was no stranger to it. Thoughts of death reminded him of
Mother Mastiff. Would his persistence result in her captors’
deciding she wasn’t worth the trouble anymore? What might


132

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

they have in mind for her, now that her presence had caused
the death of a number of them? Surely, he decided, they
wouldn’t kill her out of hand. They had gone to so much
trouble already.
But the thought made him worry even more.
Exhilarated by the fight, Lauren’s voice was slightly elevated and hurried. She had reason to be short of wind, Flinx
thought. “One of these days, Flinx, after we’ve finished with
this business, you’ll have to come back up here. I’ll take you
over to Lake Hozingar or Utuhuku. Now those are respectablesized lakes and home to some decent-sized fish. Not like poor
little Patra, here. At Hozingar, you can see the real meaning
of the name The-Blue-That-Blinded.”
Flinx regarded the immense carcass slung alongside the
jet boat in light of her words. “I know there are bigger lakes
than this one, but I didn’t know they held bigger penestrals.”
“Oh, the penestral’s a midrange predator,” she told him
conversationally. “On Hozingar you don’t go fishing for penestral. You fish for oboweir.”
“What,” Flinx asked, “is an oboweir?”
“A fish that feeds regularly on penestrals.”
“Oh,” he said quietly, trying to stretch his imagination to
handle the picture her words had conjured up.
Quite a crowd was waiting to greet them as they tied up at
the lodge pier. Lauren had moored the inflated penestral to a
buoy nearby. The carcass drew too much water to be brought
right inshore.
Flinx slipped through the oohing and ahhing guests, leaving Lauren to handle the questions. Several of her employees
fought their way to her and added questions of their own.
Eventually, the crowd began to break up, some to return to
their rooms, others to remain to gawk at the fish bobbing
slowly on the surface.
Flinx had collapsed gratefully into a chair on the porch
that encircled the main building. “How much do you want
for the use of the skimmer and a tracker?” he asked Lauren


133

when she was able to join him. “I’ll need you to show me
how to use it, of course.”
She frowned at him. “I’m not sure I follow you, Flinx.”
“I told you, I’m going after them. You’ve made it possible
for me to do that, and I’m very grateful to you.”
She looked thoughtful. “Management will scream when
they find out I’ve taken out the skimmer for personal use.
They’re a lot more expensive than a jet boat or mudder. We’ll
have to be careful with it.”
He still wasn’t listening to her, his mind full of plans for
pursuing the kidnappers. “I don’t know how I’ll ever repay
you for this, Lauren.”
“Don’t worry about it. The lodge’s share of profit from the
disposal of the penestral ought to defray all the operating
expenses. Come on, get yourself and your snake out of that
chair. We have to gather supplies. The skimmer’s usually used
for making quick runs between here and Attock. That’s where
we pick up our guests. We’ll need to stock some food, of
course, and I want to make sure the engine is fully charged.
And if I don’t take ten minutes to comb my hair out, I’m
going to die.” She tugged at the tangles of black ringlets that
the action on the lake had produced.
“Just a minute.” This time it was Flinx who put out the restraining hand as he bounded out of the chair. “I think I’ve
misunderstood. You don’t mean you’re coming with me?”
“You don’t know how to use the tracking equipment,” she
pointed out.
“I can figure it out,” he assured her confidently. “It didn’t
take me long to figure out how to handle the boat, did it?”
“You don’t know the country.”
“I’m not interested in the country,” he responded. “I’m not
going on a sightseeing trip. That’s what the tracker’s for, isn’t
it? Just loan the stuff to me. I’ll pay you back somehow. Let
me just have the tracker and a charge for my mudder, if
you’re worried about the skimmer.”
“You’re forgetting about my wervils. Besides, you can’t
track a skimmer with a mudder. What if you hit a canyon?”
“Surely you’re not giving up your work here,” he said, try-

134

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

ing another tack, “just so you can seek revenge for the deaths
of a couple of pets?”
“I told you, wervils are an endangered species on Moth.
And I also told you how I feel about animals.”
“I know,” he protested, “but that still doesn’t—”
He broke off his protest as she reached out to ruffle his
hair. “You know, you remind me of another wervil I cared for
once, though his fur wasn’t quite as bright as yours. Near
enough, though.” Then she went on more seriously. “Flinx,
I don’t like these people, whoever they are. I don’t like them
because of what they’ve done to you, and I don’t like them because of what they’ve done to me. Because of that, I’m going
to help you as well as myself. Because I’d be going out after
them whether you were here or not, for the sake of Sennar
and Soba.
“Don’t try to deny that you couldn’t use a little help and
don’t give me any of that archaic nonsense about your not
wanting me along because I’m a woman.”
“Oh, don’t worry,” he told her crisply. “The last thing I’d
try to do would be to inflict any archaic nonsense on you.”
That caused her to hesitate momentarily, uncertain whether
he was joking or not. “Anyway,” she added, “if I can’t go, not
that you can stop me, then you couldn’t go, either. Because
I’m the only one who has access to the skimmer.”
It was not hard for Flinx to give in. “I haven’t got time to
argue with you.”
“And also the sense not to, I suspect. But you’re right
about the time. The tracker should pick up the gel underneath their skimmer right away, but let’s not play our luck to
the limit. I don’t know what kind of skimmer they were
using. I’ve never seen the like before, so I’ve no idea if it’s
faster than usual. We go together, then?”
“Together. On two conditions, Lauren.”
Again, she found herself frowning at him. Just when she
thought she could predict his actions, he would do something to surprise her again. “Say them, anyway.”
“First, that Pip continues to tolerate you.” He rubbed the
back of the flying snake’s head affectionately. It rose delight-



135

edly against the pressure. “You see, I have certain feelings
toward animals myself.”
“And the other condition?” she inquired.
“If you ever touch my hair like that again, you’d better be
prepared for me to kick your lovely backside all the way to
the Pole. Old ladies have been doing that to me ever since I
can remember, and I’ve had my fill of it!”
She grinned at him. “It’s a deal, then. I’m glad your snake
isn’t as touchy as you are. Let’s go. I have to leave a message
for my superiors in case they call in and want to know not
only where their skimmer is but their lodge manager as
well.”
When she informed the assistant manager of the lodge, he
was very upset. “But what do I tell Kilkenny if he calls from
Attoka? What if he has guests to send up?”
“We’re not expecting anyone for another week. You know
that, Sal. Tell him anything you want.” She was arranging
items in a small sack as she spoke. “No, tell him I’ve gone to
the aid of a traveler in distress across the lake. That’s an acceptable excuse in any circumstance.”
The assistant looked past her to where Flinx stood waiting
impatiently, chucking Pip under its jaw and staring in the direction of the lake.
“He doesn’t look like he’s very distressed to me.”
“His distress is well hidden,” Lauren informed him,
“which is more than I can say for you, Sal. I’m surprised at
you. We’ll be back real soon.”
“Uh-huh. It’s just that I’m not a very good liar, Lauren.
You know that.”
“Do the best you can.” She patted his cheek affectionately.
“And I’m not lying. He really is in trouble.”
“But the skimmer, Lauren.”
“You still have the lodge mudders and the boats. Short
of a major catastrophe of some kind, I can see no reason
why you’d need the skimmer. It’s really only here to be used
in case of emergency. To my mind”—she gestured toward
Flinx—“this is an emergency.”
The assistant kicked at the dirt. “It’s your neck.”

136

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“Yes, it’s my neck.”
“Suppose they ask which way you went?”
“Tell them I’ve headed—” A cough interrupted her. She
looked back at Flinx and nodded once. “Just say that I’ve had
to go across Patra.”
“But which way across?”
“Across the lake, Sal.”
“Oh. Okay, I understand. You’ve got your reasons for
doing this, I guess.”
“I guess I do. And if I’m wrong, well, you always wanted
to be manager here, anyway, Sal.”
“Now hold on a minute, Lauren. I never said—”
“Do the best you can for me,” she gently admonished him.
“This means something to me.”
“You really expect to be back soon?”
“Depends on how things go. See you, Sal.”
“Take care of yourself, Lauren.” He watched as she turned
to rejoin the strange youth, then shrugged and started back
up the steps into the lodge.
As Lauren had said, it was her neck.
It didn’t take long for the skimmer to be checked out.
Flinx climbed aboard and admired the utilitarian vehicle. For
almost the first time since he left Drallar, he would be traveling totally clear of such persistent obstacles as mist-shrouded
boulders and towering trees. The machine’s body was made
of black resin. It was large enough to accommodate a dozen
passengers and crew. In addition to the standard emergency
stores, Lauren provisioned it with additional food and medical supplies. They also took along the dart rifle and several
clips and a portable sounding tracker.
Flinx studied the tracking screen and the single moving
dot that drifted northwestward across the transparency. A series of concentric gauging rings filled the circular screen.
The dot that represented their quarry had already reached the
outermost ring.
“They’ll move off the screen in a little while,” he murmured to Lauren.



137

“Don’t worry. I’m sure they’re convinced by now that
they’ve lost us.”
“They’re zigzagging all over the screen,” he noted.
“Taking no chances. Doesn’t do any good if you’re showing up on a tracker. But you’re right. We’d better get moving.”
She slid into the pilot’s chair and thumbed controls. The
whine of the skimmer’s engine drowned out the tracker’s
gentle hum as the craft rose several meters. Lauren held it
there as she ran a final instrument check, then pivoted the
vehicle on an invisible axis and drove it from the hangar. A
nudge of the altitude switch sent them ten, twenty, thirty meters into the air above the lodge. A touch on the accelerator
and they were rushing toward the beach.
Despite the warmth of the cabin heater, Flinx still felt cold
as he gazed single-mindedly at the screen.
“I told you not to worry,” Lauren said with a glance at his
expression as they crossed the shoreline. “We’ll catch them.”
“It’s not that.” Flinx peered out through the transparent
cabin cover. “I was thinking about what might catch us.”
“I’ve yet to see the penestral that can pick out and catch an
airborne target moving at our speed thirty meters up. An
oboweir might do it, but there aren’t any oboweirs in Lake
Patra. Leastwise, none that I’ve ever heard tell of.”
Nevertheless, Flinx’s attention and thoughts remained
evenly divided between the horizon ahead and the potentially
lethal waters below.
“I understand you’ve had some trouble here.”
Sal relaxed in the chair in the dining room and sipped at a
hot cup of toma as he regarded his visitors. They had arrived
in their own mudder, which immediately stamped them as
independent as well as wealthy. If he played this right, he
might convince them to spend a few days at the lodge. They
had several expensive suites vacant, and if he could place
this pair in one, it certainly wouldn’t do his record any harm.
Usually, he could place an offworlder by accent, but not these


138

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

two. Their words were clear but their phonemes amorphous.
It puzzled him.
Routine had returned as soon as Lauren and her charity
case had departed. No one had called from down south, not
the district manager, not anyone. He was feeling very content. Unless, of course, the company had decided to send its
own investigators instead of simply calling in a checkup.
That thought made him frown at the woman.
“Say, are you two Company?”
“No,” the woman’s companion replied, smiling pleasantly.
“Goodness no, nothing like that. We just like a little excitement, that’s all. If something unusual’s going on in the area,
it kind of tickles our curiosity, if you know what I mean.”
“You had a man killed here, didn’t you?” the woman asked.
“Well, yes, it did get pretty lively here for a day.” No accounting for taste, Sal mused. “Someone was killed during a
fight. A nonguest,” he hastened to add. “Right in here. Quite
a melee.”
“Can you describe any of those involved?” she asked him.
“Not really. I’m not even positive which guests were involved and which day visitors. I didn’t witness the argument
myself, you see, and by the time I arrived, most of the participants had left.”
The woman accepted this admission with a disappointed
nod. “Was there a young man involved? Say, of about sixteen?”
“Yes, him I did see. Bright-red hair?”
“That’s the one,” she admitted.
“Say, is he dangerous or anything?” The assistant manager
leaned forward in his chair, suddenly concerned.
“Why do you want to know?” the man asked.
“Well, my superior here, the regular manager—Lauren
Walder. She went off with him.”
“Went off with him?” The pleasant expression that had
dominated the woman’s face quickly vanished, to be replaced
by something much harder.
“Yes. Three, maybe four days ago now. I’m still not com-



139

pletely sure why. She only told me that the young man had a
problem and she was going to try to help him out.”
“Which way did their mudder go?” the man asked.
“North, across Lake Patra,” Sal informed them. “They’re
not in a mudder, though. She took the lodge skimmer.”
“A skimmer!” The woman threw up her hands in frustration and sat down heavily in a chair opposite the assistant.
“We’re losing ground,” she told her companion, “instead of
gaining on him. If he catches up with them before we do, we
could lose him and the . . .” Her companion cut the air with
the edge of his hand, and her words trailed away to an indecipherable mumble. The gesture had been quick and partly
concealed, but Sal had noticed it nonetheless.
“Now you’ve really got me worried,” he told the pair. “If
Lauren’s in some kind of trouble—”
“She could be,” the man admitted, pleased that the assistant had changed the subject.
Sal thought a moment. “Would she be in danger from
these people who had the fight here, or from the redhead?”
“Conceivably from both.” The man was only half lying.
“You’d better tell us everything you know.”
“I already have,” Sal replied.
“You said they went north, across the lake. Can’t you be
any more specific than that?”
Sal looked helpless. “Lauren wouldn’t be any more specific than that.”
“They might not continue heading north.”
“No, they might not. Do you have a tracker for following
other craft?” Sal asked.
The man shook his head. “We didn’t think we’d need one.
The last we knew, the young man we’d like to talk with was
traveling on stupava-back.”
“I think he arrived here in a mudder.”
The woman looked surprised and grinned ruefully at her
companion. “No wonder we fell behind. Resourceful, isn’t
he?”
“Too resourceful for my liking,” the man murmured, “and


140

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

maybe for his own good if he backs those you-know-whos
into a corner.”
The woman sighed, then rose from her chair. “Well, we’ve
wasted enough time here. We’ll just have to return to Pranbeth for a skimmer and tracking unit. Unless you think we
should try to catch up to them in the mudder.”
The man let out a short, humorless laugh, then turned
back to the assistant manager. “Thanks, son. You’ve been
helpful.”
“I wish I could be more so,” Sal told him anxiously. “If
anything were to happen to Lauren—you’ll see that nothing
happens to her, won’t you?”
“I promise you we’ll do our best,” the woman assured him.
“We don’t want to see innocent bystanders hurt. We don’t
even want to see noninnocents hurt.” She favored him with a
maternal smile, which for some reason did nothing to make
the nervous assistant feel any better about the situation.


11
The tracker hummed quietly, the single glowing dot showing clearly on its screen as the skimmer rushed northward. It
was clipping the tops of the tallest trees, more than eighty
meters above the bogs and muck that passed for the ground.
They had crossed Lake Patra, then an intervening neck of
dry land, then the much larger lake known as Tigranocerta
and were once more cruising over the forest. A cold rain was
falling, spattering off the skimmer’s acrylic canopy to form a
constantly changing wet topography that obscured much of
the view outside. The skimmer’s instruments kept its speed
responsive, maintaining a predetermined distance between it
and its quarry to the north.
Awfully quiet, Lauren Walder thought. He’s awfully quiet,
and maybe something else.
“No, I’m not too young,” he said into the silence that filled
the cabin, his tone softly defensive.
Lauren’s eyebrows lifted. “You can read minds?”
He responded with a shy smile. “No, not that.” Fingers
stroked the head of the minidrag sleeping on his shoulder. “I
just feel things at times. Not thoughts, nothing that elaborate.
Just the way people are feeling.” He glanced up at her. “From
the way I thought you were feeling just now, I thought you
were going to say something along that line.”
“Well, you were right,” she confessed, wondering what to
make of the rest of his declaration.
“I’m not, you know.”
“How old are you?” she asked.
“Sixteen. As best I know. I can’t be certain.”


142

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

Sixteen going on sixty, she thought sadly. During her rare
visits to Drallar, she had seen his type before. Child of circumstance, raised in the streets and instructed by wrong example and accident, though he seemed to have turned out
better than his brethren. His face held the knowledge withheld from his more fortunate contemporaries, but it didn’t
seem to have made him vicious or bitter.
Still she felt there was something else at work here.
“How old do you think I am?” she asked idly.
Flinx pursed his lips as he stared at her. “Twenty-three,” he
told her without hesitating.
She laughed softly and clapped both hands together in delight. “So that’s what I’m helping, a sixteen-year-old vengeful diplomat!” Her laughter faded. The smile remained. “Tell
me about yourself, Flinx.”
It was a question that no stranger in Drallar would ever be
so brazen as to ask. But this was not Drallar, he reminded
himself. Besides, he owed this woman.
So he told her as much as he knew. When he finished his
narrative, she continued to stare solemnly at him, nodding
her head as if his words had done no more than confirm suspicions already held. She spared a glance to make sure the
tracker was still functioning efficiently, then looked back at
him. “You haven’t exactly had a comfortable childhood, have
you?”
“I wouldn’t know,” he replied, “because I only have hearsay to compare it with.”
“Take my word for it, you haven’t. You’ve also managed to
get along with the majority of humanity even though they
don’t seem to want to have anything to do with you. Whereas
I’ve had to avoid the majority of people who seem to want to
have a lot to do with me.”
Impulsively, she leaned over out of the pilot’s chair and
kissed him. At the last instant, he flinched, nervous at such
unaccustomed proximity to another human being—especially
an attractive member of the opposite sex—and the kiss, which
was meant for his cheek, landed instead on his lips.
That made her pull back fast. The smile stayed on her face,


143

and she only blinked once in surprise. It had been an accident, after all. “Take my word for something else, Flinx. If
you live long enough, life gets better.”
“Is that one of the Church’s homilies?” He wondered if
she wore some caustic substance to protect her lips from
burning, because his own were on fire.
“No,” she said. “That’s a Lauren Walder homily.”
“Glad to hear it. I’ve never had much use for the Church.”
“Nor have I. Nor have most people. That’s why it’s been so
successful, I expect.” She turned her gaze to the tracker.
“They’re starting to slow down. We’ll do the same.”
“Do you think they’ve seen us?” Suddenly, he didn’t really
care what the people in the skimmer ahead of them decided
to do. The fire spread from his lips to his mouth, ran down
his throat, and dispersed across his whole body. It was a
sweet, thick fire.
“I doubt it,” she replied. “I’ll bet they’re close to their destination.” Her hands manipulated controls.
“How far ahead of us are they?” He walked forward to
peer over her shoulder at the screen. He could have stood to
her left, but he was suddenly conscious of the warmth of her,
the perfume of her hair. He was very careful not to touch her.
She performed some quick calculations, using the tracker’s
predictor. “Day or so. We don’t want to run up their tail.
There’s nothing up in this part of the country. Odd place to
stop, but then this whole business is odd, from what you’ve
told me. Why bring your mother up here?”
He had no answer for her.
They dropped until the skimmer was rising and falling in
concert with the treetops. So intent were they on the actions
of the dot performing on the tracking screen that neither of
them noticed that not only had the rain stopped but the cloud
cover had cracked. Overhead, one of the rings of Moth, the
interrupted ring which encircled the planet, shimmered
golden against the ceiling of night.
“What makes you so sure they’re stopping here instead of
just slowing down for a while?” he asked Lauren.
“Because a skimmer operates on a stored charge, just like


144

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

a mudder. Remember, they had to come from here down to
Patra. Our own charge is running low, and we’re not on the
return leg of a round trip. I don’t know what model they’re
flying, but I saw how big it was. It can’t possibly retain
enough energy to take them much farther than we’ve gone
the past several days. They at least have to be stopping somewhere to recharge, which is good.”
“Why is that?” Flinx asked.
“Because we’re going to have to recharge, also.” She
pointed to a readout. “We’ve used more than half our own
power. If we can’t recharge somewhere around here, we’re
going to have some hiking to do on our way out.”
Flinx regarded her with new respect, if that was possible;
his opinion of her had already reached dizzying heights.
“Why didn’t you tell me when we reached the turnaround
point?”
She shrugged slightly. “Why? We’ve gone to a lot of trouble to come as far as we have. You might have argued with
me about turning back.”
“No,” Flinx said quietly, “I wouldn’t have done that.”
“I didn’t think so. You’re almost as determined to see this
through as I am, and at least as crazy.”
She stared up at him, and he stared back. Nothing more
needed to be said.
“I vote no.”
Nyassa-lee was firm in her disagreement. She sat on one
side of the table and gazed expectantly at her colleagues.
Brora was thoughtfully inspecting the fingernails of his left
hand, while Haithness toyed with her eyelashes.
“Really,” the tall black woman murmured to her compatriot,
“to show such reluctance at this stage is most discouraging,
Nyassa-lee.” Her fingers left her eyes. “We may never have
the chance to manipulate another subject as promising as this
Twelve. Time and events conspire against us. You know that
as well as I.”
“I know.” The shorter woman leaned forward in the chair
and gazed between her legs at the floor. Cracks showed be-



145

tween the panels; the building had been assembled in haste.
“I’m just not convinced it’s worth the risk.”
“What risk?” Haithness demanded to know. “We’ve still
seen nothing like a demonstration of threatening power.
Quite the contrary, I’d say. Certainly the subject had the opportunity to display any such abilities. It’s evident he does
not possess them, or he would doubtless have employed
them against us. Instead, what did we see? Knife.” She made
it sound disgusting as well as primitive.
“She’s right, you know.” Brora rarely spoke, preferring to
let the two senior scientists do most of the arguing. He
stepped in only when he was completely confident of his
opinion.
“We don’t want another repeat of the girl,” Nyassa-lee
said. “The Society couldn’t stand another failure like that.”
“Which is precisely why we must pursue this last opportunity to its conclusion,” Haithness persisted.
“We don’t know that it represents our last opportunity.”
“Oh, come on, Nyassa-lee.” Haithness pushed back her
chair and stood; she began pacing nervously back and forth.
Behind her, lights shone cold green and blue from the consoles hastily assembled. “Even if there are other subjects of
equal potential out there, we’ve no guarantee that any of us
will be around much longer to follow up on them.”
“I can’t argue with that,” Nyassa-lee admitted. “Nor can I
argue this Number Twelve’s statistical promise. It’s just those
statistics which frighten me.”
“Frighten you?” Haithness stopped pacing and looked over
at her companion of many hard years. The tall woman was
surprised. She had seen Nyassa-lee wield a gun with the
cold-blooded efficiency of a qwarm. Fear seemed foreign to
her. “But why? He’s done nothing to justify such fear.”
“Oh, no?” Nyassa-lee ticked off her points on the fingers
of one hand. “One, his statistical potential is alarming. Two,
he’s sixteen, on the verge of full maturity. Three, he could
cross into that at any time.”
“The girl,” Brora pointed out, “was considerably younger.”
“Agreed,” said Nyassa-lee, “but her abilities were preco-


146

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

cious. Her advantage was surprise. This Number Twelve is
developing slowly but with greater potential. He may be the
kind who responds to pressure by reaching deeper into himself.”
“Maybe,” Brora said thoughtfully, “but we have no proof
of it, nor does his profile predict anything of the sort.”
“Then how do you square that,” she responded, “with the
fact that he has by himself—”
“He’s not by himself,” Brora interrupted her. “That woman
from the lodge was helping him out on the lake.”
“Was helping him. She didn’t help him get to that point.
He followed us all the way to that lake on his own, without
any kind of external assistance. To me that indicates the accelerated development of a Talent we’d better beware of.”
“All the more reason,” Haithness said angrily, slapping the
table with one palm, “why we must push ahead with our
plan!”
“I don’t know,” Nyassa-lee murmured, unconvinced.
“Do you not agree,” Haithness countered, forcing herself
to restrain her temper, “that if the operation is a success we
stand a good chance of accomplishing our goal as regards
outside manipulation of the subject?”
“Possibly,” Nyassa-lee conceded.
“Why just ‘possibly’? Do you doubt the emotional bond?”
“That’s not what concerns me. Suppose, just suppose, that
because his potential is still undeveloped, he has no conscious control of it?”
“What are you saying?” Brora asked.
She leaned intently over the table. “With the girl Mahnahmi we knew where we stood, once she’d revealed herself.
Unfortunately, that knowledge came as a surprise to us, and
too late to counteract. We’ve no idea where we stand vis-àvis this subject’s Talents. Suppose that, despite the emotional
bond, pressure and fear conspire to release his potential regardless of his surface feelings? Statistically, the subject is a
walking bomb that may not be capable or mature enough to
control itself. That’s what worries me, Haithness. The emotional bond may be sufficient to control his conscious self.



147

The unpredictable part of him may react violently in spite
of it.”
“We cannot abandon our hopes and work on so slim a
supposition, one that we have no solid facts to support,”
Haithness insisted. “Besides, the subject is sixteen. If anything, he should have much more control over himself than
the girl did.”
“I know, I know,” Nyassa-lee muttered unhappily. “Everything you say is true, Haithness, yet I can’t help worrying.
In any case, I’m outvoted.”
“That you are,” the tall woman said after a questioning
glance at Brora. “And if Cruachan were here with us, you
know he’d vote to proceed too.”
“I suppose.” Nyassa-lee smiled thinly. “I worry too much.
Brora, are you sure you can handle the implant?”
He nodded. “I haven’t done one in some time, but the old
skills remain. It requires patience more than anything else.
You remember. As to possible unpredictable results, failure,
well”—he smiled—“we’re all condemned already. One more
little outrage perpetrated against society’s archaic laws can’t
harm us one way or the other if we fail here.”
Off in a nearby corner, Mother Mastiff sat in a chair, hands
clasped in her lap, and listened. She was not bound. There
was no reason to tie her, and she knew why as well as her
captors. There was nowhere to run. She was in excellent condition for a woman her age, but she had had a good view of
the modest complex of deceptive stone and wood structures
as the skimmer had landed. Thousands of square kilometers
of damp, hostile forest lay between the place she had been
brought to and the familiar confines of Drallar. She was no
more likely to steal a vehicle than she was to turn twenty
again.
She wondered what poor Flinx was going through. That
had been him, out on the boat on the lake far to the south.
How he had managed to trace her so far she had no idea. At
first, her concern had been for herself. Now that she had had
ample opportunity to listen to the demonic trio arguing in
front of her—for demonic she was certain they were—she



148

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

found herself as concerned for the fate of her adopted son as
for her own. If she was lost, well, she had had a long and
eventful life. Better perhaps that her brave Flinx lose track of
her than stumble into these monsters again.
One of the trio, the short, toad-faced man, had spoken of
“adjusting” her and of “implants.” That was enough to convince her to prepare for something worse than death. Many
of their words made no sense to her. She still had no idea
who the people were, much less where they had come from
or the reasons for their actions. They never spoke to her, ignoring her questions as well as her curses.
Actually, they did not treat her as a human being at all, but
rather as a delicate piece of furniture. Their current conversation was the most peculiar yet, for one of them was expressing fear of her boy. She could not imagine why. True,
Flinx had tamed a dangerous animal, that horrid little flying
creature, but that was hardly a feat to inspire fear in such
people. They knew he occasionally had the ability to sense
what others were feeling. Yet far from fearing such erratic
and minor talents, these people discussed them as if they
were matters of great importance.
None of which explained why they’d kidnapped her. If
their real interest lay with her boy, then why hadn’t they kidnapped him? The whole affair was too complicated a puzzle
for her to figure out. Mother Mastiff was not a stupid woman,
and her deficiency in formal education did not blunt her
sharp, inquiring mind; still she could not fathom what was
happening to her, or why.
She let her attention drift from the argument raging across
the table nearby to study the room to which she had been
brought. Most of the illumination came from the impressive
array of electronics lining the walls. Everything she could
see hinted of portability and hurried installation. She had no
idea as to the purpose of the instrumentation, but she had
been around enough to know that such devices were expensive. That, and the actions of the people who had abducted
her, hinted at an organization well stocked with money as
well as malign intentions.


149

“I’m not even sure,” Nyassa-lee was saying, “that the subject realizes how he’s managed to follow us this far.”
“There is likely nothing mysterious about it,” Haithness
argued. “Remember that he is a product of an intensely competitive, if primitive, environment. Urban youths grow up
fast when left to their own resources. He may not have enjoyed much in the way of a formal education, but he’s been
schooled in the real world—something we’ve had to master
ourselves these past years. And he may have had some ordinary, quite natural luck.”
“These past years,” Brora was mumbling sadly. “Years
that should have been spent prying into the great mysteries
of the universe instead of learning how to make contacts
with and use of the criminal underworld.”
“I feel as wasted as you do, Brora,” the tall woman said
soothingly, “but vindication lies at hand.”
“If you’re both determined to proceed, then I vote that we
begin immediately.” Nyassa-lee sighed.
“Immediately with what?” a crotchety voice demanded.
For some reason, the question caused the trio to respond,
whereas previous attempts to draw their attention had failed
miserably.
Nyassa-lee left the table and approached Mother Mastiff.
She tried to adopt a kindly, understanding expression, but
was only partly successful. “We’re scientists embarked on a
project of great importance to all mankind. I’m sorry we’ve
been forced to inconvenience you, but this is all necessary. I
wish you were of a more educated turn of mind and could
understand our point of view. It would make things easier for
you.”
“Inconvenienced!” Mother Mastiff snorted. “Ye pluck me
out of my house and haul me halfway across the planet. That’s
inconvenience? I call it something else.” Her bluster faded as
she asked, “What is it you want with my boy Flinx?”
“Your adopted boy,” Nyassa-lee said. While the small Oriental spoke, Mother Mastiff noted that the other two were
studying her the way a collector might watch a bug on a park
bench. That made her even madder, and the anger helped to


150

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

put a damper on her fear. “I wouldn’t make things any easier
for you people if ye promised me half the wealth of Terra.”
“I’m sorry you feel that way, but it’s only what we have
come to expect,” Nyassa-lee said, turning icy once again.
“Have you heard of the Meliorare Society?”
Mother Mastiff shook her head, too angry to cry, which is
what she really wanted to do. Names, words they threw at
her, all meaningless.
“We’re part of an experiment,” the Oriental explained, “an
experiment which began on Terra many years ago. We are
not only scientists, we are activists. We believe that the true
task of science is not only to study that which exists but to
forge onward and bring into existence that which does not
exist but eventually will. We determined not to stand still,
nor to let nature do so, either.”
Mother Mastiff shook her head. “I don’t understand.”
“Think,” Nyassa-lee urged her, warming to her subject,
“what is there in Commonwealth society today that could
most stand improvement? The government?” A bitter, derogatory laugh sounded behind her, from Haithness. “Not
the government, then. What about the ships that carry us
from star to star? No? Language, then, an improvement on
Terranglo or symbospeech? What about music or architecture?”
Mother Mastiff simply stared at the woman ranting before
her. She was quite certain now, quite certain. These three
were all as insane as a brain-damaged Yax’m.
“No, none of those things!” Nyassa-lee snapped. It was
terrible to see such complete assurance in one so diminutive.
“It’s us. We.” She tapped her sternum. “Humankind. And the
means for our improvement lie within.” Her hand went to her
head. “In here, in abilities and areas of our mind still not
properly developed.
“We and the other members of the Society decided many
years ago that something could and should be done about
that. We formed a cover organization to fool superstitious
regulators. In secret, we were able to select certain human
ova, certain sperm, and work carefully with them. Our plan-



151

ning was minute, our preparations extensive. Through microsurgical techniques, we were able to alter the genetic code of
our humans-to-be prior to womb implantation. The result
was to be, will be, a better version of mankind.”
Mother Mastiff gaped at her. Nyassa-lee sighed and
turned to her companions. “As I feared, all this is beyond her
meager comprehension.”
“Perfectly understandable,” Brora said. “What I don’t understand is why you trouble to try?”
“It would be easier,” Nyassa-lee said.
“Easier for her, or for you?” Haithness wondered. The
smaller woman did not reply. “It won’t matter after the operation, anyway.” At these words, the fine hair on the back of
Mother Mastiff’s neck began to rise.
“It might,” Nyassa-lee insisted. She looked back down at
Mother Mastiff, staring hard into those old eyes. “Don’t you
understand yet, old woman? Your boy, your adopted son: he
was one of our subjects.”
“No,” Mother Mastiff whispered, though even as she
mouthed the word, she knew the woman’s words must be
true. “What—what happened to your experiment?”
“All the children were provided with attention, affection,
education, and certain special training. The majority of the
subjects displayed nothing unusual in the way of ability or
talent. They were quite normal in every way. We proceeded
with great care and caution, you see.
“A few of the subjects developed abnormally. That is in
the nature of science, unfortunately. We must accept the good
together with the bad. However, in light of our imminent success, those failures were quite justified.” She sounded as if
she were trying to reassure herself as much as Mother Mastiff.
“A few of the children, a very small number, gave indications of developing those abilities which we believe to lie
dormant in every human brain. We don’t pretend to understand everything about such Talents. We are in the position
of mechanics who have a good idea how to repair an imper-

152

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

fect machine without really knowing what the repaired machine is capable of. This naturally resulted in some surprises.
“An ignorant Commonwealth society did not feel as we
did about the importance of our activities. As a result, we
have undergone many years of persecution. Yet we have persisted. As you can see, all of us who are original members of
the Society are nearly as advanced in years as yourself.
“The government has been relentless in its efforts to wipe
us out. Over the years, it has whittled away at our number
until we have been reduced to a dedicated few. Yet we need
but a single success, one incontrovertible proof of the worthiness of our work, to free ourselves from the lies and innuendo with which we have been saddled.
“It was a cruel and uncaring government which caused the
dispersal of the children many years ago and which brought
us to our current state of scientific exile. Slowly, patiently,
we have worked to try and relocate those children, in particular any whose profiles showed real promise. Your Flinx is
one of those singled out by statistics as a potential Talent.”
“But there’s nothing abnormal about him,” Mother Mastiff
protested. “He’s a perfectly average, healthy young man.
Quieter than most, perhaps, but that’s all. Is that worth all
this trouble? Oh, I’ll admit he can do some parlor tricks from
time to time. But I know a hundred street magicians who can
do the same. Why don’t you go pick on them?”
Nyassa-lee smiled that humorless, cold smile. “You’re
lying to us, old woman. We know that he is capable of more
than mere tricks and that something far more important than
sleight of hand is involved.”
“Well, then,” she continued, trying a different tack, “why
kidnap me? Why pull me away from my home like this? I’m
an old woman, just as ye say. I can’t stand in your way or do
ye any harm. If ’tis Flinx you’re so concerned with, why did
ye not abduct him? I surely could not have prevented ye from
doing so.”
“Because he may be dangerous.”
Yes, they are quite mad, this lot, Mother Mastiff mused.
Her boy, Flinx, dangerous? Nonsense! He was a sensitive


153

boy, true; he could sometimes know what others were feeling, but only rarely, and hardly at all when he most wished to
do so. And maybe he could push the emotions of others a
tiny bit. But dangerous? The danger was to him, from these
offworld fools and madmen.
“Also,” the little Oriental continued, “we have to proceed
very carefully because we cannot risk further harm to the Society. Our numbers have already been drastically reduced,
partly by our too-hasty attempt to regain control of one subject child a number of years ago. We cannot risk making the
same mistake with this Number Twelve. Most of our colleagues have been killed, imprisoned, or selectively mindwiped.”
Mother Mastiff’s sense of concern doubled at that almost
indifferent admission. She didn’t understand all the woman’s
chatter about genetic alterations and improving mankind, but
she understood mindwiping, all right. A criminal had to be
found guilty of some especially heinous crime to be condemned to that treatment, which took away forever a section
of his memories, of his life, of his very self, and left him to
wander for the rest of his days tormented by a dark, empty
gap in his mind.
“You leave him alone!” she shouted, surprised at the violence of her reaction. Had she become so attached to the
boy? Most of the time she regarded him as a nuisance inflicted on her by an unkind fate—didn’t she?
“Don’t you hurt him!” She was on her feet and pounding
with both fists on the shoulders of the woman called Nyassalee.
Though white-haired and no youngster, Nyassa-lee was a
good deal younger and stronger than Mother Mastiff. She
took the older woman’s wrists and gently pushed her back
down into the chair.
“Now, we’re not going to hurt him. Didn’t I just explain
his importance to us? Would we want to damage someone
like that? Of course not. It’s clear how fond you’ve become
of your charge. In our own way, we’re equally fond of him.”
What soulless people these are, Mother Mastiff thought as


154

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

she slumped helplessly in her chair. What dead, distant shadows of human beings.
“I promise you that we will not try to force the boy to do
anything against his will, nor will we harm him in any way.”
“What do ye mean to do with him, then?”
“We need to guide his future maturation,” the woman explained, “to ensure that whatever abilities he possesses are
developed to their utmost. It’s highly unlikely he can do this
without proper instruction and training, which is why his
abilities have not manifested themselves fully so far. Experience, however, has shown us that when the children reach
puberty, they are no longer willing to accept such training
and manipulation. We therefore have to guide him without
his being aware of it.”
“How can ye do this without his knowing what is being
done to him?”
“By manipulating him through a third party whose suggestions and directions he will accept freely,” the woman
said. “That is where you become important.”
“So ye wish for me to make him do certain things, to alter
his life so that your experiment can be proven a success?”
“That’s correct,” Nyassa-lee said. “All this must be carried
out in such a way that he cannot suspect he is being guided
by an outside force.” She gestured toward the far end of the
room, past transparent doors sealing off a self-contained
operating theater. In the dim blue and green light of the
instrument readouts, the sterile theater gleamed softly.
“We cannot allow the possibility of interference or misdirection to hamper our efforts, nor can we risk exposure to
the Commonwealth agencies which continue to hound us. It
is vital that our instructions be carried out quickly and efficiently. Therefore, it will be necessary for us to place certain
small devices in your brain, to ensure your complete compliance with our directives.”
“Like hell,” Mother Mastiff snapped. “I’ve spent a hundred
years filling up this head of mine. I know where everything
is stored. I don’t want somebody else messing around up
there.” She did not add, as she glanced surreptitiously toward



155

the operating room, that she had never been under the knife
or the laser and that she had a deathly fear of being cut.
“Look,” she went on desperately, “I’ll be glad to help ye.
I’ll tell the boy anything ye wish, have him study anything ye
want and avoid whatever matters ye wish him to avoid. But
leave my poor old head alone. Wouldn’t I be much more help
to ye if I did what ye require voluntarily instead of like some
altered pet?”
Brora folded his hands on the table and regarded her emotionlessly. “That would certainly be true. However, there are
factors which unfortunately mitigate against this.
“First, there are mental activities you will be required to
carry out which involve complex processes you are not conversant with but which can be stimulated via direct implants.
Second, there is no guarantee that at some future time you
would not become discouraged or rebellious and tell the subject what you know. That could be a catastrophe for the experiment. Third, though you may direct the boy with surface
willingness, his abilities may enable him to see your inner
distress and know that something is amiss, whereas I do not
think he can detect the implants themselves, as they are wholly
mechanical. Lastly, I think you are lying when you say you
would be willing to help us.”
“But I don’t want an operation!” she cried, pounding at the
arms of the chair with her fists. “I tell you ’tis not necessary!
I’ll do anything ye ask of me if you’ll but leave the boy alone
and instruct me. Why should I lie to ye? You’ve said yourself
that he’s not my true child, only an adopted one. I’ll be glad
to help ye, particularly,” she added with a sly smile, “if there
be any money involved.”
But the man Brora was shaking his head. “You lie forcefully, but not forcefully enough, old woman. We’ve spent
most of our lives having to cope with traitors in our midst.
We can’t afford another one. I’m sorry.” His attention was
drawn to the main entrance and to the two men who’d just entered. He nodded toward Mother Mastiff.
“Restrain her. She knows enough now to do something
foolish to herself.”


156

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

One of the new arrivals held Mother Mastiff’s right arm
and glanced back toward Brora. “Anesthetic, sir?”
“No, not yet.” Mother Mastiff stared at the horrid little
man and shuddered as he spoke quietly to the black woman.
“What do you think, Haithness?”
She examined Mother Mastiff. “Tomorrow is soon enough.
I’m tired. Better to begin fresh. We’ll all need to be alert.”
Brora nodded in agreement, leaving the two younger men
to bind the raving Mother Mastiff.
Later that evening, over dinner, Nyassa-lee said to Haithness, “The woman’s advanced age still gives me concern.”
“She’s not that old,” the taller woman said, spooning down
something artificial but nourishing. “With care, she has another twenty years of good health to look forward to.”
“I know, but she hasn’t the reserves of a woman of fifty
anymore, either. It’s just as well we haven’t told her how
complex tomorrow’s operation is or explained that her mind
will be permanently altered.”
Haithness nodded agreement. “There’s hardly any need to
upset her any more than she already is. Your excessive concern for her welfare surprises me.”
Nyassa-lee picked at her food and did not comment, but
Haithness refused to let the matter drop.
“How many of our friends have perished at the hands of
the government? How many have been mindwiped? It’s true
that if this old woman dies, we lose an important element in
the experiment, but not necessarily a final one. We’ve all
agreed that implanting her is the best way to proceed.”
“I’m not arguing that,” Nyassa-lee said, “only reminding
you that we should be prepared for failure.”
Brora leaned back in his chair and sighed. He was not
hungry; he was too excited by the prospects raised by the operation.
“We will not fail, Nyassa-lee. This is the best chance
we’ve had in years to gain control over a really promising
subject. We won’t fail.” He looked over at Haithness. “I
checked the implants before dinner.”
“Again?”


157

“Nothing else to do. I couldn’t stand just waiting around.
The circuitry is complete, cryogenic enervation constant. I
anticipate no trouble in making the synaptic connections.”
He glanced toward Nyassa-lee. “The woman’s age notwithstanding.
“As to the part of the old woman that will unavoidably be
lost due to the operation”—he shrugged—“I’ve studied the
matter in depth and see no way around it. Not that there
seems a great deal worth preserving. She’s an ignorant primitive. If anything, the implants and resulting excisions will
result in an improved being.”
“Her strongest virtues appear to be cantankerousness and
obstinacy,” Haithness agreed, “coupled to an appalling ignorance of life outside her immediate community.”
“Typical specimen,” Brora said. “Ironic that such a low
example should be the key not only to our greatest success
but our eventual vindication.”
Nyassa-lee pushed away her food. Her colleague’s conversation was upsetting to her. “What time tomorrow?”
“Reasonably early, I should think,” Haithness murmured.
“It will be the best time for the old woman, and better for us
not to linger over philosophy and speculation.”
Brora was startled at the latter implication. “Surely you
don’t expect the boy to show up?”
“You’d best stop thinking of him as a boy.”
“He barely qualifies as a young adult.”
“Barely is sufficient. Though he’s demonstrated nothing in
the way of unexpected talent so far, his persistent pursuit of
his adopted mother is indication enough to me that he possesses a sharp mind in addition to Talent.” She smiled thinly
at Nyassa-lee. “You see, my dear, though I do not share your
proclivity to panic in this case, I do respect and value your
opinion.”
“So you are expecting him?”
“No, I’m not,” Haithness insisted, “but it would be awkward if by some miracle he were to show up here prior to
the operation’s successful completion. Once that is accomplished, we’ll naturally want to make contact with him through


158

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

his mother. When he finds her unharmed and seemingly untouched, he will relax into our control.”
“But what if he does show up prior to our returning the old
woman to Drallar?”
“Don’t worry,” Haithness said. “I have the standard story
prepared, and our personnel here have been well coached in
the pertinent details.”
“You think he’d accept that tale?” Nyassa-lee asked. “That
hoary old business of us being an altruistic society of physicians dedicated to helping the old and enfeebled against the
indifference of government medical facilities?”
“It’s true that we’ve utilized the story in various guises before, but it will be new to the subject,” Haithness reminded
her colleague. “Besides, as Brora says, he barely qualifies as
an adult, and his background does not suggest sophistication. I think he’ll believe us, especially when we restore his
mother to him. That should be enough to satisfy him. The operation will, of course, be rendered cosmetically undetectable.”
“I do better work on a full night’s sleep.” Brora abruptly
pushed back from the table. “Especially prior to a hard day’s
work.”
They all rose and started toward their quarters, Brora contemplating the operation near at hand, Haithness the chances
for success, and only Nyassa-lee the last look in Mother Mastiff’s eyes.



12
They had to be close to their destination because their quarry
had been motionlessfor more than an hour. That’s when the
pain hit Flinx; sharp, hot, and unexpected as always. He winced
and shut his eyes tight while Pip stirred nervously on its master’s shoulder.
Alarmed, Lauren turned hurriedly to her young companion. “What is it? What’s wrong, Flinx?”
“Close. We’re very close.”
“I can tell that by looking at the tracker,” she said.
“It’s her, it’s Mother Mastiff.”
“She’s hurt?” Already Lauren was dropping the skimmer
into the woods. The minidrag writhed on Flinx’s shoulder,
hunting for an unseen enemy.
“She’s—she’s not hurting,” Flinx mumbled. “She’s—there’s
worry in her, and fear. Someone’s planning to do something
terrible to her. She fears for me, too, I think. But I can’t
understand—I don’t know what or wh—”
He blinked. Pip ceased his convulsions. “It’s gone. Damn
it, it’s gone.” He kicked at the console in frustration. “Gone
and I can’t make it come back.”
“I thought—”
He interrupted her; his expression was one of resignation.
“I have no control over the Talent. No control at all. These
feelings hit me when I least expect them, and never, it seems,
when I want them to. Sometimes I can’t even locate the source.
But this time it was Mother Mastiff. I’m sure of it.”
“How can you tell that?” Lauren banked the skimmer to
port, dodging a massive emergent.
159


160

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“Because I know how her mind feels.”
Lauren threw him an uncertain look, then decided there
was no point in trying to comprehend something beyond her
ken.
The skimmer slowed to a crawl and quickly settled down
among the concealing trees on a comparatively dry knoll.
After cutting the power, Lauren moved to the rear of the
cabin and began assembling packs and equipment. The night
was deep around them, and the sounds of nocturnal forest
dwellers began to seep into the skimmer.
“We have to hurry,” Flinx said anxiously. He was already
unsnapping the door latches. “They’re going to hurt her soon!”
“Hold it!” Lauren said sharply. “You don’t know what’s
going to happen to her. More important, you don’t know
when.”
“Soon!” he insisted. The door popped open and slid back
into the transparent outer wall. He stared out into the forest
in the direction he knew they must take even though he hadn’t
checked their location on the tracking screen.
“I promise that we’ll get to her as fast as is feasible,” Lauren assured him as she slipped the sling of the dart rifle over
her shoulder, “but we won’t do her or ourselves any good at
all if we go charging blindly in on those people, whoever
they are. Remember, they carried paralysis weapons on their
vehicles. They may have more lethal weapons here. They’re
not going to sit idly by while you march in and demand the
return of the woman they’ve gone to a helluva lot of trouble
to haul across a continent. We’ll get her back, Flinx, just as
quickly as we can, but recklessness won’t help us. Surely you
know that. You’re a city boy.”
He winced at the “boy,” but otherwise had to agree with
her. With considerable effort he kept himself from dashing
blindly into the black forest. Instead, he forced himself to the
back of the skimmer and checked out the contents of the
backpack she had assembled for him. “Don’t I get a gun, too?”
“A fishing lodge isn’t an armory, you know.” She patted
the rifle butt. “This is about all we keep around in the way
of a portable weapon. Besides, I seem to recall you putting



161

away an opponent bigger than yourself using only your own
equipment.”
Flinx glanced self-consciously down at his right boot. His
prowess with a knife was not something he was particularly
proud of, and he didn’t like talking about it. “A stiletto’s not
much good over distance, and we may not have darkness for
an ally.”
“Have you ever handled a real hand weapon?” she asked
him. “A needler? Beam thrower, projectile gun?”
“No, but I’ve seen them used, and I know how they work.
It’s not too hard to figure out that you point the business end
at the person you’re mad at and pull the trigger or depress the
firing stud.”
“Sometimes it’s not quite that simple, Flinx.” She tightened the belly strap of her backpack. “In any case, you’ll
have to make do with just your blade because there isn’t anything else. And I’m not going to give you the dart rifle. I’m
much more comfortable with it than you’d be. If you’re worried about my determination to use it, you should know me
better than that by now. I don’t feel like being nice to these
people. Kidnappers and wervil killers.”
She checked their course on the tracker, entered it into her
little compass, and led him from the cabin. The ground was
comparatively dry, soft and springy underfoot.
As they marched behind twin search beams, Flinx once
more found himself considering his companion. They had a
number of important things in common besides independence.
Love of animals, for example. Lauren’s hair masked the side
of her face from him but he felt he could see it, anyway.
Pip stirred on its master’s shoulder as it sensed strange
emotions welling up inside Flinx, emotions that were new to
the minidrag and left it feeling not truly upset but decidedly
ill at ease. It tried to slip farther beneath the protective jacket.
By the time they reached their destination, it was very
near midnight. They hunkered down in a thick copse and
stared between the trees. Flinx itched to continue, knowing
that Mother Mastiff lay in uneasy sleep somewhere in the
complex of buildings not far below. The common sense that


162

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

had served him so well since infancy did more to hold him
back than logic or reason.
To all appearances, the cluster of dimly lit structures resembled nothing so much as another hunting or fishing lodge,
though much larger than the one that Lauren managed. In the
center were the main lodge buildings, to the left the sleeping
quarters for less wealthy guests, to the right the maintenance
and storage sheds. Lauren studied the layout through the
thumb-sized daynight binoculars. Her experienced eye detected something far more significant than the complex’s deceptive layout.
“Those aren’t logs,” she told Flinx. “They’re resinated
plastics. Very nicely camouflaged, but there’s no more wood
in them than in my head. Same thing goes for the masonry
and rockwork in the foundations.”
“How can you tell?” he asked curiously.
She handed him the tiny viewing device. Flinx put it to his
eyes, and it immediately adjusted itself to his different vision, changing light and sharpening focus.
“Look at the corner joints and the lines along the ground
and ceilings,” she told him. “They’re much too regular, too
precise. That’s usually the result when someone tries to copy
nature. The hand of the computer, or just man himself, always shows itself. The protrusions on the logs, the smooth
concavities on the ‘rocks’—there are too many obvious replications from one to the next.
“Oh, they’d fool anyone not attuned to such stuff, and certainly anyone flying over in an aircraft or skimmer. But the
materials in those buildings are fake, which tells us that they
were put here recently. Anyone building a lodge for longterm use in the lake country always uses native materials.”
Closest to their position on the little hillside was a pair of
long, narrow structures. One was dark; the other had several
lights showing. Phosphorescent walkways drew narrow glowing lines between buildings.
To the right of the longhouses stood a hexagonal building,
some three stories tall, made of plastic rock surmounted with
more plastic paneling. Beyond it sprawled a large two-story


163

structure whose purpose Flinx could easily divine from the
tall doors fronting it and the single mudder parked outside: a
hangar for servicing and protecting vehicles.
Nearby squatted a low edifice crowned with a coiffure of
thin silvery cables. The power station wasn’t large enough to
conceal a fusion system. Probably a fuel cell complex, Flinx
decided.
More puzzling was the absence of any kind of fence or
other barrier. That was carrying verisimilitude a little too far,
he thought. In the absence of any such wall, Flinx’s attention,
like Lauren’s, was drawn to the peculiar central tower, the
one structure that clearly had no place in a resort complex.
She examined it closely through the binoculars. “Lights
on in there, too,” she murmured. “Could be meant to pass as
some kind of observation tower, or even a restaurant.”
“Seems awfully small at the top for an eating room,” he
commented.
Searchlights probed the darkness between the buildings
as the rest of the internal lights winked out. Another hour’s
wait in the damp, chilly bushes confirmed Lauren’s suspicions about the mysterious tower. “There are six conical objects spaced around the roof,” she told Flinx, pointing with a
gloved hand. “At first, I thought they were searchlights, but
not one of them has shown a light. What the devil could they
be?”
Flinx had spotted them, too. “I think I recognize them now.
Those are sparksound projectors.”
She looked at him in surprise. “What’s that? And how can
you be sure that’s what they are?”
He favored her with a wan smile. “I’ve had to avoid them
before this. Each cone projects a wide, flat beam of highintensity sound. Immobile objects don’t register on the sensors, so it can be used to blanket a large area that includes
buildings.” He studied the tower intently.
“Just guessing from the angles at which the projectors are
set, I’d say that their effective range stops about fifty meters
out from the longhouses.”

164

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“That’s not good,” she muttered, trying to make out the
invisible barrier though she knew that was impossible.
“It’s worse than you think,” he told her, “because the computer which monitors the beams is usually programmed
automatically to disregard anything that doesn’t conform to
human proportions. The interruption of the sonic field by
anything even faintly human will generate a graphic display
on a viewscreen. Any guard watching the screen will be able
to tell what’s entered the protected area and decide on that
basis whether or not to sound further alarm.” He added
apologetically, “Rich people are very fond of this system.”
“When we didn’t see a regular fence, I was afraid of something like this. Isn’t there any way to circumvent it, Flinx?
You said you’ve avoided such things in the past.”
He nodded. “I’ve avoided them because there’s no way to
break the system. Not from the outside, anyway. I suppose
we might be able to tunnel beneath it.”
“How deep into the ground would the sound penetrate?”
“That’s a problem,” he replied. “Depends entirely on the
power being fed to the projectors and the frequencies being
generated. Maybe only a meter, or maybe a dozen. We could
tunnel inside the camp and strike it without knowing we’d
done so until we came up into a circle of guns. Even if we
made it, we’d have another problem, because the beams probably cover the entire camp. We’d almost have to come up inside one of the buildings.”
“It doesn’t matter,” she murmured, “because we don’t have
any tunneling equipment handy. I’m going to hazard a guess
that if they have the surface monitored so intently, the sky in
the immediate vicinity will be even more carefully covered.”
“I’d bet on that, too.” Flinx gestured toward the tower. “Of
course, we could just run the skimmer in on them. There
aren’t that many buildings. Maybe we could find Mother
Mastiff and get her out before they could react.”
Lauren continued to study the complex. “There’s nothing
more expensive than a temporary facility fixed up to look
permanent. I’d guess this setup supports between thirty and a
hundred people. They’re not going to make this kind of effort


165

to detect intruders without being damn ready to repel them
as well. Remember, there are only two of us.”
“Three,” Flinx corrected her. A pleased hiss sounded from
the vicinity of his shoulder.
“Surprise is worth a lot,” Lauren went on. “Maybe ten, but
no more than that. We won’t do your mother any good as
corpses. Keep in mind that no one else knows we’re here. If
we go down, so do her chances.”
“I know the odds aren’t good,” he said irritably, “but we’ve
got to do something.”
“And do something we will. You remember that partially
deforested section we flew over earlier today?”
Flinx thought a moment, then nodded.
“That was a trail line.”
“Trail line for what?”
“For equalization,” she told him. “For evening out the
odds. For a better weapon than this.” She patted the sling of
the dart rifle. “Better even than that snake riding your shoulder. I don’t share your confidence in it.”
“You haven’t seen Pip in action,” he reminded her. “What
kind of weapon are you talking about?”
She stood and brushed bark and dirt from her coveralls.
“You’ll see,” she assured him, “but we have to be damn careful.” She gazed toward the camp below. “I wish I could think
of a better way, but I can’t. They’re sure to have guards posted
in addition to monitoring the detection system you described.
We don’t even know which building your mother is in. If
we’re going to risk everything on one blind charge, it ought
to be one hell of a charge.
“The weapon I have in mind is a volatile one. It can cut
both ways, but I’d rather chance a danger I’m familiar with.
Let’s get back to the skimmer.”
She pivoted and headed back through the forest. Flinx
rose to join her, forcing himself away from the lights of the
camp, which gleamed like so many reptilian eyes in the
night, until the trees swallowed them up.
They were halfway back to the little grove where they had
parked the skimmer when the sensation swept through him.


166

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

As usual, it came as a complete surprise, but this time it was
very different from his recent receptions. For one thing, no
feeling of pain was attached to it, and for another, it did not
come from the direction of the camp. It arose from an entirely new source. Oddly, it carried overtones of distress with
it, though distress of a confusing kind.
It came from Lauren and was directed at him.
There was no love in it, no grand, heated follow-up to the
casual kiss she had given him in the skimmer. Affection, yes,
which was not what he had hoped for. Admiration, too, and
something more. Something he had not expected from her: a
great wave of concern for him, and to a lesser extent, of pity.
Flinx had become more adept at sorting out and identifying the emotions he received, and there was no mistaking
those he was feeling now. That kiss, then, had not only carried no true love with it—it held even less than that. She felt
sorry for him.
He tried to reject the feelings, not only from disappointment but out of embarrassment. This was worse than looking
into someone’s mind. He was reading her heart, not her
thoughts. Though he tried hard, he could not shut off the
flow. He could no more stop the river of emotion than he
could willingly turn it on.
He made certain he stayed a step or two behind her so she
would not be able to see his face in the darkness, still soaking up the waves of concern and sympathy that poured from
her, wishing they might be something else, something more.
They hesitated before approaching the skimmer, circling
the landing area once. The quick search revealed that their
hiding place had remained inviolate. Once aboard, Lauren
took the craft up. She did not head toward the camp; instead,
she turned south and began to retrace their course over the
treetops. Very soon they encountered the long, open gash in
the woods. Lauren hovered above it for several minutes as
she studied the ground, then decisively headed west. Flinx
kept to himself, trying to shut the memory of that emotional
deluge out of his mind. Then, quite unexpectedly, the open
space in the trees came to a dead end.


167

“Damn,” Lauren muttered. “Must have picked the wrong
direction. I thought sure I read the surface right. Maybe it’s
the other way.”
Flinx did not comment as she wheeled the skimmer around
and headed southeast. When the pathway again ended in an unbroken wall of trees, she angrily wrenched the craft around
a second time. This time when they encountered the forest
wall, she slowed but continued westward, her gaze darting
repeatedly from the darkened woods below to the skimmer’s
instrumentation.
“Maybe if you were a little more specific, I could help you
look,” he finally said, a touch of frustration in his voice.
“I told you. Weapons. Allies, actually. It comes to the same
thing. No sign of them, though. They must have finished eating and entered semidormancy. That’s how they live; do nothing but eat for several days in a row, then lie down to sleep it
off for a week. The trouble is that once they’ve finished an
eating period, they’re apt to wander off in any direction until
they find a sleep spot that pleases them. We haven’t got the
time to search the whole forest for the herd.”
“Herd of what?” Flinx asked.
“Didn’t I tell you? Devilopes.”
Enlightenment came to Flinx. He had heard of Devilopes,
even seen a small head or two mounted in large commercial
buildings. But he had had no personal experience of them.
Few citizens of Drallar did. There was not even one in the
city zoo. As Flinx understood it, Devilopes were not zooable.
The Demichin Devilope was the dominant native life form
on Moth. It was unusual for a herbivore to be the dominant
life form, but excepting man, a fairly recent arrival, they had
no natural enemies. They were comparatively scarce, as were
the mounted heads Flinx had seen; the excessive cost of the
taxidermy involved prevented all but the extremely wealthy
from collecting Devilope.
The skimmer prowled the treetops, rising to clear occasional emergents topping ninety meters, dropping lower
when the woods scaled more modest heights. Occasionally,
Lauren would take them down to ground level, only to lift


168

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

skyward again in disappointment when the omens proved
unhelpful. There was no sign of a Devilope herd.
Meanwhile, another series of sensations swept through
Flinx’s active mind, and Pip stirred on his shoulder. He had
continually tried to find Mother Mastiff’s emotions, without
success. Instead, his attempts seemed to be attracting the
feelings of everyone but his mother-not. He wondered anew
at his heightened perception since he had acquired his pet;
though it was likely, he reminded himself that here in the
vastness of the northern forests where minds were few and
scattered, it might be only natural that his receptivity improved.
These latest sensations carried a female signature. They
were also new, not of Mother Mastiff or Lauren. Cool and
calm, they were vague and hard to define: whoever they belonged to was a particularly unemotional individual. He felt
fear, slight but unmistakable, coupled with a formidable resolution that was cold, implacable—so hard and unyielding
that it frightened Flinx almost as much as Mother Mastiff’s
own terror. Save for the slight overtones of fear, they might
have been the emotions of a machine.
The feelings came from the camp where Mother Mastiff
was being held. Flinx had little doubt that they belonged to
one of those mysterious individuals who had abducted her.
From the one brief, faint sensation he felt he could understand her fear. Then it was gone, having lasted less than a
minute. Yet, in that time, Flinx had received a complete emotional picture of the person whose feelings he had latched
onto. Never before had he encountered a mind so intent on a
single purpose and so devoid of those usual emotional colorations that comprised common humanity. Pip hissed at the
empty air as if ready to strike and defend its master.
“This isn’t working,” Lauren muttered, trying to see through
the trees. “We’ll have to—” She paused, frowning at him.
“Are you all right? You’ve got the most peculiar expression
on your face.”
“I’m okay.” The coldness was at last fading from his mind;
evidently he hadn’t been conscious of how completely it had


FOR LOVE OF MOTHER-NOT

169

possessed him. Her query snapped him back to immediacy,
and he could feel anew the warmth of the skimmer’s cabin,
of his own body. Not for the first time did he find himself
wondering if his unmanageable Talent might someday do
him harm as well as good. “I was just thinking.”
“You do a lot of that,” she murmured. “Flinx, you’re the
funniest man I’ve ever met.”
“You’re not laughing.”
“I didn’t mean funny ha ha.” She turned back to the controls. “I’m going to set us down. This skimmer really isn’t
equipped for the kind of night-tracking we’re doing. Besides,
I don’t know about you, but it’s late, and I’m worn out.”
Flinx was exhausted too, mentally as much as physically.
So he did not object as Lauren selected a stand of trees and
set the skimmer down in their midst.
“I don’t think we need to stand a watch,” she said. “We’re
far enough from the camp so that no one’s going to stumble
in on us. I haven’t seen any sign of aerial patrol.” She was at
the rear of the skimmer now, fluffing out the sleeping bags
they had brought from the lodge.
Flinx sat quietly watching her. He had known a few girls—
young women—back in Drallar. Inhabitants of the marketplace, like himself, students in the harsh school of the moment.
He could never get interested in any of them, though a few
showed more than casual interest in him. They were not,
well, not serious. About life, and other matters.
Mother Mastiff repeatedly chided him about his attitude.
“There’s no reason for ye to be so standoffish, boy. You’re no
older than them.” That was not true, of course, but he could
not convince her of that.
Lauren was a citizen of another dimension entirely. She
was an attractive, mature woman. A self-confident, thinking
adult—which was how Flinx viewed himself, despite his age.
She was already out of pants and shirt and slipping into the
thin thermal cocoon of the sleeping bag.
“Well?” She blinked at him, pushed her hair away from
her face. “Aren’t you going to bed? Don’t tell me you’re not
tired.”

170

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“I can hardly stand up,” he admitted. Discarding his own
clothing, he slipped into the sleeping bag next to hers. Lying
there listening to the rhythmic patter of rain against the
canopy, he strained toward her with his mind, seeking a hint,
a suggestion of the emotions he so desperately wanted her to
feel. Maddeningly, he could sense nothing at all.
The warmth of the sleeping bag and the cabin enveloped
him, and he was acutely aware of the faint musky smell of
the woman barely an arm’s length away. He wanted to reach
out to her; to touch that smooth, sun-darkened flesh; to caress the glistening ringlets of night that tumbled down the
side of her head to cover cheek and neck and finally form a
dark bulge against the bulwark of the sleeping bag. His hand
trembled.
What do I do, he thought furiously. How do I begin this?
Is there something special I should say first, or should I reach
out now and speak later? How can I tell her what I’m feeling? I can receive. If only I could broadcast!
Pip lay curled into a hard, scaly knot near his feet in the
bottom of the sleeping bag. Flinx slumped in on himself,
tired and frustrated and helpless. What was there to do now?
What could he possibly do except the expected?
A soft whisper reached him from the other sleeping bag.
Black hair shuffled against itself. “Good night, Flinx.” She
turned to smile briefly at him, lighting up the cabin, then
turned over and became still.
“Good night,” he mumbled. The uncertain hand that was
halfway out of his covering withdrew and clenched convulsively on the rim of the material.
Maybe this was best, he tried to tell himself. Adult though
he believed himself to be, there were mysteries and passwords he was still unfamiliar with. Besides, there was that
surge of pity and compassion he had detected in her. Admiring, reassuring, but not what he was hoping to feel from her.
He wanted—had to have—something more than that.
The one thing he didn’t need was another mother.


13
He said nothing when they rose the next morning, downed
a quick breakfast of concentrates, and lifted once again into
the murky sky. The sun was not quite up, though its clouddiffused light brightened the treetops. They had to find Lauren’s herd soon, he knew, because the skimmer’s charge was
running low and so were their options. He did not know how
much time Mother Mastiff had left before the source of fear
he had detected in her came to meet her.
Perhaps they had been hindered by the absence of daylight, or perhaps they had simply passed by the place, but
this time they found the herd in minutes. Below the hovering
skimmer they saw a multitude of small hills the color of obsidian. Black hair rippled in the morning breeze, thick and
meter-long. Where one of the hills shifted in deep sleep,
there was a flash of red like a ruby lost in a coal heap as an
eye momentarily opened and closed.
Flinx counted more than fifty adults. Scattered among them
were an equal number of adolescents and infants. All lay
sprawled on their sides on the damp ground, shielded somewhat from the rain by the grove they had chosen as a resting
place.
So these were the fabled Demichin Devilopes!—awesome
and threatening even in their satiated sleep. Flinx’s gaze settled on one immense male snoring away between two towering hardwoods. He guessed its length at ten meters, its height
when erect at close to six. Had it been standing, a tall man
could have walked beneath its belly and barely brushed the
lower tips of the shaggy hair.


172

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

The downsloping, heavily muscled neck drooped from between a pair of immense humped shoulders to end in a nightmarish skull from which several horns protruded. Some
Devilopes had as few as two horns, others as many as nine.
The horns twisted and curled, though most ended by pointing forward; no two animals’ horns grew in exactly the same
way. Bony plates flared slightly outward from the horns to
protect the eyes.
The forelegs were longer than the hind—unusual for so
massive a mammal. This extreme fore musculature allowed a
Devilope to push over a fully grown tree. That explained the
devastated trail that marked their eating period. A herd
would strip a section of forest bare, pushing down the evergreens to get at the tender branches and needles, even pulling
off and consuming the bark of the main boles.
The Devilopes shifted in their sleep, kicking tree-sized
legs.
“They’ll sleep like this for days,” Lauren explained as they
circled slowly above the herd. “Until they get hungry again
or unless something disturbs them. They don’t even bother to
post sentries. No predator in its right mind would attack a
herd of sleeping Devilopes. There’s always the danger they’d
wake up.”
Flinx stared at the ocean of Devilope. “What do we do
with them?” Not to mention how, he thought.
“They can’t be tamed, and they can’t be driven,” Lauren
told him, “but sometimes you can draw them. We have to
find a young mare in heat. The season’s right.” Her fingers
moved over the controls, and the skimmer started to drop.
“We’re going into that?” Flinx pointed toward the herd.
“Have to,” she said. “There’s no other way. It ought to be
okay. They’re asleep and unafraid.”
“That’s more than I can say,” he muttered as the skimmer
dipped into the trees. Lauren maneuvered it carefully, trying
to break as few branches and make as little noise as possible.
“What do we need with a mare in heat?”
“Musk oil and blood,” Lauren explained as the skimmer
gently touched down.


173

Up close, the herd was twice as impressive: a seething,
rippling mass of shaggy black hair broken by isolated
clumps of twisted, massive horns, it looked more like a landscape of hell than an assembly of temporarily inanimate herbivores. When Lauren killed the engine and popped open the
cabin door, Flinx was assailed by a powerful odor and the
steady sonority of the herd’s breathing. Earth humming, he
thought.
Lauren had the dart rifle out and ready as they approached
the herd on foot. Flinx followed her and tried to pretend that
the black cliffs that towered over them were basalt and not
flesh.
“There.” She pointed between a pair of slowly heaving
bulks at a medium-sized animal. Picking her spot, she sighted
the long barrel carefully before putting three darts behind the
massive skull. The mare stirred, coughing once. Then the head,
which had begun to rise, relaxed, slowly sinking back to the
surface. Flinx and Lauren held their breath, but the slight activity had failed to rouse any of their target’s neighbors.
Lauren fearlessly strode between the two hulks that formed
a living canyon and unslung her backpack next to the tranquilized mare. Before leaving the skimmer, she had extracted
several objects from its stores. These she now methodically
laid out in a row on the ground and set to work. Flinx
watched with interest as knife and tools he didn’t recognize
did their work.
One container filled rapidly with blood. A second filled
more rapidly with a green crystalline liquid. Lauren’s face
was screwed up like a knot, and as soon as the aroma of the
green fluid reached Flinx, he knew why. The scent was as
overpowering as anything his nostrils had ever encountered.
Fortunately, the smell was not bad, merely overwhelming.
A loud, sharp grunt sounded from behind him. He turned,
to find himself gazing in horrified fascination at a great
crimson eye. An absurdly tiny black pupil floated in the center of that blood-red disk. Then the eyelid rolled like a curtain over the apparition. Flinx did not relax.

174

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“Hurry up!” he called softly over his shoulder. “I think
this one’s waking up.”
“We’re not finished here yet,” Lauren replied, stoppering
the second bottle and setting to work with a low-power laser.
“I have to close both wounds first.”
“Let nature close them,” he urged her, keeping an eye on
the orb that had fixed blankly on him. The eyelid rippled, and
he feared that the next time it opened, it would likely be to
full awareness.
“You know me better than that,” she said firmly. Flinx
waited, screaming silently for her to hurry. Finally, she said,
“That’s done. We can go.”
They hurried back through the bulwark of black hair. Flinx
did not allow himself to relax until they sat once more inside
the skimmer. He spent much of the time trying to soothe Pip;
in response to its master’s worry, it had developed a nervous
twitch.
Despite the tight seal, the miasma rising from the green
bottle nearly choked him. There was no odor from the container of blood.
“The green is the oil,” she explained unnecessarily. “It’s
the rutting season.”
“I can see what you have in mind to do with that,” Flinx
told her, “but why the blood?”
“Released in the open air, the concentrated oil would be
enough to interest the males of the herd. We need to do more
than just interest them. We need to drive them a little crazy.
The only way to do that is to convince them that a ready female is in danger. The herd’s females will respond to that,
too.” She set to work with the skimmer’s simple store of
chemicals.
“You ought to be around sometime when the males are
awake and fighting,” she said to him as she mixed oil, blood,
and various catalysts in a sealed container. Flinx was watching the herd anxiously. “The whole forest shakes. Even the
tallest trees tremble. When two of the big males connect with
those skulls and horns, you can hear the sound of the collision echo for kilometers.”


175

Five minutes later, she held a large flask up to the dim
early-morning light. “There, that should do it. Pheromones
and blood and a few other nose-ticklers. If this doesn’t draw
them, nothing will.”
“They’ll set off the alarm when they cross the sonic
fence,” he reminded her.
“Yes, but by that time they’ll be so berserk, nothing will
turn them. Then it won’t matter what they set off.” She smiled
nastily, then hesitated at the thought. “My only concern is
that we find your mother before they start in on the buildings.”
“We’d better,” Flinx said.
“There should be enough confusion,” she went on, “to distract everyone’s attention. Unless they’re downright inhuman,
the inhabitants of the camp aren’t going to be thinking of
much of anything beyond saving their own skins.
“As to getting your mother out fast, I think we can assume
that she’s not in the hangar area or the power station or that
central tower. That leaves the two long structures off to the
west. If we can get inside and get her out before whoever’s in
charge comes to his senses, we should be able to get away
before anyone realizes what’s happening.
“Remember, we’ll be the only ones ready for what’s going
to happen. A lot will depend on how these people react.
They’re obviously not stupid, but I don’t see how anyone
could be adaptable enough to react calmly to what we’re
going to do to them. Besides, I don’t have any better ideas.”
Flinx shook his head. “Neither do I. I can see one difficulty, though. If we’re going to convince this herd that they’re
chasing after an injured Devilope in heat, we’re going to
have to stay on the ground. I don’t see them following the
scent up in the air.”
“Quite right, and we have to make our actions as believable as possible. That means hugging the surface. Not only
would tree-level flight confuse the herd, air currents would
carry the scent upward too quickly and dissipate it too fast.”
“Then what happens,” Flinx pressed on, “if this idea works

176

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

and the herd does follow us back toward the camp and we hit
a tree or stall or something?”
Lauren shrugged. “Can you climb?”
“There aren’t many trees in Drallar free for the climbing,”
he told her, “but I’ve done a lot of climbing on the outsides
of buildings.”
“You’ll find little difference,” she assured him, “with the
kind of motivation you’ll have if the skimmer stalls. If something happens, head for the biggest tree you can find. I think
they’ll avoid the emergents. The smaller stuff they’ll just ignore.” She hesitated, stared sideways at him. “You want to
wait a little while to think it over?”
“We’re wasting time talking,” he replied, knowing that
every minute brought Mother Mastiff closer and closer to
whatever fate her abductors had planned for her. “I’m ready
if you are.”
“I’m not ready,” she said, “but I never will be, for this. So
we might as well go.” She settled into the pilot’s chair and
thumbed a control. The rear of the cabin’s canopy swung upward.
“Climb into the back. When I give the word, you uncap
the flask and pour out, oh, maybe a tenth of the contents.
Then hold it out back, keep it open, and pour a tenth every
time I say so. Got it?”
“Got it,” he assured her with more confidence than he felt.
“You just drive this thing and make sure we don’t get into an
argument with a tree.”
“Don’t worry about that.” She gave him a last smile before
turning to the control console.
The skimmer rose and turned, heading slowly back toward
the somnolent herd. When they were just ten meters from the
nearest animal, Lauren pivoted the craft and hovered, studying the scanner’s display of the forest ahead.
Violent grunts and an occasional bleating sound began to
issue from the herd as Flinx held the still tightly sealed flask
over the stern of the skimmer. He looked around until he
found a piece of thin cloth and tied it across his nose and
mouth.


177

“I should have thought of that,” she murmured, watching
him. “Sorry.”
“Don’t you want one?” he asked.
She shook her head. “I’m up here, and the wind will carry
the scent back away from me. I’ll be all right. You ready?”
Her hands tightened on the wheel.
“Ready,” he said. “You ready, Pip?”
The flying snake said nothing; it did not even hiss in response. But Flinx could feel the coils tighten expectantly
around his left arm and shoulder.
“Open and pour,” she instructed him.
Flinx popped the seal on the flask as Lauren slowly edged
the skimmer forward. Even with the improvised mask and a
breeze to carry the aroma away from him, the odor was all
but overpowering. His eyes watered as his nostrils rebelled.
Somehow he kept his attention on the task at hand and
slowly measured out a tenth of the liquid.
A violent, querulous bellow rose from several massive
throats. As the skimmer slipped past a cathedral-like cluster
of hardwoods, Flinx could see one huge male pushing itself
erect. It seemed to dominate the forest even though the great
trees rose high above. The metallic red eyes were fully open
now, the tiny black pupils looking like holes in the crimson.
The Devilope shook its head from side to side, back and
forth, and thundered. It took a step forward, then another.
Behind it, the rest of the herd was rising, the initial uncertain
bellowing turning to roars of desire and rage. A second male
started forward in the wake of the first; then a third took up
the long, ponderous stride. At this rate, Flinx thought, it
would take them days to reach the camp.
But even as he watched and worried, the pace of the awakening herd began to increase. It took time for such massive
animals to get going. Once they did, they ate up distance.
Not long after, Flinx found himself wishing for the skimmer
to accelerate, and accelerate again.
The herd was bearing down on the weaving, dodging craft.
Lauren had to avoid even the smaller trees, which the herd
ignored in its fury to locate the source of that pungent, elec-


178

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

trifying odor. She turned to yell something to him, but he
couldn’t hear her anymore.
Trees whizzed by as Lauren somehow managed to increase their speed without running into anything. Behind
them sounded a rising thunder as the noise of hundreds of
hooves pulverizing the earth mixed with the crackle of snapping tree trunks and the moan of larger boles being torn from
their roots.
Red eyes and horns were all Flinx could see as he poured
another tenth of the herd-maddening liquid from the flask,
drawing the thunder down on the fragile skimmer and its
even more fragile cargo. . . .
There was nothing in the small operating theater that had not
been thoroughly sanitized. Mother Mastiff had no strength
left to fight with as they gently but firmly strapped her to the
lukewarm table. Her curses and imprecations had been reduced to whimpered pleas, more reflex than anything else,
for she had seen by now that nothing would dissuade these
crazy people from their intentions. Eventually, she lost even
the will to beg and contented herself with glaring tightlipped at her tormentors.
Bright lights winked to life, blinding her. The tall black
woman stood to the right of the table, checking a palm-sized
circle of plastic. Mother Mastiff recognized the pressure syringe, and looked away from it.
Like her companions, Haithness wore a pale surgical gown
and a mask that left only her eyes showing. Nyassa-lee
plugged in the shears that would be used to depilate the subject’s skull. Brora, who would execute the actual implantation, stood off to one side examining a readout on the display
screen that hung just above and behind Mother Mastiff’s
head. Occasionally, he would glance down at a small table
holding surgical instruments and several square transparent
boxes frosted with cold. Inside the boxes were the microelectronic implants that he would place in the subject’s skull.
A globular metal mass hung from the ceiling above the
operating table, gleaming like a steel jellyfish. Wiry arms


179

and tendrils radiated from its underside. They would supply
power to attachments, suction through hosing, and supplementary service to any organs that exhibited signs of failure
during the operation. There were microthin filament arms
that could substitute for cerebral capillaries, tendrils that
could fuse or excavate bone, and devices that could by-pass
the lungs and provide oxygen directly to the blood.
“I’m ready to begin.” Brora smiled thinly across at
Nyassa-lee, who nodded. He looked to his other colleague.
“Haithness?” She answered him with her eyes as she readied
the syringe.
“A last instrument check, then,” he murmured, turning his
attention to the raised platform containing the microsurgical
instruments. Overhead, the jellyfish hummed expectantly.
“Now that’s funny.” He paused, frowning. “Look here.”
Both women leaned toward him. The instruments, the tiny
boxes with their frozen contents, even the platform itself,
seemed to be vibrating.
“Trouble over at power?” ventured Nyassa-lee. She glanced
upward and saw that the central support globe was swaying
slightly.
“I don’t know. Surely if it was anything serious, we would
have been told by now,” Brora muttered. The vibration intensified. One of the probes tumbled from the holding table and
clattered across the plastic floor. “It’s getting worse, I think.”
A faint rumble reached them from somewhere outside. Brora
thought it arose somewhere off to the west.
“Storm coming?” Nyassa-lee asked, frowning.
Brora shook his head. “Thunder wouldn’t make the table
shake, and Weather didn’t say anything about an early storm
watch. No quake, either. This region is seismically stable.”
The thunder that continued to grow in their ears did not
come down out of a distant sky but up out of the disturbed
earth itself. Abruptly, the alarm system came to life all
around the camp. The three surgeons stared in confusion at
one another as the rumbling shook not only tables and instruments but the whole building.
The warning sirens howled mournfully. There came a rip-

180

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

ping, tearing noise as something poured through the far end
of the conference room, missing the surgery by an appreciable margin. It was visible only for seconds, though in that
time it filled the entire chamber. Then it moved on, trailing
sections of false log and plastic stone in its wake, letting in
sky and mist and leaving behind a wide depression in the
stelacrete foundation beneath the floor. Haithness had the best
view as debris fell slowly from the roof to cover the mark: it
was a footprint.
Nyassa-lee tore off her surgical mask and raced for the
nearest doorway. Brora and Haithness were not far behind.
At their departure, Mother Mastiff, who had quietly consigned that portion of herself that was independent to oblivion, suddenly found her voice again and began screaming for
help.
Dust and insulation began to sift from the ceiling as the
violent shaking and rumbling continued to echo around her.
The multiarmed surgical sphere above the operating table
was now swinging dangerously back and forth and threatening, with each successive vibration, to tear free of its mounting.
Mother Mastiff did not waste her energy in a futile attempt
to break the straps that bound her. She knew her limits. Instead, she devoted her remaining strength to yelling at the
top of her lungs.
As soon as they had entered the monitored border surrounding the camp, Lauren had accelerated and charged at
dangerously high speed right past the central tower. Someone had had the presence of mind to respond to the frantic
alarm siren by reaching for a weapon, but the hastily aimed
and fired energy rifle missed well aft of the already fleeing
skimmer.
At the same time, the wielder of the rifle had seen something flung from the rear of the intruder. He had flinched, and
when no explosion had followed, leaned out of the thirdstory window to stare curiously at the broken glass and greenred liquid trickling down the side of the structure. He did not
puzzle over it for very long because his attention—and that


181

of his companions in the tower—was soon occupied by the
black tidal wave that thundered out of the forest.
The frustrated, enraged herd concentrated all its attention
on the strongest source of the infuriating odor. The central
tower, which contained the main communications and defensive instrumentation for the encampment, was soon reduced
to a mound of plastic and metal rubble.
Meanwhile, Lauren brought the skimmer around in a wide
circle and set it down between the two long buildings on the
west side of the camp. The camp personnel were too busy
trying to escape into the forest and dodging massive horns
and hoofs to wonder at the presence of the unfamiliar vehicle in their midst.
They had a fifty-fifty chance of picking the right building
on the first try. As luck would have it, they chose correctly . . . no thanks, Flinx thought, to his resolutely unhelpful Talent.
The roof was already beginning to cave in on the operating
theater when they finally reached that end of the building.
“Flinx, how’d ye—?” Mother Mastiff started to exclaim.
“How did he know how to find you?” Lauren finished for
her as she started working on the restraining straps binding
the older woman’s right arm.
“No,” Mother Mastiff corrected her, “I started to ask how
he managed to get here without any money, I didn’t think ye
could go anywhere on Moth without money.”
“I had a little, Mother.” Flinx smiled down at her. She appeared unhurt, simply worn out from her ordeal of the past
hectic, confusing days. “And I have other abilities, you know.”
“Ah.” She nodded somberly.
“No, not that,” he corrected her. “You’ve forgotten that
there are other ways to make use of things besides paying for
them.”
She laughed at that. The resounding cackle gladdened his
heart. For an instant, it dominated the screams and the echoes
of destruction that filled the air outside the building. The
earth quivered beneath his feet.
“Yes, yes, ye were always good at helping yourself to


182

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

whatever ye needed. Haven’t I warned ye time enough against
it? But I don’t think now be the time to reprimand ye.” She
looked up at Lauren, who was having a tough time with the
restraining straps.
“Now who,” she inquired, her eyebrows rising, “be this
one?”
“A friend,” Flinx assured her. “Lauren, meet Mother Mastiff.”
“Charmed, grandma.” Lauren’s teeth clenched as she
fought with the recalcitrant restraints. “Damn magnetic
catches built into the polyethelene.” She glanced across to
Flinx. “We may have to cut her loose.”
“I know you’ll handle it.” Flinx turned and jogged toward
the broken doorway, ducking just in time to avoid a section
of roof brace as it crashed to the floor.
“Hey, where the hell do you think you’re going?” Lauren
shouted at him.
“I want some answers,” he yelled back. “I still don’t know
what this is all about, and I’ll be damned if I’m leaving here
without trying to find out!”
“ ’Tis you, boy!” Mother Mastiff yelled after him. “They
wanted to use me to influence you!” But he was already out
of earshot.
Mother Mastiff laid her head back down and stared worriedly at the groaning ceiling. “That boy,” she mumbled, “I
don’t know that he hasn’t been more trouble than he’s worth.”
The upper restraint suddenly came loose with a click, and
Lauren breathed a sigh of relief. She was as conscious as
Mother Mastiff of the creaking, unsteady ceiling and the
heavy mass of the surgical globe swaying like a pendulum
over the operating table.
“I doubt you really mean that, woman,” she said evenly,
“and you ought to stop thinking of him as a boy.” The two
women exchanged a glance, old eyes shooting questions,
young ones providing an eloquent reply.
Confident that Lauren would soon free Mother Mastiff, Flinx
was able to let the rage that had been bottled up inside him


183

for days finally surge to the fore. So powerful was the suddenly freed emotion that an alarmed Pip slid off its master’s
shoulder and followed anxiously above. The tiny triangular
head darted in all directions in an attempt to locate the asyet-unperceived source of Flinx’s hate.
The fury boiling within him was barely under control.
“They’re not going to get away with what they’ve done,” he
told himself repeatedly. “They’re not going to get away with
it.” He did not know what he was going to do if he confronted these still-unknown assailants, only that he had to do
something. A month ago, he would never have considered
going after so dangerous an enemy, but the past weeks had
done much for his confidence.
The herd was beginning to lose some of its fury even as its
members still hunted for the puzzling source of their discomfort. Females with young were the first to break away,
retreating back into the forest. Then there were only the
solitary males roaming the encampment, venting their frustration and anger on anything larger than a rock. Occasionally, Flinx passed the remains of those who had not succeeded
in fleeing into the trees in time to avoid the rampaging Devilopes. There was rarely more than a red smear staining the
ground.
He was heading for the hangar he and Lauren had identified from their hilltop. It was the logical final refuge. It
didn’t take long for him to reach the building. As he strode
single-mindedly across the open grounds, it never occurred
to him to wonder why none of the snorting, pawing Devilopes paused to turn and stomp him into the earth.
The large doorway fronting the hangar had been pushed
aside. Flinx could see movement and hear faint commands.
Without hesitation, he walked inside and saw a large transport skimmer being loaded with crates. The loading crew
worked desperately under the direction of a small, elderly
Oriental woman. Flinx just stood in the portal, staring. Now
that he had located someone in a position of authority, he
really didn’t know what to do next. Anger and chaos had

184

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

brought him to the place; there had been no room in his
thoughts for reasoned preparation.
A tall black lady standing in the fore section of the skimmer stopped barking orders long enough to glance toward
the doorway. Her eyes locked on his. Instead of hatred, Flinx
found himself thinking that in her youth this must have been
a strikingly beautiful woman. Cold, though. Both women, so
cold. Her hair was nearly all gray, and so were her eyes.
“Haithness.” A man rushed up behind her. “We haven’t got
time for daydreaming. We—”
She pointed with a shaky finger. Brora followed her finger
and found himself gaping at a slim, youthful figure in the
doorway. “That boy,” Brora whispered. “Is it him?”
“Yes, but look higher, Brora. Up in the light.”
The stocky man’s gaze rose, and his air of interested detachment suddenly deserted him. His mouth dropped open.
“Oh, my God,” he exclaimed, “an Alaspinian minidrag.”
“You see,” Haithness murmured as she looked down at
Flinx, regarding him as she would any other laboratory subject, “it explains so much.” Around them, the sounds of the
encampment being destroyed continued to dominate everyone else’s attention.
Brora regained his composure. “It may, it may, but the boy
may not even be aware that—”
Flinx strained to understand their mumblings, but there
was too much noise behind him. “Where did you come
from?” he shouted toward the skimmer. His new-found maturity quickly deserted him; suddenly, he was only a furious,
frustrated adolescent. “Why did you kidnap my mother? I
don’t like you, you know. I don’t like any of you. I want to
know why you’ve done what you’ve done!”
“Be careful,” Nyassa-lee called up to them. “Remember
the subject’s profile!” She hoped they were getting this upstairs.
“He’s not dangerous, I tell you,” Haithness insisted. “This
demonstrates his harmlessness. If he was in command of
himself, he’d be throwing more than childish queries at us by
now.”


185

“But the catalyst creature.” Brora waved a hand toward the
flying snake drifting above Flinx.
“We don’t know that it’s catalyzing anything,” Haithness
reminded him, “because we don’t know what the boy’s abilities are as yet. They are only potentials. The minidrag may be
doing nothing for him because it has nothing to work with as
yet, other than a damnable persistence and a preternatural
talent for following a thin trail.” She continued to examine
the subject almost within their grasp. “I would give a great
deal to learn how he came to be in possession of a minidrag.”
Brora found himself licking his lips. “We failed with the
mother. Maybe we should try taking the subject directly in
spite of our experience with the girl.”
“No,” she argued. “We don’t have the authority to take that
kind of risk. Cruachan must be consulted first. It’s his decision to make. The important thing is for us to get out of here
now with our records and ourselves intact.”
“I disagree.” Brora continued to study the boy, fascinated
by his calm. The subject appeared indifferent to the hoofed
death that was devastating the encampment. “Our initial plan
has failed. Now is the time for us to improvise. We should
seize the opportunity.”
“Even if it’s our last opportunity?”
Flinx shouted at them. “What are you talking about? Why
don’t you answer me?”
Haithness turned and seemed about to reply when a vast
groaning shook the hangar. Suddenly, its east wall bulged inward. There were screams of despair as the loading crew
flung cargo in all directions and scattered, ignoring Nyassalee’s entreaties.
They didn’t scatter fast enough.
Walls and roof came crashing down, burying personnel,
containers, and the big cargo skimmer. Three bull Devilopes
pushed through the ruined wall as Flinx threw himself backward through the doorway. Metal, plastic, and flesh blended
into a chaotic pulp beneath massive hoofs. Fragments of
plastic flew through the air around Flinx. One nicked his
shoulder.


186

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

Red eyes flashing, one of the bulls wheeled toward the
single figure sprawled on the ground. The great head lowered.
Coincidence, luck, something more: whatever had protected Flinx from the attention of the herd until now abruptly
vanished. The bull looming overhead was half insane with
fury. Its intent was evident in its gaze: it planned to make
Flinx into still another red stain on the earth.
Something so tiny it was not noticed swooped in front of
that lowering skull and spat into one plate-sized red eye. The
Devilope bull blinked once, twice against the painful intrusion. That was enough to drive the venom into its bloodstream.
The monster opened its mouth and let out a frightening bellow
as it pulled away from Flinx. It started to shake its head violently, ignoring the other two bulls, which continued to crush
the remains of the hangar underfoot.
Flinx scrambled to his feet and raced from the scene of destruction, heading back toward the building where he had
left Lauren and Mother Mastiff. Pip rejoined him, choosing
to glide just above its master’s head, temporarily disdaining
its familiar perch.
Behind them, the Devilope’s bellowing turned thick and
soft. Then there was a crash as it sat down on its rump. It sat
for several moments more before the huge front legs slipped
out from under it. Very slowly, like an iceberg calving from
a glacier, it fell over on its side. The eye that had taken Pip’s
venom was gone, leaving behind only an empty socket.
Breathing hard, Flinx rushed back into the building housing the surgery and nearly ran over the fleeing Lauren and
Mother Mastiff. He embraced his mother briefly, intensely,
then swung her left arm over his shoulder to give her support.
Lauren supported the old woman at her other shoulder and
looked curiously at Flinx. “Did you find who you were looking for?”
“I think so,” he told her. “Sennar and Soba are properly revenged. The Devilopes did it for them.”



187

Lauren nodded as they emerged from the remains of the
building. Outside, the earth-shaking had lessened.
“The herd’s dispersing. They’ll reform in the forest, wonder what came over them, and likely go back to sleep. As
soon as they start doing that, this camp will begin filling up
with those who managed to escape. We need to improve our
transportation, and fast. Remember, there’s nowhere near a
full charge in the skimmer. You and I could walk it, but—”
“I can walk anywhere ye can,” Mother Mastiff insisted.
Her condition belied her bravado—if not for the support of
Flinx and Lauren, she would not have been able to stand.
“It’s all right, Mother,” Flinx told her. “We’ll find something.”
They boarded their skimmer. Lauren rekeyed the ignition,
removed to prevent potential escapees from absconding with
their craft, and they cruised around the ruined building back
into the heart of the camp.
Their fear of danger from survivors was unfounded. The
few men and women who wandered out of their way were
too stunned by the catastrophe to offer even a challenging
question. The majority of them had been administrative or
maintenance personnel, quite unaware of the importance of
Flinx or Mother Mastiff.
The Devilopes were gone. The power station was hardly
damaged, perhaps because it lay apart from the rest of the
encampment, perhaps because it operated on automatic and
did not offer the herd any living targets. None of the camp
personnel materialized to challenge their use of the station’s
recharge facility, though Lauren kept a ready finger on the
trigger of the dart rifle until a readout showed that the skimmer once again rode on full power.
“I don’t think we have to worry about pursuit,” she declared. “It doesn’t look like there’s anyone left to pursue. If
the leaders of this bunch got caught in that trampled hangar
as you say, Flinx, then we’ve nothing to worry about.”
“I didn’t get my answers,” he muttered disappointedly.
Then, louder, he said, “Let’s get out of this place.”



“Yes,” Mother Mastiff agreed quickly. She looked imploringly at Lauren. “I be a city lady. The country life doesn’t
agree with me.” She grinned her irrepressible grin, and Flinx
knew she was going to be all right.
Lauren smiled and nudged the accelerator. The skimmer
moved, lifting above the surrounding trees. They cruised
over several disoriented, spent Devilopes and sped south as
fast as the skimmer’s engine could push them.
“I didn’t learn what this was all about,” Flinx continued to
mutter from his seat near the rear of the cabin. “Do you know
why they abducted you, Mother? What did they want with
you?”
It was on her lips to tell him the tale the Meliorares had
told her the previous night—was it only last night? Something made her hesitate. Natural caution, concern for him. A
lifetime of experience that taught one not to blunder ahead
and blurt out the first thing that comes to mind, no matter
how true it might be. There were things she needed to learn,
things he needed to learn. There would always be time.
“You’ve said ’tis a long story as to how ye managed to
trace me, boy. My tale’s a long one, too. As to what they
wanted with me, ’tis enough for ye to know now that it involves an old, old crime I once participated in and a thirst for
revenge that never dies. Ye can understand that.”
“Yes, yes I can.” He knew that Mother Mastiff had enjoyed
a diverse and checkered youth. “You can tell me all about it
after we’re back home.”
“Yes,” she said, pleased that he had apparently accepted
her explanation. “After we’re safely back home.” She looked
toward the pilot’s chair and saw Lauren gazing quizzically
back at her.
Mother Mastiff put a finger to her lips. The other woman
nodded, not fully understanding but sensitive enough to go
along with the older woman’s wishes.

Several hours passed. The air was smooth, the mist thin, the ride
comfortable as the skimmer slipped southward. Mother
Mastiff looked back toward the rear of the craft to see Flinx
sound asleep. His useful if loathsome pet was, as usual, curled
up close to the boy’s head.
She studied the pilot. Pretty, hard, and self-contained, she
decided. Night was beginning to settle over the forest speeding by below. Within the sealed canopy of the skimmer, it
was warm and dry. “What be your interest in my boy?” she
asked evenly.
“As a friend. I also had a personal debt to pay,” Lauren
explained. “Those people who abducted you slaughtered a
couple of rare animals who were long-time companions of
mine. ‘Revenge never dies.’ ” She smiled. “You said that a while
ago, remember?”
“How did ye encounter him?”
“He appeared at the lodge I manage on a lake near here.”
“Ah! The fight, yes, I remember. So that place was yours.”
“I just manage it. That’s where I’m heading. I can help you
arrange return passage to Drallar from there.”
“How do ye know we’re from the city?”
Lauren gestured with a thumb back toward the sleeping
figure behind them. “He told me. He told me a lot.”
“That’s odd,” Mother Mastiff commented. “He’s not the
talkative kind, that boy.” She went quiet for a while, watching the forest slide past below. Flinx slept on, enjoying his
first relaxed sleep in some time.
“ ’Tis an awful lot of trouble you’ve gone through on his

190

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

behalf,” she finally declared, “especially for a total stranger.
Especially for one so young.”
“Youth is relative,” Lauren said. “Maybe he brought out
the maternal instinct in me.”
“Don’t get profound with me, child,” Mother Mastiff
warned her, “nor sassy, either.” Ironic, that last comment,
though. Hadn’t she once felt the same way about the boy
many years ago? “I’ve watched ye, seen the way ye look at
him. Do ye love him?”
“Love him?” Lauren’s surprise was quite genuine. Then,
seeing that Mother Mastiff was serious, she forced herself to
respond solemnly. “Certainly not! At least, not in that way.
I’m fond of him, sure. I respect him immensely for what he’s
managed to do on his own, and I also feel sorry for him.
There is affection, certainly. But the kind of love you’re talking about? Not a chance.”
“ ‘Youth is relative,’ ” Mother Mastiff taunted her gently.
“One must be certain. I’ve seen much in my life, child. There’s
little that can surprise me, or at least so I thought until a few
weeks ago.” She cackled softly. “I’m glad to hear ye say this.
Anything else could do harm to the boy.”
“I would never do that,” Lauren assured her. She glanced
back at Flinx’s sleeping form. “I’m going to drop you at the
lodge. My assistant’s name is Sal. I’ll make some pretense of
going in to arrange your transportation and talk to him. Then
I’ll take off across the lake. I think it will be better for him
that way. I don’t want to hurt him.” She hesitated. “You don’t
think he’ll do anything silly, like coming after me?”
Mother Mastiff considered thoughtfully, then shook her
head. “He’s just a little too sensible. He’ll understand, I’m
sure. As for me, I don’t know what to say, child. You’ve been
so helpful to him and to me.”
“ ‘Revenge,’ remember?” She grinned, the lights from the
console glinting off her high cheekbones. “He’s a funny one,
your Flinx. I don’t think I’ll forget him.”
“Ye know, child, ’tis peculiar,” Mother Mastiff muttered as
she gazed out into the clouds and mist, “but you’re not the
first person to say that.”



191

“And I expect,” Lauren added as she turned her attention
back to her driving, “that I won’t be the last, either.”
The mudder circled the devastated encampment several times
before leaving the cover of the forest and cruising among the
ruined buildings. Eventually, it settled to ground near the
stump of what had been a central tower.
The woman who stepped out was clad in a dark-green and
brown camouflage suit, as was the man at the vehicle’s controls. He kept the engine running as his companion marched
a half-dozen meters toward the tower, stopped, and turned a
slow circle, hands on hips. Then they both relaxed, recognizing that whatever had obliterated the installation no longer
posed any threat. No discussion was necessary—they had
worked together for a long time, and words had become superfluous.
The man killed the mudder’s engine and exited to join his
associate in surveying the wreckage. A light rain was falling.
It did not soak them, for the camouflage suits repelled moisture. The field was temporary, but from what they could see
of the encampment, they wouldn’t be in the place long enough
to have to recharge.
“I’m sick of opening packages, only to find smaller packages inside,” the man said ruefully. “I’m sick of having every
new avenue we take turn into a dead end.” He gestured toward
the destruction surrounding them; crumpled buildings, isolated wisps of smoke rising from piles of debris, slag where
power had melted metal.
“Dead may be the right description, too, judging by the
looks of things.”
“Not necessarily.” His companion only half heard him.
She was staring at a wide depression near her feet. It was
pointed at one end. A second, identical mark dented the
ground several meters away, another an equal distance beyond. As she traced their progress, she saw that they formed
a curving trail. She had not noticed them at first because they
were filled with water.

192

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

She kicked in the side of the one nearest her boots. “Footprints,” she said curtly.
“Hoof prints,” the man corrected her. His gaze went to the
mist-shrouded woods that surrounded the camp. “I wish I
knew more about this backwater world.”
“Don’t criticize yourself. We didn’t plan to spend so much
time here. Besides, the urban center is pretty cosmopolitan.”
“Yeah, and civilization stops at its outskirts. The rest of the
planet’s too primitive to rate a class. That’s what’s slowed us
up from the beginning. Too many places to hide.”
Her gaze swept the ruins. “Doesn’t seem to have done
them much good.”
“No,” he agreed. “I saw the bones on the way in, same as
you did. I wonder if the poor monster died here, too?”
“Don’t talk like that,” she said uneasily. “You know how
we’re supposed to refer to him. You don’t watch yourself,
you’ll put that in an official communiqué sometime and find
yourself up for a formal reprimand.”
“Ah, yes, I forgot,” he murmured. “The disadvantaged
child. Pardon me, Rose, but this whole business has been a
lousy job from the beginning. You’re right, though. I shouldn’t
single him out. It’s not his fault. The contrary. He isn’t responsible for what the Meliorares did to him.”
“Right,” the woman said. “Well, he’ll soon be repaired.”
“If he got away,” her companion reminded her.
“Surely some of them did,” the woman said.
The man pointed toward several long walls of rubble that
might once have been buildings. “Speak of the devil.”
A figure was headed toward them. It took longer than was
necessary because it did not travel in a straight line. It attempted to, but every so often would stagger off to its right
like a wheel with its bearings out. The man’s clothes were
filthy, his boots caked with mud. They had not been changed
in several days. He waved weakly at the newcomers. Save for
the limp with which he walked, he seemed intact. His stringy
hair was soaked and plastered like wire to his face and head.
He made no effort to brush it from his eyes.



193

He seemed indifferent to the identity of the new arrivals.
His concerns were more prosaic. “Have you any food?”
“What happened here?” the woman asked him as soon as
he had limped to within earshot.
“Have you any food? God knows there’s plenty of water.
That’s all this miserable place has to offer is plenty of water. All
you want even when you don’t want it. I’ve been living on
nuts and berries and what I’ve been able to salvage from the
camp kitchen. Had to fight the scavengers for everything.
Miserable, stinking hole.”
“What happened here?” the woman repeated calmly. The
man appeared to be in his late twenties. Too young, she knew,
for him to be a member of the Meliorare’s inner circle. Just
an unlucky employee.
“Caster,” he mumbled. “Name’s Caster. Excuse me a minute.” He slid down his crude, handmade crutch until he was
sprawled on the damp earth. “Broke my ankle, I think. It hasn’t
healed too well. I need to have it set right.” He winced, then
looked up at them.
“Damned if I know. What happened here, I mean. One
minute I was replacing communications modules, and the
next all hell opened up. You should’ve seen ’em. Goddamn
big as the tower, every one of ’em. Seemed like it, anyhow.
Worst thing was those dish-sized bloody eyes with tiny little
black specks lookin’ down at you like a machine. Not decent,
them eyes. I don’t know what brought ’em down on us like
they came, but it sure as hell wasn’t a kind providence.”
“Are you the only survivor?” the man asked.
“I haven’t seen anyone else, if that’s what you mean.” His
voice turned pleading. “Hey, have you got any food?”
“We can feed you,” the woman said with a smile. “Listen,
who were you working for here?”
“Bunch of scientists. Uppity bunch. Never talked to us ordinary folk.” He forced a weak laugh. “Paid well, though.
Keep your mouth shut and do your job and see the countryside. Just never expected the countryside to come visiting
me. I’ve had it with this outfit. Ready to go home. They can


1

keep their damn severance fee.” A new thought occurred to
him, and he squinted up at the couple standing over him.
“Hey, you mean you don’t know who they were? Who are
you people, anyway?”
They exchanged a glance; then the woman shrugged. “No
harm in it. Maybe it’ll help his memory.”
She pulled a small plastic card from an inside pocket and
showed it to the injured man. It was bright red. On it was
printed a name, then her world of origin: Terra. The eyes of the
man on the ground widened slightly at that. The series of letters which followed added confusion to his astonishment.
FLT-I-PC-MO. The first section he understood. It told him
that this visitor was an autonomous agent, rank Inspector, of
the Commonwealth law enforcement arm, the Peaceforcers.
“What does ‘MO’ stand for?” he asked.
“Moral Operations section,” she told him, repocketing the
ident. “These scientists you worked for—even though you
had little or no personal contact with them, you must have
seen them from time to time?”
“Sure. They kept pretty well to themselves, but I sometimes saw ’em strolling around.”
“They were all quite elderly, weren’t they?”
He frowned. “You know, I didn’t think much about it, but
yeah, I guess they were. Does that mean something?”
“It needn’t trouble you,” the man said soothingly. “You’ve
said you haven’t seen anyone else around since this horde
of beasts overwhelmed you. That doesn’t necessarily mean
you’re the only survivor. I assume some form of transportation was maintained for local use here. You didn’t see anyone
get away in a mudder or skimmer?”
The man on the ground thought a moment, and his face
brightened. “Yeah, yeah I did. There was this old lady and a
younger one—good-looking, the younger one. There was a
kid with ’em. I didn’t recognize ’em, but there were always
people coming and going here.”
“How old was the kid?” the woman asked him.
“Damned if I know. I was running like blazes in one direction, and their skimmer was headed in the other, so I didn’t




195

stop to ask questions. Kid had red hair, though. I remember
that. Redheads seem scarce on this ball of dirt.”
“A charmed life,” the older man murmured to his companion. There was admiration as well as frustration in his
voice. “The boy leads a charmed life.”
“As you well know, there may be a lot more than charm involved,” the woman said tersely. “The old woman he refers
to is obviously the adopting parent, but who was the other?”
She frowned, now worried.
“It doesn’t matter,” her companion said. He spoke to the
injured man. “Look, how well do you remember the attitudes
of this trio? I know you didn’t have much time. This younger
woman, the attractive one. Did she give the appearance of
being in control of the other two? Did it seem as if she was
holding the boy and old lady under guard?”
“I told you, I didn’t get much of a look,” Caster replied. “I
didn’t see any weapons showing, if that’s what you’re talking
about.”
“Interesting,” the woman murmured. “They may have enlisted an ally. Another complication to contend with.” She
sighed. “Damn this case, anyway. If it didn’t carry such a
high priority with HQ I’d ask to be taken off.”
“You know how far we’d get with a request like that,” her
companion snorted. “We’ll get ’em. We’ve come so damn
close so many times already. The odds have to catch up with
us.”
“Maybe. Remember your packages inside packages,” she
taunted him gently. “Still, it might be easy now.” She waved
at the ruined camp. “It doesn’t look like many, if any, of the
Meliorares got away.”
“Melio—Meliorares?” The injured man gaped at them. “Hey,
I know that name. Weren’t they the—?” His eyes widened with
realization. “Now wait a second, people, I didn’t—”
“Take it easy,” the man in the camouflage suit urged
him. “Your surprise confirms your innocence. Besides, you’re
too young. They’ve taken in smarter folk than you down over
the years.”
“We shouldn’t have that much trouble relocating the boy.”

196



She was feeling confident now. “We should be able to pick
them up at our leisure.”
“I wish I were as sanguine,” her associate murmured,
chewing on his lower lip. “There’s been nothing leisurely
about this business from the start.”
“I didn’t know,” the injured man was babbling. “I didn’t
know they were Meliorares. None of us did, none of us. I just
answered an ad for a technician. No one ever said a word to
any of us about—!”
“Take it easy, I told you,” the older man snapped, disgusted
at the other’s reaction. People panic so easily, he thought.
“We’ll see that your leg is set properly, and there’s food in the
mudder. One thing, though: you’ll have to undergo a truth
scan. There’s no harm in that, you know. And afterwards, it’s
likely you’ll be released without being charged.”
The man struggled to his feet, using his crutch as a prop.
He had calmed down somewhat at the other’s reassuring
words. “They never said a word about anything like that.”
“They never do,” the woman commented. “That’s how
they’ve been able to escape custody for so many years. The
gullible never ask questions.”
“Meliorares. Hell,” the man mumbled. “If I’d known—”
“If you’d known, then you’d never have taken their money
and gone to work for them, right?”
“Of course not. I’ve got my principles.”
“Sure you do.” He waved a hand, forestalling the other
man’s imminent protest. “Excuse me, friend. I’ve developed
a rather jaundiced view of humanity during the eight years
I’ve spent in MO. Not your fault. Come on,” he said to the
woman named Rose, “there’s nothing more for us here.”
“Me, too? You’re sure?” The younger man limped after
them.
“Yeah, you, too,” the Peaceforcer said. “You’re sure you
don’t mind giving a deposition under scan? It’s purely a voluntary procedure.”
“Be glad to,” the other said, eager to please. “Damn lousy
Meliorares, taking in innocent workers like that. Hope you
mindwipe every last one of ’em.”



197

“There’s food in back,” the woman said evenly as they
climbed into the mudder.
“It’s strange,” her companion remarked as they seated
themselves, “how the local wildlife overran this place just in
time to allow our quarry to flee. The histories of these children are full of such timely coincidences.”
“I know,” Rose said as the mudder’s engine rose to a
steady hum and the little vehicle slid forward into the forest. “Take this flying snake we’ve been told about. It’s from
where?”
“Alaspin, if the reports are accurate.”
“That’s right, Alaspin. If I remember my galographics correctly, that world’s a fair number of parsecs from here. One
hell of a coincidence.”
“But not impossible.”
“It seems like nothing’s impossible where these children
are concerned. The sooner we take this one into custody and
turn him over to the psychosurgeons, the better I’ll like it.
Give me a good clean deviant murder any time. This mutanthunting gives me the shivers.”
“He’s not a mutant, Rose,” her companion reminded her.
“That’s as inaccurate as me calling him a monster.” He
glanced toward the rear of the mudder. Their passenger was
gobbling food from their stores and ignoring their conversation. “We don’t even know that he possesses any special
abilities. The last two we tracked down were insipidly normal.”
“The Meliorares must have thought differently,” Rose
challenged. “They’ve gone to a lot of trouble to try and catch
this one and look what’s happened to them.”
They were well into the forest now, heading south. The ruined camp was out of sight, swallowed up by trees and
rolling terrain behind them.
“Some big native animals did them in,” her companion
said. “A maddened herd that had nothing whatsoever to do
with the boy or any imagined abilities of his. So far, his trail
shows only that he’s the usual Meliorare disturbed youth.
You worry too much, Rose.”



“Yeah. I know. It’s the nature of the business, Feodor.”
But their concerns haunted them as night began to overtake the racing mudder.
The woman manning the communications console was very
old, almost as old and shaky as the small starship itself, but
her hands played the instrumentation with a confidence born
of long experience, and her hearing was sharp enough for
her to be certain she had not missed any portion of the broadcast. She looked up from her station into the face of the tall,
solemn man standing next to her and shook her head slowly.
“I’m sorry, Dr. Cruachan, sir. They’re not responding to
any of our call signals. I can’t even raise their tight-beam frequency anymore.”
The tall man nodded slowly, reluctantly. “You know what
this means?”
“Yes,” she admitted, sadness tinging her voice. “Nyassalee, Haithness, Brora—all gone now. All those years.” Her
voice sank to a whisper.
“We can’t be sure,” Cruachan murmured. “Not one hundred percent. It’s only that,” he hesitated, “they ought to have
responded by now, at least via the emergency unit.”
“That stampede was terrible luck, sir.”
“If it was bad luck,” he said softly. “History shows that
where the subject children are concerned, the unknown
sometimes gives luck a push—or a violent shove.”
“I know that, sir,” the communicator said. She was tired,
Cruachan knew; but then they were all tired. Time was running out for them and for the Meliorare Society as well as
for its noble, much-misunderstood goals. There had been
thoughts, years ago, of training new acolytes in the techniques
and aims of genetic manipulation pioneered by the Society,
but the onus under which they were forced to operate made
the cooperation of foolish younger researchers impossible to
obtain, thanks to the unrelenting barrage of slanderous propaganda propagated by the Church and the Commonwealth
government.



199

Curse them all for the ignorant primitives they were! The
Society was not dead yet!
Haithness, Nyassa-lee, Brora—the names were a dirge in
his mind. If they were truly gone now, and it seemed that
must be so, that left very few to carry on the Work. The conflict within him was strong. Should he press on or flee to set
up operations elsewhere? So many old friends, colleagues,
great scientific minds, lost; was this one subject worth it?
They still had no proof that he was. Only graphs and figures
to which the computers held. But the computers didn’t care.
Nobody cared.
There was nothing to indicate that the subject had been in
any way responsible for the unfortunate stampede that had
destroyed the camp together with their hopes. Of course, it
was quite possible that the subject had perished along with
the others, Cruachan mused. If not, if he decided to pursue
this one to a conclusion, then there could be no more external manipulation attempted. They would have to confront the
subject directly, as they had years ago tried to do with the
girl.
It was a long, roundabout course to their next “safe” station.
Cruachan was not at all confident of working through another
several years of hiding and seeking out another promising
subject. If the long arm of the Peaceforcers had not caught up
with him by then, time and old age were liable to do the job for
the government. They had come a long way together, he and
his associates. A great effort; many lives had been expended to
keep the project alive. He and his few remaining colleagues
had to follow this case to its conclusion.
“Thank you, Amareth,” he told the woman waiting patiently
at the console. “Keep the receiver open just in case.”
“Of course, Dr. Cruachan, sir.”
Turning, he headed slowly toward Conference. Halfway
there, his step picked up, his stride became more brisk. This
won’t do, he told himself. As president of the Society, it was
incumbent upon him to set an example for the others, now
more than ever. By the time he reached the meeting room

200

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

and strode inside, his initial despair at the reports from below
had been replaced by icy determination.
Half a dozen elderly men and women sat waiting for him.
So few, he thought, so few left. The last of the Society, the
last supporters of a great idea. Their upturned faces all
silently asked the same question.
“Still no word,” he said firmly. “We must therefore assume
that doctors Brora, Haithness, and Nyassa-lee have been
lost.” There were no outward expressions of grief, no wails
or cries. They waited expectantly for him to continue, and
their quiet vote of confidence redoubled his resolve.
“I recommend that we proceed with the attempt to regain
control of Number Twelve.”
“We have reason to believe that MO operatives are now
working in this region,” an old woman said from the far side
of the comfortable room.
“What of it?” another woman asked sharply. “They’ve always been two steps behind us, and they always will be.”
“I wish I was as positive of that as you, Hanson,” the first
woman said. “The longevity of the Society is the result of
foresight and caution, not contempt for those who hold us in
contempt.” She looked up at their leader. “You’re sure about
continuing to operate here, Cruachan?”
“More so than ever,” he told her. “We have too much invested in this Number Twelve not to continue.” He proceeded to recite the long list of factors responsible for his
decision.
When he finished, a thin little man seated in the far corner
of the room spoke out sharply in an incongruously deep
voice. He had an artificial leg and heart, but the look in his
eyes was as blindly intense as it had been fifty years earlier.
“I concur! The promise still lies here. If the subject is still
accessible—”
“We have no reason to believe he is not,” Cruachan half
lied.
“—then we have a chance to get to him before the MO insects do. As Cruachan says, we must balance the potential


201

here against our own intensifying infirmities.” He kicked the
floor with his false leg.
“Very well,” said the old lady who had raised the specter
of Commonwealth interference. “I see that most of you are
of a mind to continue with our work here. I must confess that
I cannot muster an argument against Dr. Cruachan’s many
good points. But we now have a new problem to overcome
which will not be solved by a vote.
“Is it true that the last report from the camp places the subject in proximity to an Alaspinian miniature dragon?”
Cruachan nodded slowly. “The presence of the catalyst
creature close to the subject was alluded to, yes.”
“Then how are we to proceed? Besides acting as a magnifying lens for any latent Talent the subject may possess,
this particular animal is deadly in and of itself. If it has
formed an emotional bond with the subject, it will be a much
more dangerous opponent than any dozen MO officers.”
Cruachan waved her worries aside. “I’ve given the matter
proper consideration. The snake will be taken care of, I
promise you. If we cannot neutralize a mere reptile, then we
have no business pretending to the ideals of our Society.”
“It is not a reptile,” a man near the back put in. He was
glassy-eyed because of the thick contact lenses he was forced
to wear. “It is reptilian in appearance, but warm blood flows
in its veins, and it should more properly be classified as—”
“I don’t give a damn what Order it fits into,” Cruachan
broke in impatiently. “The beast will be handled.” His brows
drew together at a sudden thought. “In fact, if such a mental
bond now exists, it is likely stronger than that which ties the
subject to his adoptive parent.”
“Another chance for external control!” a woman exclaimed.
“Yes. Instead of presenting us with a new threat, it’s possible this creature may be our key to subject control. So you all
see how seeming difficulties may be turned to our advantage.”
“Too bad about Haithness and the others,” one of the old
men murmured. “I’d known Haithness for forty-five years.”

202

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“So did I,” Cruachan reminded him. “We must not let her
and Nyassa-lee and Brora down. If, as now seems likely, they
have sacrificed themselves for the cause, they provide us
with still another reason to press onward. As we shrink in
numbers, so must we grow in determination.”
Murmurs of assent rose from around the conference room.
“We will not abandon this subject,” Cruachan continued
forcefully. “He will be brought under our wing by whatever
means is required. I call for a formal vote for proceeding.”
Cruachan was gratified to see the decision to continue
confirmed unanimously. Such decisions usually were; dissent had no place in an organization bent to such a singular
purpose.
“Thank you all,” he said when the hands dropped. “Remember, this Number Twelve may hold the key to our vindication. We should proceed with that hope in mind. From this
moment on, our entire energy will be devoted to gaining
control over him.” He turned toward the doorway.
“We have to hurry. If the MOs find him first, they will ruin
him for our purposes.”
The group dissolved in a rush of activity and fresh resolve
that was matched in intensity only by the desperation that
gave it life.

15
The city stank of human and other beings, of animals and
exotic cooking, of resins and building materials old and new,
all affected by the eternal dampness that permeated organic
and inorganic materials alike. But it was all flowers and spice
to Flinx. The transport car hissed to a halt outside the paneled exterior of the little bar and with the little credit remaining to him, he paid the machine. It responded with a
mechanical “Thank you, sir” before drifting off up the street
in search of its next fare.
Mother Mastiff leaned heavily against him as they made
their way inside. Her ordeal had left her feeling her age, and
she was very tired. So tired that she did not pull away from
the snake riding high on Flinx’s shoulder.
Once inside, Pip uncoiled from its perch beneath the slickertic Lauren Walder had provided and made a snakeline for
the bar itself. This place he knew. On the counter ahead sat
bowls of pretzels, tarmac nuts, and other interesting salty delicacies that were almost as much fun to play with as to eat.
Flinx had deliberately brought them back to the marketplace via a zigzag, roundabout course, changing transports
frequently, trying until the last moment to travel with other
citizens. Try as he might, he had been unable to see any indication that they had been followed, nor had the minidrag
reacted negatively to any of the travelers who had looked
askance at the exhausted youth and the old woman with him.
Still, it was this caution that prompted them to visit this bar
before returning to the shop. It would be wise not to go home
alone, and Small Symm, the bar owner, would be good com203


204

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

pany to have around when they again set palm print to the
front-door lock. To some degree his physical talents matched
those of Flinx’s mind.
As giants go, Small Symm was about average. He had
been a friend of Flinx since the day of the boy’s adoption. He
often bought interesting utensils from Mother Mastiff for
use in his establishment.
An enormous hand appeared and all but swept the two
travelers into a booth. At the long metal bar, patrons nervously moved aside to allow the acrobatic flying snake
plenty of access to the pretzels.
“I’ve heard,” the young giant said by way of greeting, his
voice an echo from deep within a cavernous chest, “that you
were back. Word travels fast in the market.”
“We’re okay, Symm.” Flinx favored his friend with a tired
smile. “I feel like I could sleep for a year, but other than that,
we’re all right.”
The giant pulled a table close to the booth and used it for
a chair. “What can I get for the two of you? Something nice
and hot to drink?”
“Not now, boy,” Mother Mastiff said with a desultory wave
of one wrinkled hand. “We’re anxious to be home. ’Tis your
good company we’d make use of, not your beverages.” She
turned quiet and let Flinx do the majority of the explaining.
Small Symm frowned, his brows coming together like
clouds in the sky. “You think these people might still be after
you?”
She almost started to say, “ ’Tis not me they’re after,” and
just did manage to hold her tongue. She still believed it was
too soon to reveal to Flinx everything she had learned. Much
too soon. “Unlikely but possible, and I’m not the type to tempt
fate, the unkind bastard.”
“I understand.” Symm stood, his head just clearing the
ceiling. “You would like some friendly companionship on
your way home.”
“If you could spare the time,” Flinx said gratefully. “I
really believe that we’re finished with these people.” He did
not explain that he thought they were all dead. No need to



205

complicate matters. “But we’d sure be a lot more comfortable if you’d come with us while we checked out the shop.”
“I’ll be just a moment,” Symm assured him. “Wait here.”
He vanished into a back room. When he returned, it was in
the company of a tall young woman. He spoke softly to her
for a minute, she nodding in response, then rejoined his visitors. He was wearing a slickertic not quite large enough to
protect a medium-sized building.
“I’m ready,” he told them. “Nakina will watch business
until I return. Unless you’d rather rest a while longer.”
“No, no.” Mother Mastiff struggled to her feet. “I’ll rest
when I’m back home in my shop.”
It was not far from Small Symm’s place to the side street
where Mother Mastiff’s stall was located. With Symm carrying her, they made good time.
“Seems empty,” the giant commented as he gently set the
old woman on her feet. It was evening. Most of the shops
were already shuttered, perhaps because the rain was falling
harder than usual. In the marketplace, weather was often the
most profound of economic arbiters.
“I guess it’s all right.” Mother Mastiff stepped toward the
front door.
“Wait a minute.” Flinx put out an arm to hold her back.
“Over there, to the left of the shop.”
Symm and Mother Mastiff stared in the indicated direction. “I don’t see anything,” the giant said.
“I thought I saw movement.” Flinx glanced down at Pip.
The flying snake dozed peacefully beneath the cover of the
slickertic. Of course, the snake’s moods were often unpredictable, but his continued calm was a good sign. Flinx gestured to his right. The giant nodded and moved off like a
huge shadow to conceal himself in the darkness next to the
vacant shop off to the left. Flinx went to his right—to starboard, as Lauren might have said. It had taken him awhile to
forgive her for leaving—and Mother Mastiff for letting her
leave—while he was still sound asleep. He wondered what
she was doing, yet the memory of her was already beginning


206

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

to fade. It would take somewhat longer to escape his emotions.
Mother Mastiff waited and watched as friend and son
moved off in opposite directions. She did not mind standing
in the rain. It was Drallarian rain, which was different somehow from the rain that fell anywhere else in the universe.
Flinx crept warily along the damp plastic walls of the shop
fronts, making his way toward the alley that meandered behind their home. If the movement he thought he had spied
signified the presence of some scout awaiting their return, he
did not want that individual reporting back to his superiors
until Flinx had drained him of information.
There—movement again, and no mistaking it this time! It
was moving away from him. He increased his pace, keeping
to the darkest shadows. The stiletto that slept in his boot was
in his right hand now, cold and familiar.
Then a cry in the darkness ahead and a looming, massive
shape. Flinx rushed forward, ready to help even though it was
unlikely the giant would need any assistance. Then something new, something unexpected.
Nervous laughter?
“Hello, Flinx-boy.” In the dim light, Flinx made out the
friendly face of their neighbor Arrapkha.
“Hello, yourself.” Flinx put the stiletto back where it belonged. “You gave me reason to worry. I thought we were finished with shapes in the night.”
“I gave you reason to worry?” The craftsman indicated the
bulk of Small Symm standing behind him.
“I’m sorry,” Symm said apologetically. “We couldn’t see
who you were.”
“You know now.” He looked back toward Flinx. “I’ve been
watching your shop for you.” Symm went to reassure Mother
Mastiff. “You know, making sure no one broke in and tried to
steal anything.”
“That was good of you,” Flinx said as they started back
toward the street.
“It’s good to see you back, Flinx-boy. I’d given you up not
long after you left.”


207

“Then why have you kept watching the shop?”
The older man grinned. “Couldn’t stop hoping, I guess.
What was it all about, anyway?”
“Something illegal that Mother Mastiff was involved in
many years back,” Flinx explained. “She didn’t go into the
details. Just told me that revenge was involved.”
“Some people have long memories,” Arrapkha said, nodding knowingly. “Since you have returned well and safe, I
presume that you made a peace with the people who kidnapped your mother?”
“We concluded the business,” Flinx said tersely.
They returned to the street, where Small Symm and
Mother Mastiff waited to greet them.
“So it was you, Arrapkha. Ye ignorant fleurm, worrying us
like that.” She smiled. “Never thought I’d be glad to see ye,
though.”
“Nor I you,” the woodworker confessed. He gestured
toward Flinx. “That boy of yours is as persistent as he is foolhardy. I did my best to try and convince him not to go rushing off after you.”
“I would have told him the same,” she said, “and he would
have ignored me, too. Headstrong, he be.” She allowed herself a look of pardonable pride. Flinx was simply embarrassed. “And fortunate it is for me.”
“Old acquaintances and bad business.” Arrapkha waggled
an admonishing finger at her. “Beware of old acquaintances
and bad business and deeds left unresolved.”
“Ah, yes.” She changed the subject. “Been watching the
old place for me, eh? Then I’d best check the stock carefully
as soon as we’re inside.” They both laughed.
“If you think it’s all right for me to leave,” Small Symm
murmured. “Nakina has a bad temper, and that’s not good for
business.”
Mother Mastiff looked thoughtful. “If our friend here insists he’s kept a close eye on the shop . . .”
“I’ve watched and watched,” Arrapkha insisted. “Unless
they’ve tunneled in, no one’s gone inside since your boy left
to look for you.”



208

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“No tunneling under these streets,” she observed with a
grin. “They’d hit the sewers.” She looked back up at their escort. “Thank ye, Symm. Ye can run back to your lovely den
of iniquity.”
“It’s hardly that,” he replied modestly. “Someday if I work
hard, perhaps.”
Flinx extended a hand, which vanished in the giant’s grasp.
“My thanks, also, Symm.”
“No trouble. Glad to help.” The giant turned and lumbered
away into the night.
The three friends moved to the front door. Mother Mastiff
placed her right palm against the lock plate. It clicked immediately, and the door slid aside, admitting them. Flinx activated the lights, enabling them to see clearly that the stall
area was apparently untouched. Stock remained where they
had left it, gleaming and reassuringly familiar in the light.
“Looks to be the same as when I left,” Mother Mastiff observed gratefully.
“Looks to be the same as it did ten years ago.” Arrapkha
shook his head slowly. “You don’t change much, Mother
Mastiff, and neither does some of your stock. I think you’re
too fond of certain pieces to sell them.”
“There be nothing I’m too fond of not to sell,” she shot
back, “and my stock changes twice as fast as that pile of
beetle-eaten garbage ye try to pass off on unsuspecting customers as handicrafts.”
“Please, no fighting,” Flinx implored them. “I’m tired of
fighting.”
“Fighting?” Arrapkha said, looking surprised.
“We’re not fighting, boy,” Mother Mastiff told him. “Don’t
ye know by now how old friends greet one another? By seeing who can top the other’s insults.” To show him that she
meant what she said, she smiled fondly at Arrapkha. The
woodworker wasn’t a bad sort at all. Only a little slow.
The living quarters they found likewise untouched: in
total chaos, exactly as Flinx had last seen it.
“Housekeeping,” Mother Mastiff grumbled. “I’ve always
hated housekeeping. Still, someone has to get this place



209

cleaned up, and better me than ye, boy. Ye have no touch for
domesticity, I fear.”
“Not tonight, Mother.” Flinx yawned. His initial sight of
his own bed had expanded until it filled the whole room.
“No, not tonight, boy. I must confess to being just the
slightest bit tired.” Flinx smiled to himself. She was on the
verge of physical collapse, quite ready to go to sleep wherever her body might fall, but she was damned if she would
show weakness in front of Arrapkha lest it damage her image
of invincibility.
“Tomorrow we’ll put things to rights. I work better in the
daytime, anyway.” She tried not to look toward her own bedroom, waiting on Arrapkha.
“Well, then, I will leave you,” the craftsman said. “Again,
it’s good to see you back and healthy. The street wasn’t the
same without you.”
“We monuments are hard to get rid of,” Mother Mastiff
said. “Perhaps we’ll see ye tomorrow.”
“Perhaps,” Arrapkha agreed. He turned and left them,
making certain that the front door locked behind him.
Once outside, Arrapkha drew his slickertic tight around
his head and shoulders as he hurried back to his own shop.
He had no more intention of turning his friends over to the
authorities, as he had been instructed, than he did of cutting
the price of his stock fifty percent for some rich merchant.
He would not hinder the police, but he would do nothing to
assist them, either. He could always plead ignorance, for
which he was famed in this part of the marketplace.
So tired; they looked so tired, he thought. It was the first
time he could remember Mother Mastiff looking her age.
Even the boy, who, though slight of build, had never before
seemed exhausted by any labor, appeared completely worn
out. Even that lethal pet that always rode his shoulder had
looked tired.
Well, he would give them a few days to get their house in
order and regain their strength. Then he would surprise them
by taking them to Magrim’s for some tea and tall sandwiches
and would tell them of the mysterious visit of the two Peace-

210

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

forcers to their little street. It would be interesting to see
what Mother Mastiff would make of that. She might welcome the interest of the authorities in her case—and then
again, she might not. Not knowing the details of her history,
Arrapkha could not be sure, which was why he had elected
not to help those offworld visitors.
Yes, he decided firmly. Wait a few days and let them rest
up before springing that new information on them. No harm
in that, surely. He opened the door to his own shop and shut
it against the night and the rain.
One day passed, then another, and gradually the shop
again assumed the appearance of home as the mess the kidnappers had made was cleaned up. Comfortable in such familiar surroundings, Mother Mastiff regained her strength
rapidly. She was such a resilient old woman, Flinx thought
with admiration. For his part, by the second day he was once
again venturing out into his familiar haunts, greeting old
friends, some of whom had heard of the incident and some of
whom had not, but never straying far from the shop lest even
at this late date and in spite of his beliefs some surviving
members of the organization that had abducted Mother Mastiff return, still seeking their revenge.
Nothing materialized, however, to give any credence to
such anxieties. By the third day, he had begun to relax mentally as well as physically. It was amazing, he thought, as he
settled in that night, the things that one misses the most during a long absence. Odd how familiar and friendly one’s own
bed becomes when one has had to sleep elsewhere. . . .
It was the hate that woke Pip. Cold and harsh as the most
brutal day winter could muster on the ice world of Tran-kyky, it shook the flying snake from a sound sleep. It was directed not at the minidrag but at its master.
Pink and blue coils slid soundlessly clear of the thermal
blanket. Flinx slept on, unaware of his pet’s activity. Several
hours remained until sunrise.
Pip rested and analyzed. Examining the minidrag lying at
the foot of the bed, an observer might have believed it to be
a reasoning being. It was not, of course, but neither was its


211

mental capacity inconsequential. Actually, no one was quite
sure how the mind of the Alaspinian miniature dragon
worked or what profound cogitations it might be capable of,
since no xenobiologist dared get close enough to study it.
Blue and pink wings opened, pleats expanding, and with a
gentle whirr the snake took to the air. It hovered high over its
master’s head, worried, searching, trying to pinpoint the
source of the unrelenting malignancy that was poisoning its
thoughts. The hate was very near. Worse, it was familiar.
There was a curved roof vent that Pip had appropriated for
its own private comings and goings. The snake darted toward
it, the wings folding up at the last second to allow the slim
body to slip through the curving tube. Nothing much bigger
than a mouse could have slipped through that vent. With wings
folded flat against its muscular sides, the minidrag made the
passage easily.
Pip emerged atop the roof into the light, early-morning
rain. Up that way the hate lay, to the north, up the alley. Wings
unfolded and fanned the air. The minidrag circled once above
the shop, paused to orient itself, then buzzed determinedly
into the opening nearby where the alley emerged into cloudlight.
It braked to a halt and hovered, hissing at the mental snarl
that had drawn it.
“Over here pretty, pretty,” coaxed a voice. “You know who
hates your master, don’t you? And you know what we’ll do to
him if we get the chance.”
The flying snake shot through the partly open doorway
into the hate-filled room beyond. Two humans awaited it
with deadly calm. Never would they have the chance to harm
the minidrag’s master. Never!
A thin stream of venom spewed from the roof of the flying snake’s upper jaw and struck toward the nearest of the
vicious bipeds. It never reached the man. Something was between him and Pip, something hard and transparent. The
venom contacted it, hissed in the still air as it started to eat at
the transparent shield. Startled, the two monsters seated behind the shield flinched and began to rise.


212

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

But the door opening on the alley had already slammed
shut behind the minidrag. Suddenly, a strange, sweet smell
filled the room. Wingbeats slackened and grew weak. Twin
eyelids fluttered and closed. The flying snake flopped about
on the floor like a fish out of water, wings beating futilely
against the plastic as it gasped for breath.
“Be careful,” a distant voice warned. “We don’t want to
overdose it. It’s no good to us dead.”
“I’d sooner see it dead and take our chances with the
subject,” another said.
“We need every hold we can manage, including the possibility raised by this little devil.”
The voices faded. Soon the flying snake had stopped moving. Long minutes passed before a man dared to enter the
sealed room. He was dressed head to toe in a protective suit.
His eyes were anxious behind the transparent visor. With the
long metal prod he carried he poked once, twice at the comatose minidrag. It jerked convulsively in response to the
touches, but otherwise displayed no sign of life.
The man took a deep breath and set the long prod aside as
he bent to pick up the thin body. It hung limply in his gloved
hands as he inspected it.
“Still breathing,” he declared to the people pressed close
to the transparent wall.
“Good. Get it in the cage quick,” said the shorter of the
two observers. Her companion was studying the hole where
the venom had finally eaten through the protective shield.
“I’d like to see a molecular breakdown on this stuff,” he
murmured, careful to keep his fingers clear of the stillsizzling edges of the ragged gap. “Anything that can eat
through pancrylic this fast . . .” He shook his head in disbelief. “I don’t see how the venom sacs can contain the stuff
without dissolving right through the creature’s jaw.”
“You’d need a toxicologist and biochemist to explain it, if
they could,” said the woman standing next to him, likewise
taking a moment to examine the hole. “Perhaps there’s more
to it than just a straightforward poison. The snake’s mouth


213

may hold several separate sacs whose contents mix only
when it’s spraying someone.”
“Makes sense.” The man turned away from the shield that
had nearly failed them. “We better get moving. The subject
may awaken any minute now. Be sure you keep the monster
thoroughly narcotized.”
“Is that necessary?” She frowned. “Surely the cage will
hold it.”
“That’s what we thought about the wall. The cage is tougher,
but we don’t want to take any chances. I don’t want our guest
spitting his way free while we’re asleep in our beds.”
“No, we sure as hell don’t.” The woman shuddered slightly.
“I’ll take charge of it myself.”
“I was hoping you’d say that.” Cruachan smiled to himself. He was intimately familiar with the theories that attempted to explain the special bonds that could spring into
being between a catalyst creature such as the minidrag and
one of the Talented. Certainly the link that existed between
this creature and the boy known as Number Twelve was as
powerful as any of the imperfectly recorded cases he had
studied. It was not unreasonable to suppose that it could be
stronger than the affection bond between the boy and his
adoptive mother.
They came at him without warning during his final period of
REM sleep, when he was defenseless. They sprang into existence out of emptiness, laughing at him, tormenting him with
feelings and sensations he could not define or understand.
Nightmares.
Someone was twisting a wire around his brain, compressing it tighter and tighter until it seemed certain that his eyes
would explode out of his head and fly across the room. He
lay in his bed, twitching slightly, his eyelids quivering, as
they did their work on him and took advantage of his helpless, unconscious mind.
This batch was worse than most; twisting, abstract forms,
dark swirling colors, and himself somehow in the middle of
them all, racing down a long, ominous corridor. At the end of



214

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

that corridor lay his salvation, he knew, and almost as important, answers. Understanding and safety.
But the faster he ran, the slower he advanced. The floor
that was not a floor dissolved beneath his feet, dropping him
like some relativistic Alice down a rabbit hole of space-time
distortions, while the far end of the corridor and its promises
of light and comprehension receded into the wastes overhead.
He woke up with a silent start and glanced rapidly around
the room. Only after he convinced himself of its reality did
he begin to relax.
It was the right room, his room, the one he had lived in
most of his life: tiny, spartan, comfortable. The patter of
morning rain was music on the roof, and faint daylight filtered through the window above his bed. He swung his legs
out clear of the blanket and rubbed both throbbing eyes with
his fingers.
The fingers abruptly ceased their ministrations, and he
looked back to the bed. Something was wrong.
“Pip?” The flying snake was not coiled in its familiar position at the top of the pillow, nor was it underneath. Flinx
pulled back the blanket, then bent to peer under the bed.
“C’mon boy, don’t hide from me this morning. I’m worn out,
and my head is killing me.”
There was no familiar hissing response to his confession.
He prowled the room’s meager confines, at first puzzled, then
concerned. At last, he stood on the bed and shouted toward
the air vent overhead.
“Pip, breakfast!”
No comforting hum of brightly hued wings reached him
from beyond. He found a piece of wire and used it to probe
the vent. It was clear to the outside.
He left his room and frantically started an inspection of
the rest of the living quarters. Mother Mastiff stood by the
convection stove, cooking something redolent of pepper and
less exotic spices. “Something the matter, boy?”
“It’s Pip.” Flinx peered beneath recently righted furniture,
moved bowls, and dropcloths.
“I gathered as much from the hollering ye were doing in


215

your bedroom,” she said sardonically. “Disappeared again,
has he?”
“He never stays out through morning when he takes a solo
night flight. Never.”
“Always a first time, even for monsters,” Mother Mastiff
said, shrugging and concentrating on her cooking. “Wouldn’t
upset me if the little nastiness never did come back.”
“Shame on you, Mother!” Flinx said, his tone agonized.
“He saved my life, and probably yours, too.”
“So I’m an ungrateful old Yax’m,” she snorted. “Ye know
my feelings toward your beast.”
Flinx finished inspecting her room, then resolutely stormed
back to his own and began dressing. “I’m going out to look
for him.”
Mother Mastiff frowned. “Breakfast ready soon. Why bother
yourself, boy? Likely it’ll be back soon enough, more’s the pity.
Besides, if it has got its slimy little self stuck someplace, you’re
not likely to find him.”
“He could just be in the alley behind the shop,” Flinx argued, “and I can hear him even when I can’t see him.”
“Suit yourself, boy.”
“And don’t wait breakfast on me.”
“Think I’ll starve meself on your account? Much less
on account of some devil-wing.” She had long ago given
up arguing with him. When he made up his mind about
something—well, one might as well wish for the planet’s
rings to be completed. He was a dutiful-enough son in most
ways, but he simply refused to be restricted.
“It’ll be here when ye get back,” she said softly, checking
the containers and lowering their ambient temperatures fifty
degrees. “Ye can warm it up for your shiftless self.”
“Thanks, Mother.” Despite her contorting attempt to avoid
him, he managed to plant a hurried kiss on one leathery
cheek. She wiped at it, but not hard, as she watched him dash
from the shop.
For an instant, she thought of telling him about what she
had learned days ago up in the forest. About those strange
Meliorare people and their intentions toward him. Then she


216

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

shrugged the idea off. No, they were well clear of the horrid
folk, and from the glimpse she had of their camp, they would
not be bothering her boy ever again.
As to what she had learned of his history, it would be better to keep that secret for a few years yet. Knowing his stubborn impulsiveness, such information might send him running
off in all sorts of dangerous directions. Much better not to
say anything for a while. When he reached a reasonable age,
twenty-three or so, she could let on what she had learned
about his background. By then, he would have taken over
management of the shop, perhaps married. Settled down
some to a nice, sensible, quiet life.
She tasted the large pot, winced. Too little saxifrage. She
reached for a small shaker.
“Pip! To me, boy!” Still no blue and pink flash enlivening the
sky, still no rising hum. Now where would he get to? Flinx
mused. He knew the minidrag was fond of the alley behind
the shop. That was where he had first encountered the flying
snake, after all, and to a snake’s way of thinking, the alley
was usually full of interesting things to eat. For all the
minidrag’s aerial agility, a box tumbling from the crest of a
garbage heap or a rolling container could easily pin it to the
ground. Flinx knew that no stranger was likely to get within
ten meters of a trapped snake.
Might as well try the first, he decided. Slipping down the
narrow space separating Mother Mastiff’s shop from the vacant structure next to it, he soon found himself in the alleyway. It was damp and dark, its overall aspect dismal as usual.
He cupped his hands to his mouth, called out, “Pip?”
“Over here, boy,” said a soft voice.
Flinx tensed, but his hand did not grab for the knife concealed in his boot. Too early. A glance showed that his retreat
streetward was still unblocked, as was the section of alley
behind him. Nor did the individual standing motionless
beneath the archway in front of him look particularly threatening.
Flinx stood his ground and debated with himself, then


217

finally asked, “If you know where my pet is, you can tell me
just as easily from where you’re standing, and I can hear you
plainly from where I’m standing.”
“I know where your pet is,” the man admitted. His hair
was entirely gray, Flinx noted. “I’ll take you to it right now,
if you wish.”
Flinx stalled. “Is he all right? He hasn’t gotten himself
into some kind of trouble?”
The little man shook his head and smiled pleasantly. “No,
he isn’t in trouble, and he’s just fine. He’s sleeping, in fact.”
“Then why can’t you bring him out?” Flinx inquired. He
continued to hold his position, ready to charge the man or
race for the street as the situation dictated.
“Because I can’t,” the man said. “Really, I can’t. I’m just
following orders, you know.”
“Whose orders?” Flinx asked suspiciously. Suddenly, events
were becoming complicated again. The speaker’s age and attitude abruptly impacted on him. “Are you with the people
who abducted my mother? Because if you’re trying to get revenge on her for whatever she was involved in years ago by
harming me, it’s not going to work.”
“Take it easy, now,” the man said. A voice Flinx could not
hear whispered to the speaker from behind the door.
“For heaven’s sake, Anders, don’t get him excited!”
“I’m trying not to,” the elderly speaker replied through
clenched teeth. To Flinx he said more loudly, “No one wants
to harm you or your pet, boy. You can have my word on that
even if you don’t think it’s worth anything. My friends and I
mean you and your pet only well.” He did not respond to
Flinx’s brief allusion to his adoptive mother’s past.
“Then if you mean us only well,” Flinx said, “you won’t
object if I take a minute to go and reassure—”
The speaker took a step forward. “There’s no need to disturb your parent, boy. In a moment she’ll have her shop open
and the crowd will ensure her safety, if that’s what you’re
concerned about. Why alarm her needlessly? We just want to
talk to you. Besides,” he added darkly, taking a calculated

218

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

risk, “you don’t have any choice but to listen to me. Not if
you want to see your pet alive again.”
“It’s only a pet snake.” Flinx affected an air of indifference
he didn’t feel. “What if I refuse to go with you? There are
plenty of other pets to be had.”
The speaker shook his head slowly, his tone maddeningly
knowledgeable. “Not like this one. That flying snake’s a part
of you, isn’t it?”
“How do you know that?” Flinx asked. “How do you know
how I feel about him?”
“Because despite what you may think of me right now,”
the speaker said, feeling a little more confident, “I am wise
in the ways of certain things. If you’ll let me, I’ll share that
knowledge with you.”
Flinx hesitated, torn between concern for Pip and a sense
of foreboding that had nothing to do with his peculiar Talents. But the man was right: there was no choice. He wouldn’t
chance Pip’s coming to harm even though he couldn’t have
said why.
“All right.” He started toward the speaker. “I’ll go with
you. You’d better be telling the truth.”
“About not wishing to harm you or your pet?” The smile
grew wider. “I promise you that I am.”
Try as he might, Flinx couldn’t sense any inimical feelings emanating from the little man. Given the erratic nature
of his abilities, that proved nothing—for all Flinx could tell,
the man might be planning murder even as he stood there
smiling. Up close, the speaker looked even less formidable.
He was barely Flinx’s height, and though not as ancient as
Mother Mastiff, it was doubtful he would be much opposition in a hand-to-hand fight.
“This is my friend and associate Stanzel,” the man said.
An equally elderly woman stepped out of the shadows. She
seemed tired but forced herself to stand straight and look determined.
“I don’t want to hurt you, either, boy.” She studied him
with unabashed curiosity. “None of us do.”
“So there are still more of you,” Flinx murmured in con-


219

fusion. “I don’t understand all this. Why do you have to keep
persecuting Mother Mastiff and me? And now Pip, too? Why?”
“Everything will be explained to you,” the woman assured
him, “if you’ll just come with us.” She gestured up the alley.
Flinx strode along between them, noting as he did so that
neither of them appeared to be armed. That was a good sign
but a puzzling one. His stiletto felt cold against his calf. He
looked longingly back toward the shop. If only he could have
told Mother Mastiff! But, he reminded himself, as long as he
returned by bedtime, she wouldn’t worry herself. She was
used to his taking off on unannounced explorations.
“Mark me words,” she would declaim repeatedly, “that curiosity of yours will be the death of ye!”
If it didn’t involve striking against Mother Mastiff, though,
then what did these people want with him? It was important
to them, very important. If not, they wouldn’t have risked an
encounter with his deadly pet. Despite their age, he still feared
them, if only for the fact that they had apparently managed to
capture Pip, a feat beyond the capabilities of most.
But something, an attitude perhaps, marked these people
as different from the usual run-of-the-mill marketplace cutthroats. They were different from any people he had ever encountered. Their coolness and indifference combined with
their calm professionalism to frighten him.
The alley opened onto a side street, where an aircar
waited. The old man unlocked it and gestured for him to
enter. As Flinx started to step into the little cab, he experienced one of those mysterious, unannounced bursts of emotional insight. It was brief, so brief he was unsure he had
actually felt it. It wiped out his own fear, leaving him more
confused and uncertain than ever.
He might be afraid for Pip and perhaps even a little for
himself, but for some unknown reason, these two outwardly
relaxed, supremely confident individuals were utterly terrified of him!



16
Cruachan studied the readouts carefully. The section of the
old warehouse in which they had established themselves was
a poor substitute for the expensively outfitted installation
they had laboriously constructed far to the north. He did not
dwell on the loss. Years of disappointment had inured him to
such setbacks. The machines surrounding him had been
hastily assembled and linked together. Wiring was exposed
everywhere, further evidence of haste and lack of time to install equipment properly. It would have to do, however.
He was not disappointed. In spite of all their problems,
they appeared on the verge of accomplishing what they had
intended to do on this world, albeit not in the manner originally planned. It seemed that the presence of the Alaspinian
immigrant was going to turn to their advantage. For the first
time since they had placed themselves in orbit around the
world, he felt more than merely hopeful. His confidence came
from Anders’ and Stanzel’s last report. The subject, accompanying them quietly, seemed reluctantly willing to cooperate,
but had thus far displayed no sign of unexpected threatening
abilities.
While a potentially lethal act, the taking of the subject’s
pet had turned out far more successful than the attempted adjustment of the subject’s adoptive parent. Cruachan now conceded that that had been a mistake. If only their information
had included mention of the catalyst creature in the first
place! He did not blame the informant, though. It was likely
that the minidrag came into the subject’s possession subsequent to the filing of the informant’s report.


221

He felt like an old tooth, cracked and worn down by overuse and age. But with the semisymbiotic pet now under their
control, the subject would have to accede to their wishes.
There could no longer be any consideration of attempting to
influence the boy externally. They would have to implant the
electronic synapses intended for his parent in the lad’s own
brain. Direct control posed some risks, but as far as Cruachan
and his associates could see, they had no other choice. Cruachan was glad the case was nearing conclusion. He was very
tired.
It was raining harder than usual for the season when the
little aircar pulled up outside the warehouse. Flinx regarded
the place with distaste. The section of Drallar out toward
the shuttleport was bloated with stark, blocky monuments to
bad business and overconsumption, peopled mostly with
machines—dark, uninviting, and alien.
He had no thought of changing his mind, of making a
break for the nearest side street or half-open doorway. Whoever these people were, they were not ignorant. They had
correctly surmised the intensity of his feelings for Pip, which
was why they had not bound him and carried no arms.
He still couldn’t figure out what they wanted with him. If
they were not lying to him and truly meant him no harm,
then of what use could he be to them? If there was one thing
he couldn’t stand, it was unanswered questions. He wanted
explanations almost as badly as he wanted to see Pip.
They seemed very sure of themselves. Of course, that no
weapons were in evidence did not mean no weapons were
around. He could not square their fear of him with the absence of armament. Perhaps, he mused, they were afraid of
him because they feared he might reveal what he knew of the
kidnapping to the local authorities. Maybe that was what they
wanted from him: a promise to remain silent.
But somehow that didn’t make much sense, either.
“I wish you’d tell me what you want with me,” he said
aloud, “and what’s going on.”
“It’s not our place to explain.” The man glanced at his


222

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

companion and then said, as if unable to suppress his own
curiosity, “Have you ever heard of the Meliorare Society?”
Flinx shook his head. “No. I know what the word means,
though. What’s it got to do with me?”
“Everything.” He seemed on the verge of saying more, but
the old woman shushed him.
The building they entered was surrounded by similarly nondescript edifices. They were off the main shuttleport accessway. Flinx had seen only a few people about from the time
they had entered the area. No one was in the dingy hallway.
They rode an elevator to the third floor. His escorts led
him through broad, empty corridors, past high-ceilinged
storage rooms filled with plasticine crates and drums. Finally, they halted before a small speaker set into the plastic
of an unmarked door. Words were exchanged between
Flinx’s escort and someone on the other side, and the door
opened to admit them.
He found himself in still another room crammed full of bundles and boxes. What set it apart from a dozen similar rooms
was the right-hand wall. Stacked against it was an impressive
array of electronics. Empty crates nearby hinted at recent and
hasty unpacking and setup. The consoles were powered-up
and manned. Their operators spared curious glances for the
new arrivals before returning their attention to their equipment. Save for their uniformly grim expressions, they looked
like retirees on a holiday outing.
Two people emerged from a door at the rear of the room.
They were soon joined by a third—a tall, silver-haired, ruggedly handsome man. He carried himself like a born leader,
and Flinx concentrated on him immediately. The man smiled
down at Flinx. Even though he was close to Mother Mastiff’s
age, the man held himself straight. If he was subject to the
infirmities of old age, he did a masterful job of concealing
them. Vanity or will? Flinx wondered. He sought the man’s
emotions and drew the usual blank. Nor could he feel anything of Pip’s presence in the room or nearby.
Even as the tall senior was shaking his hand and mouthing
platitudes, Flinx was searching for the most likely escape


223

route. There seemed to be only one exit: the door through
which he had entered. He had no idea where the door at the
far end of the room led, but suspected that freedom was not
one of the possibilities.
“What a great pleasure to finally meet you, my boy,” the
old man was saying. His grip was firm. “We’ve gone to a
great deal of trouble to arrive at this meeting. I would rather
not have had to proceed in this fashion, but circumstances
conspired to force my hand.”
“It was you, then”—Flinx gestured at the others—“who
were responsible for abducting my mother?”
Cruachan relaxed. There was no danger in this skinny, innocent boy. Whatever abilities he might possess remained
dormant, awaiting proper instruction and development. Certainly his attitude was anything but threatening.
“I asked him,” the man who had brought Flinx from the
marketplace reported, “if he’d heard of the Society. He said
no.”
“No reason for him to,” Cruachan observed. “His life has
been restricted, his horizons limited.”
Flinx ignored that appraisal of his limitations. “Where’s
Pip?”
“Your pet, I assume? Yes.” The tall man turned and called
out toward the rear doorway. The section of wall containing
the door creaked as hidden winches pulled it aside. Beyond
lay still another of the endless series of storage chambers,
packed with the usual containers and drums and crates. On a
table in the forefront stood a transparent cube, perhaps a meter
square, topped with several small metal tanks. Hoses ran from
the tanks into the cube.
To the left of the table stood a nervous-looking old man
holding a small, flat control box. His thumb was pressed hard
against one of the buttons set in the box. His eyes shifted
regularly from the cube to Flinx and back to the cube.
Pip lay in the bottom of the cube, coiled into itself apparently deep in sleep. Flinx took a step forward. Cruachan
put out a hand to hold him back.
“Your pet is resting comfortably. The air in the cage has


224

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

been mixed with a mild soporific. Westhoff is regulating the
mixture and flow of gases even as we speak. If you were to
try anything foolish, he would increase the flow from the
tanks before you could possibly free your pet. You see, the
cage has been weld-sealed. There is no latch.
“The adjusted normal atmosphere inside the cube will be
completely replaced by the narcoleptic gas, and your pet will
be asphyxiated. It would not take long. All Westhoff has to
do is press violently on the button his thumb is caressing. If
necessary, he will throw his body across it. So you see, there
is nothing you could do to prevent him from carrying out his
assignment.”
Flinx listened quietly even as he was gauging the distance
between himself and the cage. The elderly man holding the
control box gazed grimly back at him. Even if he could
somehow avoid the hands that would surely reach out to restrain him, he did not see how he could open the cage and
free Pip. His stiletto would be useless against the thick pancrylic.
“You’ve made your point,” he said finally. “What do you
want from me?”
“Redemption,” Cruachan told him softly.
“I don’t understand.”
“You will eventually, I hope. For now, suffice for you to
know that we are interested in your erratic but unarguable
abilities: your Talent.”
All Flinx’s preconceived ideas collapsed like sand castles
in a typhoon. “You mean you’ve gone through all this, kidnapping Mother Mastiff and now Pip, just because you’re curious about my abilities?” He shook his head in disbelief. “I
would have done my best to satisfy you without your having
to go through all this trouble.”
“It’s not quite that simple. You might say one thing, even
believe it, and then your mind might react otherwise.”
Crazier and crazier, Flinx thought dazedly. “I don’t know
what the hell you’re talking about.”
“Just as well,” Cruachan murmured. “You are an emotional telepath, is that not correct?”



225

“I’m sensitive sometimes to what other people are feeling,
if that’s what you mean,” Flinx replied belligerently.
“Nothing else? No precognitive abilities? Telekinesis?
True telepathy? Pyrokinesis? Dimensional perceptivity?”
Flinx laughed at him, the sound sharpened by the tension
that filled the room. “I don’t even know what those words
mean except for telepathy. If by that you mean can I read
other people’s minds, no. Only sometimes their feelings.
That other stuff, that’s all fantasy, isn’t it?”
“Not entirely,” Cruachan replied softly, “not entirely. The
potentials lie within every human mind, or so we of the
Society believe. When awakened, further stimuli, provided
through training and other means, can bring such abilities to
full life. That was the—” He paused, his smile returning.
“As I said, someday you will understand everything, I
hope. For now, it will be sufficient if you will permit us to
run some tests on you. We wish to measure the probable limits of your Talent and test for other possible hidden abilities
as yet undeveloped.”
“What kinds of tests?” Flinx regarded the tall man warily.
“Nothing elaborate. Measurements, electroencephalotopography.”
“That sounds elaborate to me.”
“I assure you, there will be no discomfort. If you’ll just
come with me . . .” He put a fatherly hand on Flinx’s shoulder. Flinx flinched. There should have been a snake there, not
an unfamiliar hand.
Cruachan guided him toward the instruments. “I promise
you, give us twenty-four hours and you’ll have your pet restored to you unharmed, and you’ll never have to go through
this again.”
“I don’t know,” Flinx told him. “I’m still not sure of what
you want from me.” It seemed to him that there was an awful
lot of instrumentation around for just a few simple tests, and
some of it looked almost familiar. Where had he seen that
tendriled globe before?
Over a table in a room far to the north, he realized suddenly.



226

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

What do I do? he thought frantically. He could not lie
down on that table, beneath those waiting tentacles. But if he
hesitated, what might they do to Pip out of impatience and
anger?
Unexpectedly, as his thoughts were tied in knots and he
tried to decide what to do next, a sudden surge of emotion
burst into his brain. There was hate and a little fear and a
self-righteous anger that bordered on the paranoiac. He looked
up at Cruachan. The older man smiled pleasantly down at
him, then frowned as he saw the expression that had come
over the subject’s face. “Is something wrong?”
Flinx did not reply, methodically searching every face in
the room. None of them seemed to be the source of the feelings he was receiving. And they were getting steadily stronger,
more intense. They came—they came from—
He looked sharply toward the main entrance.
“Nobody move!” snapped a determined voice. The couple
who burst through the door, having quietly circumvented the
lock, were complete strangers to Flinx. A middle-aged pair
dressed like offworld tourists, each holding a gun bigger
than a pistol and longer than a rifle carefully balanced in both
hands, they surveyed the startled occupants of the storage
chamber.
Flinx did not recognize their weapons. That was unusual.
His learning expeditions through the marketplace had made
him familiar with most personal armament. But these were
new to him. As new as this couple. They looked unrelentingly average. There was nothing average about the way they
moved, however, or gave commands or held those peculiar
guns. The Meliorares certainly seemed familiar with them.
“MO Section, Commonwealth Peaceforce,” the man barked.
“All of you are under government detention as of this moment.” He grinned crookedly, almost savagely. “The charges
against you, the specifics of which I’m sure you’re all quite
familiar with, are many and varied. I don’t think I have to go
into details.”
Flinx started gratefully toward them. “I don’t know how
you people found me, but I’m sure glad to see you.”


227

“Hold it right there.” The woman shifted her weapon
toward him. The expression on her face assured Flinx she
was ready to shoot him if he took so much as another half
step toward her. He froze, hurt and confused.
There was something new there, partly in her eyes but also
in her mind: not so much fear as a kind of twisted hatred, a
loathing. The emotion was directed squarely at him. It was so
new, so alien and sickening, that he didn’t know how to react.
He knew only that his would-be saviors held no more affection for him, and perhaps even less in the way of good intentions, than this insane society of Meliorare people.
His confusion was being replaced by anger, a frantic fury
born of frustration and despair, compounded by helplessness
and desperation. Through no fault of his own, desiring only
to be left alone, he had become the focal point of forces beyond his control, forces that extended even beyond his
world. And he didn’t know how, couldn’t begin to think how
to deal with them.
Through all the confusion came one lucid realization: he
wasn’t as grown-up as he had thought.
Near the back room the man named Westhoff had gone
unnoticed by the Peaceforcers. He did not linger. Putting
aside the control box he commenced a cautious retreat, utilizing crates and containers to make good his escape.
Pressure removed, the button he had been holding down
rebounded.
“Over against that empty packing and away from the consoles. All of you,” the woman commanded them, gesturing
meaningfully with her gun. Rising from their seats and showing empty hands, the Meliorares hurried to comply with her
order.
“Anybody touches a switch,” the other Peaceforcer warned
them, “it’ll be the last thing he ever touches.”
The woman threw Flinx a hard look. “Hey, you too. Move
it.” Revulsion emanated from her. Disgust and pity washed
over Flinx in waves. She was broadcasting them all. Flinx
tried to squeeze the degrading emotions out of his mind.
“I’m not with them,” he protested. “I’m not part of this.”


228

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

“I’m afraid that you are, boy, whether you like it or not,”
she told him. “You’ve caused a lot of trouble. But don’t
worry.” She tried to smile. The result was a discomfiting
parody. “Everything’s going to be all right. You’re going to
be fixed up so you can live a normal life.”
A buzzer suddenly roared to life on one of the unattended
consoles, filling the room with insistent discordance. Cruachan
stared dumbly at it, then at Flinx, then at the Peaceforcers.
“For heaven’s sake, don’t threaten him!”
“Threaten me?” Flinx was almost crying now, ignoring
Cruachan’s sudden terror, the buzzing, everything, as he spoke
to the female Peaceforcer. “What does he mean, threaten me?
What did you mean when you said you’re going to have me
fixed up? I’m fine.”
“Maybe you are, and maybe you aren’t,” she replied, “but
these Meliorares,” she spat the word out, “seem to think
otherwise. That’s good enough for me. I’m no specialist.
They’re the ones who’ll decide what’s to be done with you.”
“And the sooner the better,” her companion added. “Did
you call for backup?”
“As soon as we were sure.” She nodded. “It’ll take them a
few minutes to get here. This isn’t Brizzy, you know.”
Flinx felt unsteady on his feet as well as in his mind.
Where he had expected rescue, there was only new hurt, fresh
indifference. No, worse than indifference, for these people
saw him only as some kind of deformed, unhealthy creature.
There was no understanding for him here in this room, not
from his ancient persecutors or these new arrivals. The universe, as represented by organizations illegal and legitimate,
seemed wholly against him.
Fixed, the woman had said. He was going to be fixed. But
there was nothing wrong with him. Nothing! Why do they
want to do these unnameable things to me? he thought angrily.
The pain and confusion produced results unnoticed by the
anxious antagonists facing each other across the floor. Prodded by the powerful emotions emanating from his master,
half-awakened by the thinning quantity of soporific gas entering its cage, the flying snake awoke. It did not need to


229

search visually for Flinx—his outburst of hurt was a screaming beacon marking his location.
The snake’s wings remained folded as it quickly examined
its prison. Then it rose up and spat. In the confused babble
that filled the opposite end of the room, the quiet hissing of
dissolving pancrylic went unnoticed.
“Let’s get them outside.” The male Peaceforcer moved to
his right, separating from his companion to stand to one side
of the entrance while she moved to get behind the shifting
group gathered in the middle of the room.
“Single file now,” she ordered them, gesturing with her gun.
“All of you. And please keep your hands in the air. No dramatic last-minute gestures, please. I don’t like a mess.”
Cruachan pleaded with her. “Please, we’re just a bunch of
harmless old scholars. This is our last chance. This boy”—and
he indicated Flinx—“may be our last opportunity to prove—”
“I’ve studied your history, read the reports.” The woman’s
voice was icy. “What you did is beyond redemption or forgiving. You’ll get just what you deserve, and it won’t be a
chance to experiment further on this poor, malformed child.”
“Please, somebody,” Flinx said desperately, “I don’t know
what you’re talking about! Won’t somebody tell me—?”
“Somebody probably will,” she told him. “I’m not privy
to the details, and explanations aren’t my department.” She
shuddered visibly. “Fortunately.”
“Rose, look out!” At the warning cry from her companion,
the woman whirled. There was something in the air, humming like a giant bumblebee, moving rapidly from place to
place: a pink and blue blur against the ceiling.
“What the hell’s that?” she blurted.
Flinx started to answer, but Cruachan spoke first, taking a
step out of the line and toward the Peaceforcer. “That’s the
boy’s pet. I don’t know how it got out. It’s dangerous.”
“Oh, it is, is it?” The muzzle of the short rifle came up.
“No!” Cruachan rushed toward her, the console buzzer
screaming in his ears. “Don’t!”
The Peaceforcer reacted instinctively to the unexpected
charge. A brief burst of high-intensity sound struck the leader


230

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

of the Meliorares. His stomach exploded through his spine.
No sound had come from the gun. There had been only a
slight punching noise when the burst had struck home.
One of the elderly women screamed. The Peaceforcer cursed
her overanxiousness and took aim at the source of her embarrassment. As she pointed her weapon at Pip, all the fury
and pain and anguish crashed together inside Flinx’s head.
“Pip! No!” he yelled, rushing the woman. The other Peaceforcer moved to cover his companion. Pip darted toward the
rear of the storage room. The woman’s gun tracked the minidrag as her finger started to tighten on the trigger.
Something happened. Cruachan’s eyes were still open. A
smile of satisfaction appeared on his face. Then he died.
Night descended unexpectedly.
Flinx was floating inside a giant bass drum. Someone was
pounding on it from both sides. The rhythm was erratic, the
sound soul-deafening. It hurt.
Something was resting on his chest. I am lying on my
back, he thought. He raised his head to look down at himself.
Pip lay on the slickertic, bruised but alive. The flying snake
looked dazed. As consciousness returned with a vengeance,
the narrow tongue darted out repeatedly to touch Flinx’s lips
and nose. Content, the minidrag ceased its examination and
crawled from chest to shoulder. Flinx fought to sit up.
There was something wrong with his balance. It made the
simple act of changing from a prone to a sitting position into
a major operation. Two things he noted immediately; it was
cold, and rain was soaking his face. Then his vision cleared
and he saw the old man bending over him.
For an instant the fear returned, but this was no Meliorare.
It was a kindly, unfamiliar face. The oldster was dressed very
differently from the Society members. There hadn’t been
anything shabby about their attire. This stranger was a refugee
from a simpler life.
“Are you all right, boy?” He looked over his shoulder. “I
think he’s all right.”
Flinx looked past the old man. Several other strangers


231

were gathered behind him. It occurred to Flinx that he was
the center of their concerned curiosity. Strong arms reached
toward him and helped him to his feet. There were comments
about the flying snake riding his shoulder.
A younger man stepped forward. “You okay?” He searched
Flinx’s face. “I’ve had a little medical training.”
“I’m not—I think—” Funny, his mouth wasn’t working
right. He swallowed. “What happened?”
“You tell me,” said the unsmiling young man. He was
dressed neatly, much more so than the oldster who had first
examined Flinx. A yellow-and-green-striped slickertic covered what Flinx could see of a brightly colored business suit.
“I’m a factotum for the Subhouse of Grandier. I was just
coming down to check on the arrival of a recent shipment
from Evoria.” He turned and pointed. “That’s our warehouse
over there. I nearly tripped over you.”
“Me, too,” the oldster said, “though I’m no factotum for
anybody ’cept my own house.” He grinned, showing missing
teeth.
Flinx brushed wet strands of hair from his eyes and forehead. How had he gotten so wet? He couldn’t remember
lying down in the street. He couldn’t remember lying down
at all.
Now that those around him had quieted, the roar that had
filled his ears since he had regained consciousness assumed
deafening proportions. Sirens sounded in counterpart.
A couple of blocks away, flames shot skyward from the
top of a warehouse in defiance of the steady, light rain. A
fire-control skimmer hovered off to one side, its crew spraying the flames with fire-retardant chemical foam. It combined with the rain to knock the blaze back into itself.
“Anyway,” the younger man next to Flinx continued as
they both watched the dying inferno, “I was just entering our
office over there when that building”—he nodded toward the
flames—“blew up. If I remember aright, it was four or five
stories tall. There are only two left, as you can see. Top three
must’ve been incinerated in the first seconds. There’s charred
debris all over the streets. Knocked me right off my feet, just


232

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

like you.” Flinx’s gaze roved over the crowd that had gathered
to watch the unusual sight. Large fires were rare in Drallar.
“Somebody’s let themselves in for a nest o’ trouble,” the
oldster muttered. “Storing explosives or volatiles inside the
city limits. Bad business. Bad.”
“Someone told me they felt it all the way to the inurbs,”
the younger man said conversationally. “I wonder what the
devil was stored in there to cause an explosion like that?
Piece of building went past me like a shot. It’s stuck in our
front door, no less, if you want to see it. As I was getting up,
I saw you lying there in the street. Either something mercifully small hit you or else you got knocked out when your
head hit the pavement.”
“I didn’t see him get hit,” the oldster said.
“Doesn’t mean anything, as fast as stuff was flying.” The
executive looked at Flinx. “I’ll bet you never even felt it.”
“No,” Flinx admitted, still terribly confused. “I didn’t. But
I’m okay now.”
“You’re sure?” The man looked him over. “Funny. Whatever it was that knocked you down must have whizzed right
past. I don’t see any bruises or cuts, though it looks like your
pet got a little banged up.”
“Can do you like that,” the oldster said. “ ’Nother centimeter and maybe you’d have a piece of metal sticking out of
your head. Conversation piece.” He chuckled.
Flinx managed a weak grin. “I feel all right now.” He
swayed a moment, then held steady.
The executive was still studying the minidrag coiled around
Flinx’s left shoulder. “That’s an interesting pet, all right.”
“Everybody thinks so. Thanks for your concern, both of
you.” He staggered forward and joined the ring of spectators
gawking at the obliterated building.
Slowly, reluctantly, his brain filled in the blank spaces pockmarking his memory. Third floor, he’d been up there, and the
Meliorares . . . Yes, the Meliorares—that was their name—
were getting ready to run some tests on him. Then the Peaceforcers had broken in, and Pip had gotten loose, and one of
them had been ready to shoot it, and the head Meliorare—



233

Flinx couldn’t remember his name, only his eyes—had panicked and rushed the Peaceforcer, and Flinx remembered
screaming desperately for the woman not to fire, not to hurt
Pip, not to, not to—!
Then he had awakened, soaked and stunned in the street,
an old man bending solicitously over him and Pip licking his
mouth.
His hand went to the back of his head, which throbbed like
the drum he had dreamed of being imprisoned inside. There
was no lump there, no blood, but it sure felt like something
had whacked him good, just as the executive had surmised.
Only the pain seemed concentrated inside his head.
People were emerging from the burning warehouse: medical personnel in white slickertics. They were escorting someone between them. The woman’s clothes were shredded, and
blood filled the gaps. Though she walked under her own
power, it took two medics to guide her.
Suddenly, Flinx could feel her, for just an instant. But
there was no emotion there, no emotion or feelings of any
kind. Then he noticed her eyes. Her stare was vacant, blank,
without motivation. Probably the explosion had stunned her,
he thought. She was the Peaceforcer who had been about to
shoot Pip.
In a hospital that blankness would doubtless wear off, he
thought. Though it was almost as if she had been mindwiped,
and not selectively, either. She looked like a walking husk of
a human being. Flinx turned away from her, uncomfortable
without really knowing why, as she was put in a hospital
skimmer. The vehicle rose above the crowd and headed downtown, siren screaming.
Still he fought to reconstruct those last seconds in the
warehouse. What had happened? That unfortunate woman
had been about to kill Pip. Flinx had started toward her,
protesting frantically, and her companion had started to aim
his own weapon at him. The weapons themselves functioned
noiselessly. Had the woman fired? Had the man?
The instrumentation that had filled the storage chamber
required a lot of power. If the Peaceforcer had missed Flinx,


234

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

perhaps deliberately firing a warning shot, the bolt might
have struck something equally sensitive but far more volatile
than human flesh. As a rule, warehouses did not draw much
power. There might have been delicately attuned fuel cells in
the room. The shot might have set them off.
Or had one of the Meliorares—perhaps the one who had
fled from Pip’s cage—set off some kind of suicide device to
keep his colleagues from the disgrace of an official trial? He
felt much better as he considered both reasonable explanations. They fit what had happened, were very plausible.
The only thing they failed to explain was how he had
landed two blocks away, apparently unhurt except for a raging headache.
Well, he had been moving toward the door, and explosions
could do funny things. The streets of the industrial district
were notorious for their potholes, which were usually full of
rain water. And he was soaked. Could the force of the explosion have thrown him into one deep enough to cushion his
fall and cause him to skip out again like a stone on a pond?
Obviously, that was what had happened. There was no other
possible explanation.
His head hurt.
Local gendarmes were finally beginning to show up. At
their arrival Flinx instinctively turned away, leaving the
crowd behind and cradling Pip beneath his slickertic. He was
glad that he hadn’t been forced to use his own knife, felt
lucky to be alive. Maybe now, at last, external forces would
leave him and Mother Mastiff and Pip in peace.
He thought back a last time to that final instant in the warehouse. The rage and desperation had built up in him until
he had been unable to stand it any longer and had charged
blindly at the Peaceforcer about to kill Pip. He hoped he would
never be that angry again in his life.
The crowd ignored the boy as he fled the scene; he vanished
into the comforting shadows and narrow alleys that filtered
back toward the central city. There was nothing remarkable
about him and no reason for the gendarmes to stop and question him. The old man and the executive who had found him


235

lying in the street had already forgotten him, engrossed in
the unusual sight of a major fire in perpetually damp Drallar.
Flinx made his way back toward the more animated sections of the city, toward the arguing and shouting and smells
and sights of the marketplace and Mother Mastiff’s warm,
familiar little shop. He was sorry. Sorry for all the trouble he
seemed to have caused. Sorry for the funny old Meliorares
who were no more. Sorry for the overzealous Peaceforcers.
Mother Mastiff wouldn’t be sorry, he knew. She could be
as vindictive as an AAnn, especially if anything close to her
had been threatened.
For himself, however, he regretted the deaths of so many.
All for nothing, all because of some erratic, harmless, usually useless emotion-reading ability he possessed. Their own
fault, though. Everything that happened was their own fault,
Meliorares and Peaceforcers alike. He tried to warn them.
Never try to come between a boy and his snake.
The damp trek homeward exhausted his remaining strength.
Never before had the city seemed so immense, its byways
and side streets so convoluted and tortuous. He was completely worn out.
Mother Mastiff was manning the shop, waiting for him as
anxiously as she awaited customers. Her thin, aged arm was
strong as she slipped it around his back and helped him the
last agonizing steps into the store.
“I’ve been worried like to death over ye, boy! Damn ye for
causing a poor old woman such distress.” Her fingers touched
his bruised cheeks, his forehead, as her eyes searched for serious damage. “And you’re all cut up and bleeding. What’s to
become of ye, Flinx? Ye have got to learn to stay out of trouble.”
He summoned up a grin, glad to be home. “It seems to
come looking for me, Mother.”
“Hmpnh! Excuses. The boy’s wit is chock full of excuses.
What happened to ye?”
He tried to marshal his thoughts as he slid Pip out from
beneath the slickertic. Mother Mastiff backed away. The
minidrag was as limp as a piece of rope. It lay curled up in its


236

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

master’s lap, if not asleep then giving a fine scaly imitation of
some similar state.
“Some people kidnapped Pip. They called themselves Meliorares. But they really wanted me. They—” His expression
screwed tight as he remembered, “One of them said something about wanting to fix me. Fix what? What did they want
with me?”
She considered a long moment, studying the boy. Truly, it
appeared that he was telling the truth, that he had learned no
more than what he said. Ignoring the proximity of the hated
flying snake, she sat down and put an arm around his shoulders.
“Now mark me well, boy, because this is vital to ye. I don’t
have to tell ye that you’re different. You’ve always been different. Ye have to hide that as best ye can, and we’ll have to
hide ourselves. Drallar’s a big place. We can move the shop
if need be. But you’re going to have to learn to live quietly,
and you’re going to have to keep your differences to yourself, or we’ll be plagued with more of this unwelcome and
unwholesome attention.”
“It’s all so silly, Mother. Just because I can sometimes
sense what other people are feeling?”
“That. And maybe more.”
“There isn’t anything more. That’s all I can do.”
“Is it, boy? How did ye get away from these people.” She
looked past him toward the street, suddenly concerned. “Will
they be coming after ye again?”
“I don’t think so. Most of them were kind of dead when I
left. I don’t know how I got away from them. I think one of
them shot at something explosive and it blew up. I was blown
clear out of a building and into the street.”
“Lucky to be alive ye are, it seems, though by what providence I wonder. Maybe ’tis best this way. Maybe ’tis best ye
don’t know too much about yourself just yet. Your mind
always was advanced of your body, and maybe there’s something more that’s advanced even of that.”
“But I don’t want to be different,” he insisted, almost crying. “I just want to be like everyone else.”



237

“I know ye do, boy,” she said gently, “but each of us must
play the cards fate deals us, and if you’ve been stuck with the
joker, you’ll just have to learn to cope with it, turn it to your
advantage somehow.”
“I don’t want any advantage! Not if it’s going to cause us
this kind of trouble.”
“I’ll have none of that, boy! A difference can always be to
one’s advantage. ’Tis time ye chose a profession. I know
you’ve no like for running a shop like this one. What is it ye
like to do?”
He mulled it over a while before replying. “All I enjoy
doing is making other people happy.”
She shook her head sadly. “Sometimes I think you’ve not
enough self-interest to keep yourself alive. However, if that’s
what ye like, then you’ll have to find some way to earn a living at it.”
“Sometimes I dream of becoming a doctor and healing
people.”
“I’d advise ye to set your sights a bit lower, boy.”
“All right. An actor, then.”
“Nay, not that low. Be sensible. Set yourself to something
ye can do now, without years of study.”
“I could perform right here in the marketplace,” he said
thoughtfully. “I can juggle pretty good. You’ve seen me.”
“Aye, and yelled at ye often enough for practicing with my
expensive baubles. But ’tis a sound thought. We must find
ye a good street corner. Surely ye can’t get into trouble performing before these simple locals.”
“Sure! I’ll go and practice right now.”
“Easy, boy, easy. You’re nearly asleep on your feet, and I’ll
not have ye breaking either my goods or yourself. Go inside
and lie down. I’ll be in soon to fix ye something to eat. Go on
now, boy, and be sure and take your monster with ye.”
Cradling the exhausted Pip in his hands, Flinx rose and
made his way through the displays to the section of the shop
that served as their home. Mother Mastiff’s eyes followed
him.


238

ALAN DEAN FOSTER

What was to become of the boy? Somehow he had come
to the attention of powerful, dangerous people. At least there
was a good chance they wouldn’t be bothered for a while. Not
if he had left them “kind of dead.”
How had he escaped? Sometimes he still frightened her.
Oh, not because he would ever harm a hair of her old head.
Quite the contrary, as his dogged pursuit and rescue of her
these past days had proven. But there were forces at work
within that adolescent body, forces beyond the comprehension of a simple shopkeeper, forces he might not be able to
control. And there was more to it than reading the emotions
of others. Of that she was certain. How much more she could
only suspect, for it was clear enough the boy had little awareness of them himself.
Well, let him play at the trade of jongleur for a while. Surely
that was harmless. Surely he could not find much trouble
plying so simple an occupation.
She told herself that repeatedly all the rest of the afternoon
and on into evening as she sat watching him sleep. When she
finally slipped into her own bed, she thought she had put
such imaginary fears beyond her, but such was not the case.
She sensed that the boy lying content and peaceful in the
room opposite hers was destined for more than an idle life of
entertaining on street corners. Much more. She knew somehow that a damnable universe, which was always sticking its
cosmic nose into the destinies of innocent citizens, would
never let anyone as unique as Flinx alone.






Page 239
For a taste of Alan Dean Foster’s
Pip & Flinx novel Sliding Scales read on!

I am in danger of becoming permanently, irrevocably, and
unrescuably moody, Flinx found himself thinking. He knew
unrescuably wasn’t a word, but the mangled syntax fit his
melancholic state of mind. Forced to leave a badly injured
Clarity Held behind on New Riviera in the care of Bran TseMallory and Truzenzuzex, pursued now by a newly revealed
clutch of fatalistic end-of-the-universe fanatics who called
themselves the Order of Null (whose existence he might be
responsible for), sought by Commonwealth authorities and
others for reasons multifarious and diverse, he could be forgiven for sinking into a mood as black as the space that enveloped the Teacher.
Sensing his mood, Pip did what she could to cheer him.
The flying snake whizzed effortlessly among the garden and
fountains of the lounge, occasionally darting out from behind leaves or bushes in an attempt to startle her master—or
at least rouse him from the lethargy that had settled on his
soul ever since their forced flight from Nur. Recognizing the
effort she was making on his behalf, he smiled and stroked
her. But he could no more hide his frame of mind from the
empathetic minidrag than he could from himself. Emotionally, she knew him better than anyone, Clarity Held included.
Clarity, Clarity, Clarity, he murmured softly to himself.
When will I be able to see you again? After years of wandering, to have finally found someone he felt truly understood
him and he might be able to spend the rest of his life with
only to lose so soon was almost more than he could bear. Instead of having her to comfort him, he had agreed to spend

240

who knew how long and how much precious time searching
for an ancient weapons platform fabricated by an extinct
race that might not even prove useful or usable in diverting
an oncoming peril of incalculable dimensions and intent.
If that wasn’t enough to depress someone, he could not
imagine what was. At least his recurring headaches had not
bothered him for a while.
Even some of the live plants in the relaxation chamber
seemed to sense his melancholy, brushing his seated form
with branches and flowers. The exotic scents of several blossoms refreshed but did not inspire him. The striking foliage
could touch, even caress, but could not converse. That ability
remained the province of the Teacher’s ship-mind. To its
credit, in its limited, formalized, electron-shunting fashion,
it tried to help.
“My medical programming informs me that extended periods of depression can affect the health of a human as seriously as a bacterial infection.”
“Go infect yourself,” Flinx snapped irritably.
“It also,” the ship continued briskly, “is detrimental to the
well-being of any unlucky sentiences who are compelled to
function in the vicinity of the one so depressed.”
Slumped in the lounge chair, Flinx glanced sideways in
the direction of the nearest visual pickup. “Are you saying
that my mood is contagious?”
“I am saying that anything that affects you also affects me.
Your continuing mental condition is not conducive to the efficient functioning of this vessel.”
“Not to mention myself, eh?” He sat up a little straighter,
brushing leaves and the tips of small branches away from his
legs and sides. Several of them, very subtly, retracted without having to be touched. “You know, ship, I’ve been thinking about everything Bran and Tru told me, about all that we
discussed, and the longer I ponder on it, the more my inclination is to say the hell with it, the hell with everything.
Except for Clarity, of course.”
“I sense that this energetic verbal response is not an indication of a lightening of mood.”

241

“Damn right it isn’t. Give me one good reason why I
shouldn’t do exactly that?”
The ship did not hesitate. “Because if you do nothing, there
is a strong likelihood that everything and everyone in this
galaxy will perish, with the concomitant possibility that the
ultimate responsibility will be yours.”
He rolled his eyes. “All right—give me another reason.”
Surprisingly, the ship did not respond. Advanced AI circuitry notwithstanding, there were still occasional matters that
required a certain modicum of cybernetic reflection. This, apparently, was one of them. Or else, he told himself, it was
simply pausing for dramatic effect, something it was quite
capable of doing.
“You are not thinking with your usual clarity—if you will
pardon my use of that word in this context. I have been meditating on this situation for some days now, and I believe I
may have, in the course of researching and studying the matter, come to a possible solution.”
For the first time all day, Flinx showed some real interest.
“You don’t say? What have you been studying? Human
psychoanalysis?”
“Nothing so imprecise. Human behavior can be slotted,
albeit with variations, into specific categories. Analysis of
yours suggests that you have been laboring under immense
mental pressure for some time now.”
The tone of his reply was sardonic. “That’s hardly a news
bulletin, ship. Tell me: what prescribed remedy have you uncovered?”
The ship could not keep a note of—artificial?—
accomplishment from creeping into its dulcet electronic
tones. “Philip Lynx—you need a vacation. That one quick
recent visit to Moth was not nearly what is required. You
need a vacation from your concerns, your worries, your fears.
From trying to see and learn and study. From the immense
threat that looms over the galaxy. From yourself.”
It was not the response he had expected. Initially cynical,
he found himself more than a little intrigued. “You mean I

 242

need to spend time on a beach somewhere, or go for extended hikes in some woods? I’ve done all that.”
“No. It’s true you have been to such places and done those
things, but it was always with some specific purpose in mind.
You need to go somewhere and do some things to no purpose. You need to just ‘be’ for a while. This is a necessity for
the health of any human. The library of me says so.”
He considered thoughtfully before finally responding, “I
don’t know if I can do that, ship. I never have.”
“Then,” declared the ship conclusively, “it is time you did
so. Every one of my relevant stored medical texts attests to
the therapeutic value of such an undertaking. You need to go
somewhere interesting and expend some energy in doing
nothing. It is necessary for your health.”
Could he? he found himself wondering. Could he set
everything aside: thoughts of Clarity, of Bran Tse-Mallory
and Truzenzuzex and the steadily approaching evil that
lurked behind the Great Emptiness, of the Tar-Aiym weapons platform and all those who sought him, and really do
nothing for any appreciable period of time? Could he, dare
he, attempt the seemingly impossible? A vacation? Of everything he had done in his short but full life, that struck him as
being among the most alien. Even as a child he had not been
able to engage in such non-activity. He had been too busy
stealing, to keep himself and Mother Mastiff alive.
He had been on the verge of saying to hell with everything. Here was his ship advising him to do essentially that,
only without the attendant rancor. For a little while, at least.
But where to seek such mental and physical succor? He
asked as much of the Teacher.
“I have devoted almost a full minute of thought to the matter,” the synthetic voice replied, clearly gratified by Flinx’s
decision. “Given the inauspicious interest in your person by
everyone from several independent inimical organizations to
the Commonwealth authority itself, it is clear that you would
not be able to relax and refresh yourself on any developed
world within the Commonwealth.”
Now there’s an understatement, Flinx thought.


243

“Persisting with this line of reasoning,” ship continued, “it
is also plain that if you are forced to spend time on an undeveloped, unexplored world, you will similarly be unable to
unwind, as all your mental acuity will perforce be focused on
staying alive. This would seem to leave you with few options.”
“Indeed it would.” Flinx watched as Pip coiled around a
dark-barked shrub and slid sinuously down the oddly patterned bark. It did not appear to bother the bush.
“What is required is a comfortably habitable world that
lies not only beyond the reach of Commonwealth authority
but of those other groups that seek to incommode you. A
world where you can move about without, as humans like to
put it, having to constantly peer over your shoulder. I do not
have any shoulders to peer over, but I am able to grasp the
philosophical conceit.”
“I always said you were full of conceit,” Flinx riposted.
His heart wasn’t really in the verbal sparring, though. He
was, as ship had persisted in pointing out, very tired. “You’re
going to tell me that you’ve found such a refuge?” Near the
pond, Pip was bobbing and weaving like a serpentine boxer
as a thorny flower struck reflexively in her direction.
“I do not possess sufficient information to so categorize it,
but the world I have settled upon seems a promising candidate. Certainly it appears to fulfill the requisite conditions.”
With a sigh he sat up straight on the edge of the lounge,
trying hard not to think of Clarity Held and whether she was
recovered from her injuries. He refused to countenance the
possibility that she might not have survived. Without a doubt
he needed to find something to divert himself from incessantly dwelling on such dark possibilities.
“What’s the name of this handy haven you’ve found?” he
asked dubiously.
“The planet is called Jast.”
“Just Jast?” he queried flippantly. “Never heard of it.”
“There is no reason why you should. It is not part of the
Commonwealth and in fact does not even lie within the vast
reach of the Orion Arm considered Commonwealth space.”

 244

Remembering that he was supposed to be searching for
the vanished Tar-Aiym weapons platform, he experienced a
sudden flicker of interest. “It’s not within the Blight, is it?”
“No. Quite the opposite direction, actually.”
Just as well, he mused. Ship was proposing that he go to
this world to relax. “Where, then?”
Much compacted in scope, a three-dimensional star map
materialized helpfully in front of him. So far off the familiar
space-plus vectors was the blinking yellow indicator within
that it took a moment before his eyes found it. His brow furrowed.
“You’re right. That is outside Commonwealth space.”
“Jast lies in the region claimed by both the Commonwealth and that of the AAnn Empire,” ship informed him.
Flinx could see that for himself. The flashing indicator was
located in a vast unclaimed area approximately halfway between Rhyinpine and the AAnn capital of Blasusarr. A long
ways from anywhere, he reflected.
Maybe just what he needed.
“It’s certainly off the beaten path,” he admitted, increasingly intrigued. Pleased by her master’s interest, Pip abandoned her shadowboxing with the long-suffering flower to
flit back and settle herself in his lap. “What besides its isolation makes it suitable for a safe respite?”
“Gravity is somewhat less than t-standard, which should
make for ease of locomotion. The atmosphere is reported to
be heavy with organic contaminants, but nothing dangerous.
The dominant sentient species, the Vssey, are cordial enough
toward visitors and have achieved a high level of technological and social development. Their physical configuration
renders them generally, though not exclusively, pacific by
nature. Politically, they are an independent system allied with
the Empire. While some Vssey have adapted AAnn ways and
subscribe to the AAnn outlook, this acclimatization is far
from universal.”
Flinx made a face. “That doesn’t sound very relaxing to
me. The place is likely to be full of AAnn.”
“Records relating to Jast are understandably sparse, but

245

insist that all non-Imperial visitors are welcome. Although
your concern may be somewhat justified, Flinx, the corollary
is that while sojourning on Jast you are certain to be free of
scrutiny from any Commonwealth organization or independent hostile group, official or otherwise.”
It was a valid point. In return for exposing himself to the
curiosity of potentially confrontational AAnn, he would not
have to worry about dealing with the attention of those who
had recently been pursuing him with ever greater enthusiasm.
“What’s Jast itself like?” He was halfway convinced that
the ship had made a sensible choice.
“According to the most recent galographics of related but
non-integrated systems, it is very much what you would expect of a place that would draw the attention of the AAnn.
Dry and desert-like, though with considerably more widely
scattered rainfall than is to be found on ecologically similar
Commonwealth worlds such as Comagrave, for example.
One might think of it as a particularly wet desert. Though
fully adapted to hot, dry conditions, the native flora and
fauna is abundant and varied.”
“And the Vssey themselves?”
“An unusual biotic type.”
An image promptly appeared in the air in front of Flinx.
Lifting her head, Pip regarded it with casual interest. The
synchronized synthetic aroma that accompanied the likeness
was new to her. If anything, he thought as he studied the
three-dimensional alien portrayal, the ship was yet again
given to understatement. The Vssey was like nothing he had
encountered before in any of his extensive travels. At least,
he corrected himself, like nothing intelligent he had encountered.
On the included, integrated dimensional scale, the animated Vssey stood somewhat under a meter and a half in
height. Roughly cylindrical in shape, its lower body, or stem,
was perhaps two-thirds of a meter in diameter. At its base,
this spread out and separated into four short, stubby, oppos-

246

ing, toe-like flaps of flesh. The body itself was ridged with
ligaments and muscles.
At the upper end, the body expanded out into a meterwide flattened dome that resembled an ancient umbrella. The
overhanging, circular edge was fringed with a sufficiency of
prehensile tentacles to suggest that the Vssey were an especially dexterous species. There was no neck. Near the crown
of the dome a pair of eyes emerged on short, independently
swiveling stalks. As the animation proceeded, Flinx saw that
this arrangement allowed the Vssey to see in any direction,
as well as in any two directions at once. Located above the
flexing tentacles but well below the eyes, in place of readily
recognizable ears there flashed a narrow comb-like ribbon of
erect, dull orange membrane that ran around the entire circumference of the dome, making up in extent what it lacked
in height. Below the eyes was a slit of a mouth that, when
opened, revealed two sets of flat grinding plates for chewing
food.
Though exceedingly odd-looking, it was evident that the
Vssey had the necessary tools to see, hear, and effectively
manipulate their immediate environment. What they could
not do, Flinx immediately suspected as he continued to examine the detailed depiction, was get around very well.
“How do they move?” he murmured, fascinated as always
by the sight of an entirely new sentient body style.
“Notice the significant musculature lining the central
body core,” the ship instructed him. “Observe.”
The lowermost portion of the body and its quadruple flaps
promptly contracted and released, causing the image of the
Vssey to leap a few centimeters forward. The process repeated itself until Flinx, adequately educated, called a halt to
the display. As a method of locomotion suitable to what was
essentially a one-footed creature, the technique was admirable and efficient. It did not, however, compensate for the
fact that the Vssey were compelled to explore their surroundings literally one step at a time. Flinx found himself smiling.
A Vssey in forward motion resembled nothing so much as a
hopping mushroom.

247

“Is that as fast as they can go?”
“My records do not extend to the inclusion of a compilation of Vsseyan athletic accomplishments, Flinx. But I would
venture to say that even a moderately active human would
easily be able to run circles around any Vssey.”
“Or any AAnn would,” Flinx added somberly. Visions of
the nimble, fleet-footed reptiloids tormenting slow-moving
Vssey sprang unbidden into Flinx’s mind. It was not a pleasant picture, and he could only hope that the reality on Jast and
the relationship between the two species were more amenable than his imaginings.
“Certainly so,” the ship readily agreed. “Podal agility is
likely not to be accounted among the foremost abilities of the
Vssey. Like any intelligent species confronted with an inherent physiological impediment, I am sure they have found ways
and means to compensate. For one thing, they are asexual and
reproduce by budding. Not having to search for a mate greatly
reduces the need to move about repeatedly and rapidly, with
concurrent consequences for related evolutionary development.”
“No doubt,” agreed Flinx more somberly, losing the smile.
“Tentacles—or those tentacles—don’t look very strong.”
“They apparently are not,” the ship agreed. “However, they
must be adequate to the shaping of an advanced civilization,
which the Vssey have done. And there are many of them.
Perhaps forty or fifty weak fingers are the equal, or even the
superior, to ten stronger ones. Or to sixteen, in the case of the
thranx.”
“They must be descended from an ancestor that was originally permanently sedentary.” Flinx was taken with the possibilities of the Vssey body design. “Like Terran anemones.”
“Perhaps. The information I have on the species does not
extend to details of their racial pedigree.”
Flinx leaned back in the lounge and continued to study the
image of the Vssey as the recording ran through to its conclusion. When it began to loop, he waved it away.
“Your description of Jast doesn’t sound very inviting. I
don’t much care for dry places. As you know, during our re-

248

cent visit to Pyrassis I ‘enjoyed’ more than enough forced
desert sightseeing to last me a long, long time. Not to mention a similar experience years ago on Moth, in the company
of an old reprobate named Knigta Yakus.” His tone softened.
“But the Vssey—they intrigue me. One might almost call
them charming.”
“That is not a biologically accurate categorization,” said
the ship in a voice that was mildly reproving.
“I know. It’s a silly subjective human categorization. One
I think happens to fit the sentients under discussion.” He
waved a hand grandly. “Set course for this Jast. I’m taking
your advice, ship. I’m going to make a strenuous attempt to
unwind among the mushrooms.”
“Strenuous and unwind should not be used tangentially in
the context of a proposed vacation, Flinx, as the meaning
and intent of one seriously contravenes the meaning and intent of the other. And the Vssey are not taxonomically related
to any individual family of the fungi, irrespective of—”
“Ship?”
“Yes, Flinx.”
“Shut up and navigate.”
As always, the Teacher complied. If it felt disrespected by
the abruptness of its master’s command, it kept any such reaction entirely to itself. Besides, Flinx had taken its advice,
both as to what to do next and where to carry out the doing
of it.
No more than that could an AI ask for.
