Alan Dean Foster
NorCrystalTears

Its hard to be a larva. At first there’s nothing.
Very gradually a dim, uncertain consciousness
coalesces from nothingness. Awareness of the
world arrives not as a shock, but as a gray
inevitability. The larva cannot move, cannot speak. But
it can think.
His first memories, naturally, were of the Nursery: a
cool, dimly lit tubular chamber of controlled commotion
and considerable noise. Beneath the gently arched ceiling,
adults conversed with his fellow larvae. With awareness
of his surroundings came recognition of self and of body: a
lumpish, meter-and-a-half-long cylindrical mass of mottled
white flesh.

Through simple, incomplete eyes he hungrily absorbed the limited world. Adults, equipment, walls and
ceiling and floor, his companions, the cradle he lay in, all
were white and black and in-between shades of gray. They
were all he could perceive. Color was a mysterious, unimaginable realm to which only adults had access. Of all the
unknowns of existence, he most pondered what was blue,
what was yellow the taste of the withheld spectrum.
The adults who managed the Nursery and attended the
young were experienced in that service. They’d heard generations of youngsters ask the
same questions in the same order over and over, yet they were ever patient and polite.
So they tried their best to explain color to him. The words
had no meaning because there were no possible reference
points, no mental landmarks to which a larva could relate.
It was like trying to describe the sun that warmed the surface high, high above the subterranean Nursery. He came
to think of the sun as a brightly blazing something that
produced an intense absence of dark.
As he grew the attendants let him move about in his
crude humping, wormlike fashion. Nurses bustled through
the Nursery, busy adults gifted with real mobility. Teaching machines murmured their endless litany to the studious. Other adults occasionally

came to visit, including a pair who identified themselves as his own parents.
He compared them with his companions, like himself
squirming white masses ending in dull black eyes and thin
mouth-slits. How he envied the adults their clean lines and
mature bodies, the four strong legs, the footarms above
1



2
serving either as hands or as a third pair of legs, the delicate truhands above them.

They had real eyes, adults did. Great multifaceted compound orbs that shone like a cluster of bright jewels (light
gray to him, though he knew they were orange and red and
gold, whatever those were).

These were
set to the sides ofthe shining valentine-shaped heads,
from which a pair of
feathery antennae sprouted, honestly white. He was fascinated by the antennae, as all his companions were. The
adults would explain that two senses were held there, the
sense of smell and the sense of faz.


He understood fazzing, the ability to detect the presence

of moving objects by sensing the disruption of air. But the
concept of smell utterly eluded him, much as color did.
Along with arms and legs, then, he desperately wished for
antennae. He desperately wished to be complete.
The Nurses were patient, fully understanding such yearn-

Antennae and limbs would come with time. Meanwhile there was much to learn.
They taught speech, though larvae were capable of no
more than a crude wheezing and gasping through their flexible mouth-parts. It took hard mandibles and adult lungs
and throats to produce the elegant clicks and whistles of
mature communication.
So he could see after a fashion, and hear, and speak a
little. But sight was incomplete without color and he could
not faz or smell at all. By way of compensation the teachers
explained that no adult could faz or smell nearly as well as
the primitive ancestors of the Thranx, back when the race
ings.

dwelt in unintelligence even deeper in the bowels of the
earth than they did now, when artificial light did not exist,
and the senses of faz and smell necessarily exceeded that of
sight in importance.

He
listened
and understood, but that did not lessen the
frustration. He would worm his way around the exercise
course because they insisted he needed exercise, but he was
ever conscious of what a pale shadow of true mobility it
was. Oh, so frustrating!
Larval years were the Learning Time. Hardly able to
move, unable to smell or faz, barely able to converse, but
with decent sight and hearing a larva was adequately
equipped for learning.


3
He was
a
particularly
voracious
student,
absorbing
and
everything and asking greedily for more. His teachers
Nurses were pleased, as was the teaching machine attached
although
cradle. He mastered High and Low Thranx,
to his

and
he could properly speak neither. He learned physics
posed by
chemistry and basic biology, including the danger
the
any body of water deeper than the thorax, where
adult Thranx
adult’s breathing spicules were located. An
entered
could float, but not forever, and when the water
for primthe body, it sank. Swimming was a talent reserved
with internal skeletons.
He was taught astronomy and geology although he’d
lived benever seen the sky or the earth, for all that he
tiled and
neath the surface. The Nursery was exquisitely
town, were
paneled. Other sections of Paszex, his home
stonework. In the
lined with plastics, ceramics, metals, or
itive creatures

the Thranx
ancient burrows on the planet Hivehom, where
regurgihad evolved, were tunnels and chambers lined with
regurgitated cellulose
and body plaster.

Industry and agriculture were studied. History told how
the social arthropods known as the Thranx first mastered
Hivehom, adapting to existence above as well as
below the surface
and then spread to other worlds. Eventually theology was discussed and the larvae made
their choices.


Then on to more complex subjects as the mind matured,

to biochemistry, nucleonics, sociology and psychology and
the arts, including jurisprudence. He particularly enjoyed
the history of space travel, the stories
of the first hesitant
flights to the three moons of Hivehom
in clumsy rockets,
the development of the posigravity
drive that pushed ships
through the gulf between the stars, and the
establishment
of colonies on worlds like Dixx and
Everon and Calm
Nursery. He learned of the burgeoning
commerce between

Willo-wane, his own colony world, and
Hivehom and the other colonies.

How he wanted
to go to
Hivehom when he learned
of it!
THe mother world of the people, Hivehom. Magical enchanting

name. His Nurses smiled at
his excitement. It was
there. Everyone 1
only natural he should want to travel
profile charts, an unYet something more showed on his

larval psychologists. Posdefined yearning that puzzled the
hatching. The normal
sibly it was related to his unusual

4
but
four eggs had bequeathed not male and female pairs
three females and this one male.
?
He was aware of the psychologists’ concerns but didn’t
worry about them. He concentrated on learning as much as
wonpossible, stuffing his mind full to bursting with the

mumbled
ders of existence. While these strange adults
about “indecisiveness” and “unwilli ngness to tend toward a
procourse of action,” he plowed through the learning
grams, mitigating their worries with his extraordinary apknowledge.
,
in
interested
wasn’t
he
that
understand
Couldn’t they

petite for

everyany one particular subject? He was interested in
and they
thing. But the psychologists didn’t understand,
the Verge
fretted. So did his family, because a Thranx on
Genalways knows what he or she intends to do • • • after.
eralizations do not a life make.
For a while they thought he might want to be a philosonot of
pher, but his general interests were of specifics and

Only his unusually high scores premoving him from the general Nursery to one

abstruse speculations.

vented their
reserved for the mentally deficient.

he studied, learning that Willow-wane was a
wonderful world of comfortable swamps and lowlands, of
true
heat and humidity much like that of the Nursery. A
garden world whose poles were free of ice and whose large
even
continents were heavily jungled. Willow-wane was
more accommodating than Hivehom itself. He was fortunate
to have been bom there.
His name he knew from early on. He was Ryo, of the
Family Zen, of the Clan Zu, of the Hive Zex. The last was
cities
a holdover from primitive times, for only towns and

On and on

existed now,

no more true hives.

development of
development of
real intelligence was concurrent with the
need
egg-laying ability in all Thranx females. Gone was the

More

history, the information that the

biological
for a specialized Queen. Their newly evolved
over other
flexibility gave the Thranx a natural advantage
honorary
arthropods. But Thranx still paid respects to an
maclanmother and hivemother, echoes of the biological

was tradition.
triarchy that once dominated the race. That
The people had a great love of tradition.
He remembered his shock when he’d first learned of the

5

AAnn, a

space-going race of intelligence, calculation, cunning, and aggressiveness. The shock arose not from their
abilities but from the fact that the creatures possessed internal skeletons, leathery skins,

moved

and

flexible bodies.

They

like the primitive animals of the jungles but their

was undeniable. The discovery had caused consternation in the Thranx scientific community, which had
postulated that no creature lacking a protective exoskeleton
could survive long enough to evolve true intelligence. The
hard scales of the AAnn gave protection, and some felt

intelligence

that their closed circulatory systems

compensated for the

lack of an exoskeleton.
All these things he studied and mastered, yet he was unsettled in mind because he also knew that of all the inhabi-

Nursery who were on the Verge, he alone was
unable to settle on a career, to choose a life work.
Around him, his childhood companions made their
choices and were content as the time grew near. This one
to be a chemist, that one a janitorial engineer, the one on
the cradle across from Ryo to become a public Servitor,
another opting for food-processing management.
Only he could not decide, would not decide, did not
want to decide. He wanted only to learn more, to study
more.
Then there was no more time for study. There was only
time for a sudden upwelling of fear. His body had been
changing for months, subtle tremors and quivers jostling
him internally. He’d felt his insides shift, felt skin and self
tingling with a peculiar tension. An urge was upon him, a
powerful desire to turn inward and explode outward.
The Nurses tried to prepare him for it as best they
could, soothing, explaining, showing him again the chips
he’d studied over and over. Yet the sight of it recorded on
screen was clinical and distant, hard to relate to what was
tants of the

occurring inside his

own

body. All the chips,

all

the infor-

mation in the world could not prepare one for the reality.
Worse were the rumors that passed from Nurserymate to
Nurserymate in the dark, during sleeping time, when the
adults were not listening. Horrible stories of gross deformities, of monstrosities put out of their misery before they
had a chance to see themselves in a mirror, which others

6
said were allowed to survive for a life of miserable study as

never to be permitted out in society.
The rumors grew and multiplied as fast as the changes
in his own body. The Nurses and special doctors came and
went and monitored him intensively. Around it all, encapsulating all the mystery and terror and wonder and hope,

scientific subjects,

was a

single word.

Metamorphosis.

The process was something you could not avoid, like
death. The genes insisted and the body obeyed. The larva
could not delay

He had

it.

repeatedly with a fervor he had never
applied to anything else. He watched the recordings, marveled at the transformation. What if the cocoon was
studied

it

wrongly spun? What if he matured too soon and burst from
the cocoon only half formed or, worse yet, waited too long
and smothered?
The Nurses were reassuring. Yes, all those terrible things
had happened once upon a time, but now trained doctors
and metamorphic engineers stood by at all times. Modern
medicine would compensate for any mistake the body
might make.
,
The day came and he hadn’t slept for four days before
it. His body felt nervous and ready to burst. Incomprehensible feelings possessed him. He and the others who were
ready were taken from the Nursery. Befuddled younger
larvae watched them go, some filling their wake with cries
of farewell.

“Good-bye, Ryo . . . Don’t come out with eight legs!”
“See you as an adult,” shouted another. “Come back and
show us your hands,” cried a third. “Tell us what color is!”
Ryo knew he wouldn’t be returning to the Nursery. Once
gone, there was no reason to return. It would belong to
another life, unless he opted for Nursery work as an adult.
He watched the Nursery recede as his palette traveled in
train with the others down the long central aisle. The Nurs-

and grays, its cradles and
compassion the only companions he’d ever had, all van-

ery, its friendly-familiar whites

ished behind a tripartite door.
He heard someone cry out, then realized he was the noise-

maker. The medical personnel hushed him, calmed him.
Then he was in a great, high-ceilinged chamber, a dome

7
balanced humidity and

of glowing darkness, of perfectly
temperature. He could see the other palettes being placed
nearby, forming a circle. His friends wiggled and twisted
under the gentle glow of special lamps.

On

the next palette rested a female named Urilavsezex.
She made the sound indicative of good wishes and friendship. “It’s finally here,” she said. “After so long, after all

these years.

do

I’m—I’m not sure I know what to do

or

how

to

it.”

“Me either,” Ryo replied. “I know the
how do you tell when the precise moment
know when

the time

mistakes.”

is

...

right? I don’t

recordings, but

how do you
want to make any
is,

—

so strange. Like I like I have
to. . .
She was no longer talking, for silk had begun to
emerge magically from her mouth. Fascinated, he stared as
“I

feel

I

feel

.”

she began single-mindedly to work, her body contorting
with a flexibility soon to be lost forever. Bending sharply,
she had begun at the base of her body and was working
rapidly toward the head.
Layer upon layer the damp silk rose around her body,
hardening on contact with the air. Now he could see only
her head. The eyes began to disappear. Around him others
had begun to work.
Something heaved inside him and he thought he was
going to vomit. He did not. It was not his stomach that was
suddenly, eruptively working, but other glands and organs.
There was a taste in his mouth, not bad at all, fresh and
clean. He twisted, doubled over, working the silk that extruded in a steady, effortless flow as if he’d spun a hundred
times before.
He felt no claustrophobia, a fear unknown to a people
who mature underground. Up, high, higher, around his
mouth and eyes now, the cocoon rose. The upper cap narrowed over his head. It was almost closed when a pair of
truhands reached in and down through the remaining gap.
Moving quickly, in time to his mouth movements so as not
to become entangled in the hardening silk, they held a tube
that was pressed against his forehead.
The hands withdrew. Nothing else remained to concentrate on except finishing, finishing, finishing the work.
Then the cocoon was complete and the sedative that had

8

been injected into him combined with his physical exhaustion to speed

him

knew he would

into the Sleep.

A dim, fading part of him

whole seasons
But it wasn’t long at all. Only a few seconds, and suddenly he was kicking with a desperate intensity. Out, he
thought hysterically, I have to get out. He was imprisoned,
confined in something hard and unyielding. He shoved and
kicked with all his strength. So weak, he was so terribly
weak. Yet a small crack, there.
The sight renewed his determination and he kicked harder, punched with his hands and began to pull at the pieces
sleep for three

.

.

.

—

around him.

He

The

prison was disintegrating
whistled in triumph, kicked with all four

that cracked in front of him.

—then sprawled

legs

free

and exhausted onto a

soft floor.

On his thorax the eight spicules pulsed weakly, sucking
air. He turned his head and looked up, using his truhands
dampness still clinging to his eyes.
Then other hands were on him, turning him, helping
him untangle. Antiseptic cloths brushed at his eyes and
there was a sharp smell of peppermint. A voice spoke soothingly. “It’s all over. Relax, just relax. Let your body gather
to brush at the

its

strength.”

he turned toward the sound of the voice as
the last film masking his eyes was sponged away. A male
Thranx looked down at him. His chiton was deep purple,
so he would be quite elderly.
Realization came in a rush. Purple. The adult’s chiton
was purple, and purple was a color that had been described
to him and now he knew what it was and the ceramic inlay
in the doctor’s forehead was a single bar of silver crossed
by two bars of gold and his ommatidia were red with gold
and yellow central bands and they gleamed in the light of
and ... It was wonderful.
the room and
.
.
Instinctively

.

He

down

saw the slim body, the segmented abdomen, the four glistening wing cases, vestigial,
looked

at himself,

wings beneath, the four strong, jointed legs spraddled to his
left. He raised a truhand, touched it with a foothand, then
repeated the motion with the other pair, then touched all
four sets of four fingers together.
All around him he heard uncertain clicks and whistles as
strange voices struggled to master new bodies. Someone
brought a mirror. Ryo looked into it. Staring back at hi

m

9
was a beautiful blue-green adult, still damp but drying rapidly following Emergence. The valentine-shaped head was
cocked to one side. Cream-white feathery antennae fluttered and smothered him in the most peculiar sensations.
Smells, they were; rich, dark, pungent, musky, glowing, vanilla. The smells of the postcocoon recovery room, of his
metamorphosed friends. He knew he’d been asleep not a
few minutes or seconds but for more than half a year, that
his body had changed and matured from a pulpy, barely
conscious white thing into a gloriously streamlined adult.
He tried to gather his legs beneath him and found ready
hands on either side, helping him up. “Easy there . . .
don’t try to rush yourself,” a voice told him.

and discovered a wide window. On the
other side stood a host of excited, mature Thranx. Ryo recognized the markings of two, his sire and dame.
They were no longer kindly gray shapes. They had color
Erect, he turned

now. Evidentally they recognized him, for they made greeting signs at him. He returned them, realizing that he now
possessed the means for doing so.
The hands left him. He stood by himself on all fours,
abdomen stretched out behind him, thorax and then bthorax inclined upward with his head topping all. He
looked back over his shoulder, down at his body, then down
at the floor. He stepped carefully off the soft padding onto
the harder outside ring. Experimentally, he walked in a
slow

circle.

“Very good, Ryozenzuzex.” It was the elderly doctor
who’d supervised his Emergence. “Don’t rush yourself.
Your body knows what to do.”
Around Ryo his companions were taking experimental
deep breaths, cleaning their eyes, testing legs and fingers,
females wiggling their shining ovipositors, extending and
recoiling them.

can walk, he thought delightedly. I can see colors. He
sensed the pressure of air around him and his brain sorted
the implications. I can faz, and I can smell, and I can still
hear. He thanked those who’d assisted him and marveled at
I

the clarity of his speech; sharp clicks, beautifully
lated

—

whistles

all

the

intricate

convolutions

modu-

of

Low

Thranx. Years of study paid off now.
He marveled at that, too, his four mandibles moving

10
smoothly against each other as he made sounds of pure
pleasure. Only one thing hung in his thoughts to mar his
happiness: his body was complete but his future was not,
for he still had not the vaguest idea what he wanted to do
with himself.
Eventually he drifted into agricultural services, for he
felt a positive joy at finally being able to go Above and,
unlike his highly gregarious fellow citizens, took pleasure
in working outside the town.

He drowned

and confusion in
he took as premate a bright and

his personal uncertainties

work. Pushed by his clan,
energetic female named Falmiensazex. Life settled into a
comfortable, familiar routine. His clan and family ceased
to worry about him, and the old, nagging indecision faded
steadily until

it

was nearly

forgotten.

was the midday of Malmrep, the third
of Willow-wane’s five seasons and the time
of High Summer. The weather was rich with
moisture and the air rippled with heat.
Ryo checked the readout on the console. Two assistants
accompanied him on the scouting expedition into the jungle. They were to survey the feasibility of planting two
thousand bexamin vines.
He’d argued long and patiently with the Inmot local
council who had intended to plant the newly drained and
cleared land in ji bushes. Ryo insisted that it was time to
diversify local operations further and that bexamin vine,
which produced small hard berries of deep ocher hue, was
the most suitable candidate for planting.
The berry fruit was useless, but the single seed that lay
at the center of each, when crushed and mixed with water
and a protein additive, produced a wonderfully sweet syrup
that was nearly as nutritious as it was tasty. But the fifteenmeter-long vines required more attention that the most delicate ji bush. Nevertheless, the council voted three to two
It

in favor of his suggestion.

Ryo was

quite conscious of

how much was

riding

on the

success of this planting. While failure would not shatter his
solid reputation within the Company, a good bexamin crop

would considerably enhance it. Whether a grand triumph
was a good idea he wasn’t sure, but he didn’t seem to be
progressing in any other directions. So he thought he might
as well rise within the Company structure.
“Bor, Aen,” he said to his two assistants, both of

whom

were older than

We’re

he, “break out the transit sighters.

going to lay a line down that way.” With right foothand
and truhand he gestured to his left, to the northeast.
They acknowledged the order by unpacking the instruments and fixing them to the proper mounts on the side of
the crawler. Ryo made sure the stingers were unstrapped
and ready for use in case they should meet with an errilis.
But nothing sprang from the tangled vegetation to challenge them as they powered up the instruments. Minutes
passed and Bor was removing a reflective marker from its
case when an explosion threw him violently to the crawler
deck. The concussion bent the thinner trees eastward. Vines
and creepers were torn free of their branches. Only his
11

12

on the

grip

steering pylon enabled

Ryo

to maintain his

footing.

During the silence that followed, the three of them lay
stunned, not knowing what to make of the violence. Then a
frantic cacophony of screeks and wails, moans and weeping
rose from the startled inhabitants of the jungle as they recovered from their own shock.

A trio of splay-footed inwicep birds ran past the crawler,
their meter-wide

webbed

feet barely tickling the

swamp

water, their necks held parallel to the surface and their

them for balance.
“Ovipositors acute!” muttered Bor. “What was that?” As
if to punctuate the query there was another roar, less cataclysmic but still strong enough to rattle the treetops.
Both assistants looked to Ryo for an explanation, but he
could only stare south, the way they’d come, and perform
instinctive gestures of befuddlement. “I’ve no idea. It almost sounds as if the generator nexus went up.”
thin blue tails stretched out behind

“A

collision at the transport terminal perhaps,”

sug-

gested Aen.

Bor made a gesture of assurance. He was
the eldest of the trio. “Only a monitor breakdown for the
northern sector of the continent would allow such a disaster. Even if that came to pass I can’t visualize any collision
of modules producing such an explosion.”
“That would depend on what they were carrying,” said
Ryo, “but I agree with you. A more likely source of such
energy would be the Reducer complex south of town where
“Not

they

possible.”

distill

fuel alcohols.”

Aen

concurred. “We’d best hurry back and see what
can do to help. There may be fire in the burrows.”

we

have clanmates who work at the Reducer.” Bor was
no less concerned than his friends.
“And I,” added Aen.
Ryo gunned the engine of the crawler. Broad exterior
treads spun in opposite directions. The vehicle turned on its
axis and Ryo sent it rumbling back down the path they’d
crunched through the raw jungle. Ooze and water sprayed
from the speeding machine’s flanks as Bor and Aen hur“I

riedly restowed the survey equipment.

A fresh shock

awaited them as they reached the edge of
the jungle and were about to touch the farthest of the plan-

13
tation access roads.

Two

large shuttlecraft of peculiar mul-

tiwinged design were resting there. In landing they’d made
a ruin of several neatly tended fields of weoneon and asfi.

The

local airport

was south of Paszex, a

fact that

Ryo

could not reconcile with the presence in his familiar fields
of the two strange ships. It was the older Bor who roughly
took the controls from him and hurriedly backed the crawler into the cover of the jungle.
The action ended Ryo’s immobility, if not his confusion.
“I don’t understand. Is it some kind of emergency? Is that
?”
why they didn’t set down at the port and
Bor interrupted him, pragmatism assuming sway over
.

.

.

politeness.

“Those are not Thranx, or anything else friendly. They
are AAnn shuttlecraft. Don’t you recall them from Learning Time? There has to be an AAnn warship somewhere in
orbit around Willow-wane.”
Bor’s words brought the segment of study back to Ryo in

a

rush.

Powerful, antagonistic, and crafty were the words that
best described the endoskeletal space-going AAnn. Their
star systems lay farther out along the galactic plane than
the Thranx worlds. Though war had never been declared
between the two races, occasional “mistakes” were made

by

AAnn commanders who “overstepped
Or so the AAnn apologies always insisted.

individual

orders.”

their

Since the Central government on Hivehom was always
practical about such matters, the errors never led to fullscale combat. Such isolated incidents were irritating but
rarely outrageous.

The Grand Council

therefore chose to

protest such incidents through diplomatic channels.

This policy was not

much comfort

individuals driving the crawler,

to the three outraged

an unusual

state of affairs

among a people normally respectful of authority.
The trio could not sympathize with diplomats,

since all

they could see were two invading craft that had destroyed
laboriously groomed fields, and the plumes of dark black
smoke that rose like mutilated ghosts above Paszex.

“We must do

something .”

Ryo

stared helplessly through

the trees. Across the fields drifted the hiss of discharging

energy weapons mixed with the lighter crackle of Thranx

14
stingers

and an occasional nasty cur-rrrupmph! from explo-

sive shells.

“What can we do?”

Bor’s tone

“We do not have—

was one of calm accep-

His voice rose at the thought
and his eyes gleamed like diamonds. “We do have weap-

tance.

”

ons.”

Ryo’s hands pulled the largest stinger rifle from its holster. He needed all four to handle it. “Bor, you drive the
crawler. Aen, you navigate and keep watch for the AAnn.”
“Pardon,” Aen objected, “but in accordance with our respective positions it would be my place to drive, Bor’s to
shoot, and yours to navigate.”
“Rank is hereby superseded by circumstance.” Ryo was
checking the charge on the rifle. It was full. “I order you
to disregard position.”
“If

you wish

me

you cannot give
she argued smoothly. Bor settled the

to ignore position then

me

an order to do so,”
argument by plunging the crawler through the trees onto
the field of cab-high asfi. They were soon submerged in ripe
yellow pods just starting to droop from their green-andblack-striped stalks.

Noise and gunfire continued to issue from the direction
of the town. That was natural. Also promising, Ryo
thought. Having touched down unopposed in an unprotected colonial region, the invaders quite likely

would an-

way

of armed resistance. Certainly
nothing as absurd as a counterattack.
Ryo ordered Bor to aim the crawler for the parked shut-

ticipate little in the

Ryo wished simultaneously for an energy rifle. That
would be much more effective against machinery, the
tles.

been designed for use against living beings.
They approached quite near to the shuttles and still no
one appeared to challenge them. The shuttleeraft were the
first true space-going vehicles Ryo had ever seen. Paszex
and Jupiq and even Zirenba did not rate a spaceport. Only
facilities for less powerful suborbital craft.
At Aen’s suggestion, Bor swung the crawler sharply left
and off the main cultivation path. Now they were smashing crudely through the dense rows of asfi stalks. Fruit and
stingers having

stalks flew in all directions.

Such casual destruction was normally worthy of severe
condemnation, but under the circumstances Ryo didn’t

15
worry about possible social consequences. And then, suddenly and unexpectedly, a single creature was standing just
ahead and to the right of the rapidly advancing crawler.
The AAnn was relieving himself and the abrupt appearance of the crawler was a shock. He stumbled over his
short pants and growled unintelligibly.
The blunt, heavy jaws were filled with sharp teeth. A
pair of black, single-lensed eyes peered from high on the
two sides of the head.
single tail curved from behind.
The large, clawed feet wore devices that resembled steel
spats. Its short pants were matched by a shirt of dull color
and a helmet forested with electronic sensors.
A thick cord connected a bulky hand weapon to a power pack slung around the AAnn’s waist. The muzzle swung
around to point at the onrushing crawler.
Civilized thoughts were subsumed by fury and Ryo
never hesitated. Had he been the average worker, he would
have died, but in the swamps Ryo had acquired reflexes
that most hive dwellers lacked.
There was a sharp crack from the stinger and a tiny bolt
of electricity jumped from its tip to strike the AAnn
squarely in the chest The AAnn convulsed, jumped a meter clear of the ground, and fell back twitching. He was
motionless by the time the crawler rumbled past. Now the
enormity of what Ryo had just done finally struck. He’d
deliberately slain another sentient creature. For an instant
Ryo was a little shaky.
They could hear anguished, high-pitched whistles from
the direction of Paszex. Primitive instincts overwhelmed

A

The

was
defending the burrow

the last of thousands of years of civilization.

hive

being attacked. Ryo was a soldier
entrances. All that mattered now was defense.
By now they were quite close to the nearer of the two
shuttlecraft and Ryo was hunting for a section of the ship
that might prove vulnerable to his weapon. If he’d had an
energy rifle he would have begun by shooting at the multiple landing gear or at the transparent crescent that

command

marked

cabin above the nose. But these were warcraft. There were no exposed antennae or exterior engines.
Several armed AAnn stood beneath the nearest wing.
They glanced up in surprise as the crawler rumbled into
view. Ryo shot one of them before the others could move.

the

16
frantically for the

The group suddenly broke and ran

ramp

to the belly of the shuttle.
Ryo caught another AAnn with a second bolt halfway
and
up the ramp, watching coldly as the creature jerked

that led

from the ground

downward. Several energy beams reached from the
wildly
other retreating soldiers toward the crawler but, fired
it
and in haste, they missed the agile machine as Bor sent

twisted

winding in unpredictable directions.
Now they were crossing under the stern of the first
sent several
shuttle and careening toward the second. Ryo
then the
shots crackling toward the twin exhaust jets and
comrocket openings between, hoping to disable some vital
ponent.

He had no way of knowing if the bursts were effec-

tive.

By

this

time panic was giving

way

to reaction

among

of enthose on board the craft. Suddenly a powerful wash
carbonergy radiated from the bow of the second ship. It
crawlized the ground ahead and to the left of the charging
er.

soft
‘Turn, turn!” shouted Aen. Bor responded with
annoyclicking noises indicating acknowledgment and mild

ance.
for the concealment of some tettoq
second energy blast seared the earth where the

The crawler raced
trees.

A

crawler had been heading

moments

earlier.

Other rushing, mechanical sounds reached them. Lookdisappeared
ing back over the stem of the crawler as they
make out
into the shelter of the tettoq boles, Ryo could

moving

figures hurrying

toward the

shuttles.

Some were on

Othsingle-tracked machines that carried soldiers in pairs.
town.
ers ran on foot. All were pouring out of the

from the second shuttle was joined by a flare
orchard
from the first. Beams from both swept the tettoq
enough to exin search of fleeing enemy. One struck near
the overplode the crawler’s rear tread. But by that time
ofworked vehicle was limping into the far thicker cover
fered by the jungle.
two
Almost reluctantly, a final, fiery burst cut down
crash just to
massive lugulic trees, which fell with a ripping
down vines and
the left of the damaged crawler, carrying
rising whine filled the
lesser trees with them. Then a rich,

The

air.

fire

17

“Can you

what they’re doing?” Bor asked, maintaining as complex an evasive course as he could manage with
the damaged tread. Ryo and Aen tried to stare through the
see

trees.

“The ramps have been taken in,” Ryo said excitedly.
“Judging from the noise, I’d say they’re preparing to
leave.”

“Surely not because of our little diversion?”
“Who knows?” Pride filled Aen’s voice. “They were certainly surprised. Perhaps they think several dozen of us,
mounting deadlier weaponry, are preparing to attack

them.”

“Such speculation

is

unbecoming,” Ryo murmured.

“The circumstances support
“Then again,” Bor put in,

it,”

she replied.

“it

may be

that their flight

has several possible causes.”

“Meaning what?” wondered Ryo.
Bor brought the crawler to a halt and joined them in
gazing through the wall of trees. “Either they have accomplished whatever evil they planned for our poor hive or
else,”

and he pointed skyward with a truhand, “one of the

warships that occasionally but regularly visits our system
had received word of this attack and has drawn near.”
The whine of the lifting jets achieved a respectable thunder and the three Thranx watched as the warcraft taxied
through more of the fresh asfi, picked up speed, and gradually rose into the eastern sky. Of defensive aircraft from
distant Ciccikalk there was still no sign.
As to whether a Thranx warship had actually arrived on
the orbital scene and prompted the retreat, they would
have to wait to find out. The echo of the jets faded. There
was nothing to hint that anything out of the ordinary had
happened, nothing save the columns of black smoke, the
crushed vegetation in the fields, and the faint, awful smell
of something burning.
Paszex had not been completely destroyed. One of the
natural advantages of living underground is that all but the
uppermost levels of a community are relatively impregnable
to all but the heaviest weapons.

From

their primitive begin-

nings the Thranx had always lived beneath the surface of

the earth.
Still,

substantial

and heartrending damage had been

*

18
tended ordone. Besides the casual destruction of carefully
station was
chards and fields, the hive’s module transport
intakes and ventitwisted, running metal. Many of the air
much dry straw.
lation stacks had been burned away like so
No real military purpose could have been served by such
destruction;

it

seemed

to

have been done more for amuse-

ment than tactical advantage.
The hive’s communication center and satellite terminal
had
had also been destroyed, but not before the operators
succeeded in transmitting a message to Zirenba.

From

was instantly relayed to Ciccikalk, whence help
had been summoned.
Many were dead and every clan had new ancestors to
wailhonor. But there were no recriminations, no days of
untouched
ing and weeping. Because the water lines were
there

it

but the
the Servitor staff could efficiently extinguish all
remost persistent fires. Because the Servitors were also
peace
sponsible for such diverse functions as keeping the
were
cleaning up the garbage, restoration and repair

and

well coordinated from the beginning.
rosFamilies tallied their losses, clanmothers compiled
Paszex back toters of the dead, while the job of putting
had been
gether again proceeded smoothly. Since the AAnn
too busy or too contemptuous to destroy the synchronousorbit

communications

satellites

above Willow-wane, rees-

simply a
tablishing contact with the rest of the planet was
the
matter of placing portable communication discs above

town.
for such details as he’d raced through
the smoke-filled corridors in search of Fal.
that,
She’d been working in the Nursery. If he’d known

Ryo

cared

little

he wouldn’t have worried so much about her. But he
couldn’t be sure she was at work when the AAnn attacked.
She could have been anywhere in the hive. It was a considerable relief to learn that she was safe and unhurt.
When the first explosions had sounded, followed immeof the
diately by the alarms, she’d assisted in the transfer
hive’s
larvae to the special Nursery chambers below the
attendants
fifth and bottom level. There she and the other
waited out the battle in comparative safety.
The emergency lower Nursery had its own sealed air
supply as well as weapons, and could have held out for

19
long-term invaders.
Such security for the young was a holdover from the
Thranx’s primitive past. Even after attaining intelligence
three seasons without revealing

itself to

and civilization, the Thranx had never forgotten that the
most basic ingredient for the survival of a people is the
protection of the young.

Eventually the town learned that the timely arrival of a
Thranx warship had, indeed, forced the hasty AAnn retreat. That did not prevent Ryo, Bor, and Aen from being
accorded the status due local heroes.
They had been responsible for the deaths of at least
three of the bandits the local council would not dignify
the AAnn by calling them invaders and one of the two
AAnn shuttles had been destroyed by the Thranx warship
before rendezvous with its mother ship. The Thranx captain had ascribed the fatal shot to an improperly supervised
gunnery officer, subsequently “reprimanded.” So there was
something of a trade-off, incidentwise. Nevertheless, a few
were convinced that the success was due to Ryo’s stinging
rifle. But there was now no way to prove this, so Ryo and
his companions naturally refused to accept credit for it.
That did not keep the hive council from voting them
commendations and thanks. There was even talk of some
kind of presentation at the capital. That never materialized,
but weeks later Ryo learned that he had been nominated
for a single crimson star by the grateful colonial government, and that the award had been approved by the appropriate bureau on Hivehom, in Daret. The star was to be

—

set in his chiton just

Some

behind his

and

—

left shoulder.

accomplishment could boast twenty and thirty such stars, acquired
through long and meritorious service.
few even carried
the coveted yellow sunburst. But thousands of respected
achievers had never received a single such honor. The
award was quite a coup for Ryo’s clan, though he cared
little for it. Anyone would have done as he had, presented
with the same options. Nonetheless, it was argued, it was
military

civilian heroes of great

A

he who had done it.
As the weeks passed, supplies were air-ferried from Zirenba, and Jupiq and Paszex’s other sister towns contributed
what they could. Medical and food supplies were the first
to arrive in quantity, followed by technicians, building ma-

20
terials,

and sophisticated replacement components from

Ciccikalk.

The damaged

New

ventilation

were soon readied for replanting.
and exhaust stacks were quickly set and
fields

sealed in place.

The

damage was

module transport terminal. Ryo went there one day to see how repairs were
progressing. It was important to the Company because most
of Inmot’s local unprocessed produce was shipped via modgreatest

to the

ule to Zirenba.

The guide

on which the magnetic repulsion modules cruised were still being poured and cast. The thick
gray-white plastic would solidify quickly into a nearly unbreakable, flexible line. New coils were being sealed into
position. Under the critical gaze of a large crew of local
and imported technicians the station was being rebuilt in
the most modem style and much expensive sunglass crystal
was used as shielding.
The new station would be larger and more efficient as
well as more attractive than its predecessor, though the citizens of Paszex would gladly have traded it for the old one
and a retraction of the cause of its destruction. Ryo wondered if the lavish new terminal was the government’s subtracks

apology to the scarred inhabitants.
big celebration was held when the first modules arrived over the new track from Jupiq, but Ryo missed the
event, being deep in the jungle at the time. He watched it
via screen later that night, saw the dozen oblong passenger
modules link up outside Jupiq to form a single silvery segmented train, then split up outside Paszex to arrive in
tle

A

stately individual procession.

system was operational again. Goods and
individuals could once more travel freely between Paszex

At

least the

and the rest of Willow-wane. Only decorative detail remained to be added to the terminal. More government
money. More apologies.
A formal clan evening meal was served that night. The
clan hall was utilized and the meal set two timeparts later
than normal to allow everyone time to dress properly. Fine
jewelry and inlays were brought out for the occasion. There
were neck pouches and body vests of orange and silver
mesh, pink threadwork so fine that it seemed no hand or

21

machine could manage the weave. Females and males alike
sported inlays of cerulean and camelian, obsidian and chalcedony, faceted gems, fine ceramic and enamel in curlicues, triangles, and bars. Most gleamed from excavations
made between mandibles and eyes, though more official inserts shone on a few shoulders and necks.
After the meal Ryo’s crimson star was awarded in a formal ceremony. The four-pointed insignia was presented by
a minor government functionary who’d traveled from Zirenba for the occasion.

The

presented the small transparent case to the
venerable Ilvenzuteck, Ryo’s clanmother, who handed it
official

proudly to the inlayer. The craftswoman

work with
excavating a gap from the
set to

blades and chisels, painlessly
chiton of Ryo’s left shoulder while the rest of the clan
looked on approvingly.

Permaglue was brushed on the base of the star, which
was then carefully set in place, the metal fitting flush with
Ryo’s exoskeleton. The inlayer, an old Thranx, took satis-

from a perfect fit on the first attempt. No glue
oozed from the edges of the incision. She’d done this many
times before, though mostly with cheap ceramics and
rarely before an audience. She applied a little saliva to
faction

shine the star, inlayer tradition.

decoration would remain a permanent part now of
Ryo’s body, for all to see and admire. If he ever did any

The

would be amusing when strangers asked him in
what campaign, during what exploration he’d achieved the
award. He would have to confess that he’d earned it for
acceding to the impulse to prevent belligerent aliens* from
knocking down tettoq trees and asfi bushes.
A loud whistling arose from the assembled clanate, from
elders, adults, and adolescents alike. The whistle of approval rose shrilly and then snapped off, neatly concluded.
Ryo acknowledged it while Fal beamed proudly at him
from her seat nearby.
She looks particularly beautiful tonight, he thought, with
the simple yellow stripes in her forehead and the three pink
dots topping each. She wore matching neck and body attire
of violet iridescent material. Violet and silver thread had
been applied with temporary glue around her b-thorax and
spicules. Silver wires formed double helixes around both
traveling,

it

22
arching ovipositors, an agonizingly long task at which her
brother and friends had helped.
For a moment Ryo thought to boldly announce their intention to mate, but of course he could not do that without
consulting her first, though he knew she would agree instantly. It was just as well, he thought. Lovely as she was,
wasn’t certain he was ready for that.
So he stood, accepting the accolades of his clan, the
four-pointed crimson star shining on his shoulder. As he
thought of the lady who loved him and the certain promo-

he

still

tion to the

Inmot

he was

local council,

quiet,

contempla-

tive.

one in the assembled crowd of friends and relatives
could have guessed that the thought uppermost in Ryozenzuzex’s mind was this: he did not hate but, instead, greatly

No

envied the

A Ann

of the shuttles

.

•

•

The

ship

was nearly

as

young

as her captain.

Six great oval projection fans formed a circle
in front of

it,

attached to the octahedral bulk

of the craft proper by long metal corridors

and a webwork of struts and braces.
Each fan generated a portion of the posigravity field, a
crude precursor of the KK drive that was to come following the Amalgamation. This field pulled the ship through
Space Plus, for all that it was ungainly, unstreamlined, and
resembled an angular metallic squid. Generation of the posigrav field used a great deal of energy and Space Plus was
no place for timid physics. It was a region inhabited by
ghost stars, where visible light turned diffuse and X-ray
stars became visible. Other peculiarities were normal to
Space Plus, the region of theory wherein the ships of Deep
Space uncertainly made their way. A captain had to be
ready to deal with

nomena, some

of manipulative physical phethat were not matter, others that were not
all sorts

energy.

Below Space Plus lay normal space (“below” here signifying a place more colloquial than relativistic), where
could be found predictable stars and habitable planets.
Below that were the unnatural atomic and subatomic vagaries of Space Minus, or Nullspace, a region of eternity
best not touched, where tachyons and other nonexistent
particles became real and where ships and messages sometimes vanished more utterly than if they’d dropped into a
collapsar. Nullspace was, according to a most respected
Thranx theosophical physicist, “the inside-out of real.”
Captain Brohwelporvot strolled the control room of the
Zinramm. Though he was on his third expedition for
Deep Space Research he was still nervous about his first
command. Relaxed in their saddles, his crew formed a circle around him.
Through the forward observation port the distant purple
glow of the posigravity drive field marked the burrow the
Zinramm was tunneling through Space Plus. They were a
quarter of a season out from Hivehom system. In addition
to verifying and extending the charts for this considerable

and studied two new planetary systems, one holding a world that was marginally inhabitable a discovery by itself sufficient to make this the
section of space, they’d entered

—

23

24
most productive of the three expeditions Broh had so

far

directed.

he drove ship and crew
deeper through the Arm. Nothing ever quite satisfied
Broh, no discovery sated his curiosity or sense of duty. His
internal drive was one of the reasons he’d been selected to
command the Zinramm when his years did not seem to
Still,

merit

as they

had time

left,

it.

The scanner made a

sign toward his captain with a foot-

hand, the other foothand poised delicately above lower contacts and his truhands remaining on the controls.

“What

is it,

Uvov?”

Extrasystemic, twenty squares right of our
present course. Moving at moderate speed and inclined
slightly up from the plane of the ecliptic.”
“Intercept course?” Broh stared over the scanner’s shoul“Object,

sir.

der at quadruple colored screens.

“Three timeparts,” replied the scanner, after a moment

s

calculating.

“Identification?”

“Impossible to say at this distance and velocity, sir. It’s
quite small. Wandering asteroid perhaps. Cometary nuHe left the always hopeful question unancleus. Or? . .
swered.

Broh

said nothing.

Such gaps were what the journey of

considered. They
were in no hurry to get anywhere and any object traveling
this far out from a system was worth a casual inspection.
Turning, he called across the disk of the room.

the

Zinramm were supposed

to

fill.

He

“Emmt.”
“Sir,” the pilot replied, swiveling slightly to look

back

at

him.
“Maintain course for two timeparts, then drop to normal
space.”

She turned to her instrumentation and commenced programming.
“Defense?”
“Ready, sir.”
“Place ship on third-degree alert, one degree of uncertainty. Personnel, sound stations for drop to normal space.”
The bridge was a quiet maze of moving multidigited
arms and legs as the command crew scrambled smoothly to
“Yes,

sir.”

25

comply with the sudden rush of orders. There was no confusion, no uncertainty to the preparations. Not like the first
time, Broh thought ruefully. Now everyone knew precisely
what was expected. They worked without hint of excitment, the thrill of such encounters having been dulled by
numerous similar incidents that invariably proved to be of
minor scientific utility.
Soon the computer called up the count from engineering.
“Bite
one, two, three
and on toward eight and
the drop from Space Plus. Broh braced himself in the cap.

.

.

.

.

.

tain’s saddle.

There was a violent wrench, the ship shuddered like a
leaf in a whirlwind, and Broh was certain his insides would
spill out through his mouth. The nausea passed with merciful speed and no unseemly regurgitation. The forward observation port showed relaxed, normal stars of recognizable
color and shape instead of the ghostly auras that had earlier marked their location. Nothing else was visible via the
port, but the search screens were alive with information.
“Scanner,” he called briskly, “do you have the object?”
“Coming up on screen one, sir.”
The large screen set on the wall to the left of the port
flickered momentarily. Then the subject of their temporary
drop from Space Plus became visible and the attitudes of
those who could spare a moment from their assignments
changed drastically. Startled clicks echoed through the
bridge. The object was not an asteroid, or a comet head.
Analysis confirmed what the eye supposed: the object
was largely metallic. Further information merely confirmed the obvious. The artifact was a ship. Three cones
formed the front section of the vessel, attached by struts
and beams to a sphere. The arrangement hinted at a different,

but not radically

so,

propulsive system.

The senior science council had arrived on the
drawn from their studies by the announcement
forthcoming sublight encounter.

bridge,

of the

Now

they crowded next to
the captain’s position and stared at the screen. There were
three of them, in age all quite senior to Broh. They waited,

however, for him to make the proper command inquiries.
Now more than ever in his brief and comparatively
uneventful career, Broh was aware of his lack of experience. Not that he would permit that to show. In some ways

26
the science council outranked him.

would allow him

that. It

He was

grateful for

to ask obvious questions without

seeming stupid.

“AAnn

or related design?” he asked sharply.
“No,” replied the first observer. She studied the screen
intently. “At least, not of any AAnn designs I’ve ever seen.
The projection fans for such we must assume they are

—

—

are quite different from ours or the AAnn’s, though somewhat more similar to the AAnn’s.”
“Also the number of projection units three is the
same as the AAnn employ.” The second observer pointed
toward the image and described silhouettes in the air. “But

—

—

see, they are far

more

flat

than ours or the AAnn’s. I won-

wraps around the ship
in Space Plus.” He muttered about the displacement of
reality and other arcane matters that were as much solipsistic and metaphysical as hard science.
Of course, there was no firm boundary between reality
and unreality when one was dealing with such concepts as
Space Plus and Space Minus. When brilliant generalists
like the three observers got together, even theology sometimes took on the aspect of a hard science.
The alien vessel grew steadily larger and magnification
was correspondingly reduced until finally they found themder

how

that affects the field that

selves looking at a real-size image.
“Try signaling,” the third observer suggested.

“What frequency?” Communications
“All,”

Broh

said.

asked.

“Try standard hive channels

first,

then

AAnn frequencies.”
“But the
nizable

first

observer already has said

AAnn type,

it’s

not a recog-

sir.”

Broh ignored the insubordination. “It may be a new
type,” he responded. “Or an ally of the AAnn we know
nothing of.”

scanner commented, “it’s been badly
suddenly
treated.” Screen two, to the right of the viewport,
came to life with a close-up of the alien’s fore section. Two
of the three cone-shaped units had been badly damaged.
Broh requested an analysis and opinion of the damage.
not,”
“It could have been meteoric material, but I think
“If

it’s

an

ally,” the

twists
said the analyzer. “See the way the metal folds and
back on itself there at the leading edges? And there, along

27
the support beams, surely that’s the

mark of heavy-energy

weaponry.”

murmured

“Possibly,”
interested

now

the

first

observer.

She was more

in the after section of the ship.

“No

response to inquiries, sir,” Communications announced. Broh mulled that over. Coupled with the signs of
severe damage, everything indicated that they were looking
at a dead ship, a wandering derelict. He put the thought to
the council.
“It could be a clever trap,” suggested the second ob-

“The damage could have been falsified to lure us
close enough to be taken before we had a chance to signal.
Such a ploy would be typical of the AAnn.”
server.

“If that’s the case,” said Broh, “we’ll

know

in less than a

timepart.”
If the alien

was a thangner hiding

was a most patient one.

in

its

silken burrow,

it

continued to coast as they apengines apparently quite dead. Not a hint of
It

proached, its
energy issued from the three cone projectors.
“If that’s a decoy, it’s fooled me,” Communications muttered.

Broh frowned inwardly. It was not the communicator’s
place to offer such a comment. He would have to speak
with the officer later.
“Still nothing on all bands,” the communicator said
coolly. ‘Trying unassigned frequencies now. I’ll run the
whole spectrum.”
The images on screen two shifted. “There appears,” the
analyzer pointed out judiciously, “to be damage to the main
body of the vessel as well as to the projection units.”
Broh made a clicking sound, gestured. “Bring us around
toward the main body, then.”
Slowly the Zinramm changed direction toward the stem
of the strange craft. Now they could see a few weak lights
glowing from behind intact ports. These were located
mostly near the upper rearmost section of the ship. The
ports were circular instead of triangular, but no one on the

Zinramm' bridge made the obvious lewd comments. The
main body was larger than that of the Zinramm larger
than that of most Thranx vessels but, save for the few
dimly illuminated ports, the alien craft was dark as night.
Broh whistled into the communicator that hung from his

—

—

28
s inheadset to activate the proper section of the Zinramm
Anzeljermeit, I
ternal co mmuni cations system. “Outside?
want a burrowing party of five.”
“Five, Captain?” came the querulous acknowledgment.
damage
“Five should be sufficient. I do not believe the

to this alien

is

difference

how

“Arms,

sir?”

camouflage. And if it
many are in the group.”

is,

it

will

make no

Broh hesitated. For this he had prescribed procedure to
draw upon.
w
“Small arms only. In one-tenth of a timepart. Lock six.
.

“We’ll be ready, sir.”
Broh rose fro his saddle, turned to the science council.
it very
“I have no power to compel you but I would like

m

much

if

—

you

observer cut him off with a concomitant gesSuch a
ture of apology. “This is what we live for, Captain.
moment is the joy of a life. You could not keep us from

The second

boarding that marvelous mystery if you wished to. There is
hardly a need to ask us to accompany you.”
mild
“I thought as much.” Broh’s gesture indicated
amusement mixed with high gratification. “The law requires that I ask.”

“Of course,” said the third observer. “Let us not
waste any more time in discussion of the accepted.”
The five Outside specialists were suited and waiting in
lock six when Broh and the science council arrived. The
Zinramm would not dock with the alien vessel. Broh was
not that confident of the derelict’s harmlessness, so the
party moved from the lock into a small shuttlecraft, one
normally used for conveying explorers to the surface of a
solid body.
The lock sealed behind them. Anzeljermeit, leader of the
Outsiders,

fired

engines very briefly. The
compartment and out into space,

the shuttle’s

shuttle slipped free of

its

angling toward the intimidating bulk of the alien ship. Anzeljermeit’s four subordinates struggled to maintain the
pose of professional indifference, but there was no mistaking their tense posture.

The alien was perhaps half again the size of the Zinramm. The perfect spherical body was unsettling to those
on the shuttle. They were used to ships, those of the AAnn

29
as well, that boasted a comforting alignment of planes and
sharp angles.
vessel shaped as a smooth globe was some\
thing most disturbing.

A

At

was marred by the expected
projections. Antennae and samplers were more or less recognizable. Several blunt nozzles were not, though if they
were anything but the business ends of weapons Broh
would have been much surprised. They remained comfortingly angled away from the approaching shuttle and the
motionless mass of the now distant Zinramm.
least the skin of the alien

Anzeljermeit carefully adjusted the attitude of the shut-

around the flank of the alien and toward
the stern. It did not take long to locate what had to be an
exterior lock. The officer barely touched the maneuvering
rockets. Tiny puffs of gas flared from the shuttle’s sides,

tle,

directing

moving

it

it

closer to the alien before firming

its

position in

space.

The lock opening was no

than the shape of
the alien ship. It was a squared ellipsoid, nothing like the
familiar triangular hatches on the Zinramm. It looked a lot

more

like

an

AAnn

less aberrant

The several similarities were
Broh. The shape of the lock was the
airlock.

beginning to trouble
first unarguable sign they had that the aliens might physi-

be related to the AAnn.
Boarding would be no problem. The tube that would extend from the shuttle was flexible and would conform itself
to the alien opening while sealing tightly. Broh gave the

cally

necessary orders.
The Outside officer adjusted the shuttle slightly, so that
it presented its left side to the stem of the alien. The boarding tube extended and secured itself to the alien craft. There
was a pause while checks were performed.

“Mating completed,” Anzeljermeit announced tersely.
There was no reaction from the alien ship. Now Broh
had to make a more difficult decision. Jo enter the alien
they might have to blow the lock cover, an action that
could be interpreted as offensive. Since no hint of life had
manifested itself from the ship, he’d come to believe she
was truly a derelict, floating free, engines as dead as her
crew following an armed encounter.
But the few feeble lights showed that some power remained on board. Even a dead ship might boast automatic

30
defenses. Therefore he dearly

blow the

wanted to avoid having to

lock.

Anzeljermeit left two of his people in charge of the shuttle to relay information from the burrowing party to the
Zinramm s secondary scientific complement. Broh knew
that in the event of trouble they were to return immediately to the Zinramm. While interrank relationships were
reasonably casual on board Thranx ships, discipline was ab'

when invoked.
The suited burrowing

solute

party entered the shuttle’s lock,
which closed behind them. The three sections of the outside
door slid apart and they floated into the connection tube.

Ahead

lay the exterior of the alien ship.

The

skin

was

painted black or composed of some black metal. It did not
shine the comfortable silver of the Zinramm. It was with
some relief that Broh had noticed earlier it was also not the
garish orange of an AAnn craft. Crowded together in the

narrow confines of the boarding tube they pondered what
to do next.
The Outsiders had brought solid charges for blowing the
lock if that proved necessary. Broh let the science council
time studying the lock configuration.
They quickly discovered several hinged covers, which
when raised, revealed contact disks. These were perfunctorily inspected. The observers conferred, then the first spoke
to Broh via suit communicator. “We believe these to be
simple, if bulky, controls for operating the lock, as should
be present on any such entryway in the event of internal
take

its

power failure.”
“They could also,” the second observer noted grudgingly, “be a method for inducing anyone trying to enter to
blow himself toward the nearest star.”
“An assumption that presupposes both paranoia and belligerence,” said the third observer. “Two qualities which I
would prefer not to ascribe to the builders of this vessel.”
“We’re not debating preferences, but actualities,” said
the second observer. “However, I naturally defer to the
majority opinion.” He moved toward the rear of the tube.

“You activate the controls. I will wait here.”
The third observer made a gesture indicative

of accep-

tance coupled with hopeful anticipation and just a smidgen
of mild amusement. She turned and reached with a suited

31

truhand for the lower of the two exposed disks. The Outside officer and his companions waited impassively, not
having been allowed to retreat
Broh’s inclination was to agree with the majority of observers, but he wished their decision to try the lock controls
had been unanimous.
As the third observer depressed the disk the lock hatch
promptly slid up into the wall of the ship.
brightly lit
chamber was exposed beyond.
second hatch showed
ahead. They were indeed entering an airlock, then.
It was more than large enough to hold them all, including the recalcitrant second observer who floated behind,
grumbling but willing to admit he’d been wrong.
Corresponding disks were sunk in the interior wall.
Their function was simple to divine. When all seven burrowers were inside, the third observer depressed the counterpart to the outside disk. The exterior lock door slid shut.
There was faint motion in the lock. Sound sensors de-

A

A

tected the whistle of escaping gas.

Lock

pressurization

was automatic. Suit instrumentation immediately analyzed
the gas. It was a pleasant surprise to discover that the
atmosphere that had been injected into the lock was techx

nically breathable.

“Oxygen breathers

like us,”

murmured

the

first

observer

as she settled to the floor. “Artificial gravity perhaps a tiny
bit stronger

than ours.”

“Also like the AAnn,” Broh pointed out.
“Not exactly like us.” The second observer was studying
his suit instruments. “Check your climatology readings.”
The atmosphere that now filled the lock was breathable,
but desperately cold and almost unbelievably dry. Since the
air had been provided promptly there was no reason to assume that either factor was the result of a malfunction in
the ship’s systems, though such a possibility could not be
ruled out.

Broh stared disbelievingly at his humidity indicator,
which registered close to zero. As the third observer
pointed out, that was disconcertingly like the climate the
AAnn were known to prefer.
“That much is true,” the second observer admitted. “The
lack of reasonable moisture in the air here
to suspected

AAnn home

is

indeed similar

planetery conditions. However,

32
the temperature in this lock
faster than

it

would doom

“Maybe,” the

first

is

low enough to

kill

them even

us.”

suggested,

“this

ship’s

automatic

monitors are functioning properly save for a breakdown in
the heating elements.”
“That’s possible,” Broh agreed, breaking into the learned
discussion lest it grow too esoteric, “but as near as I can tell
everything else seems to be functioning properly. I fear we
must assume that holds true for the temperature controls
the same as everything else.”
“A frozen race,” the Outside officer muttered.
“Of course,” the first observer continued after making
a polite gesture in recognition of the officer’s comment
coupled with mild condescension toward one of inferior
mental powers, “allies of the AAnn would not necessarily
have to enjoy the same climate as the AAnn, any more than
their ships would have to be based on similar designs.”
‘True enough.” The third looked thoughtful. “I’ve been
fortunate enough to have had the chance to study the interior of a captured AAnn vessel. I can say that insofar as
airlocks are concerned, the differences between that ship
and this one are considerable. I reserve final judgment until we have seen more of this one, of course.”
There was a crackling in Broh’s headset, an urgent
flurry of inquisitive clicks and whistles.
“Captain, sir?” said a slightly distorted voice.
“Speaking.” Broh’s reply was sharper than he intended.
“It’s nothing specific, sir.” Broh recognized the voice of
the Outsider manning the shuttle. “But we hadn’t heard
from you since instruments showed that you’d boarded the
alien and closed the lock door behind you.”
“My error,” Broh replied. “We should have checked
back with you sooner. The builders of this ship remain unknown and,” he glanced for confirmation at the science
council, “at least so far there is nothing to indicate they are
AAnn or AAnn-allied. You may relay this very tentative
and preliminary information back to the Zinramm ”
“And happy they’ll be to hear it, too tentative though it
may be,” the other Outsider on the shuttle commented.
“We’ve spent enough time here.” Broh moved to the
hatch barring the far end of the lock and studied the controls. They were duplicates of those outside the ship. He

—

33
touched what should have been the proper one for opening
the door. Nothing happened. He tried the other, with the

same disappointing result.
“Try them in opposite sequence,” suggested the first observer. Broh did so and was rewarded when the hatch slid
sideways into the wall. The outer hatch had retracted upward. Broh wondered idly if the disparity of direction was
functional, aesthetic, or designed to satisfy some sense he
could not imagine.

A

corridor gleamed beyond, brightly lit and beckoning.
They cautiously exited the lock, pausing repeatedly to marvel at various peculiar aspects of the walls and ceiling. The
science council continually

had

be urged onward, or they
would have spent a timepart arguing over the function and
purpose of each tiny control or extrusion.
As they moved deeper into the alien ship the party encountered smoke. Broh and the Outsiders kept their hands
close to their holstered stingers, their attention on each new
doorway and opening.
The lighting was harsh, though whether this was due to
damage or intention they had no way of knowing. Broh
wondered at the sources of the smoke. They paused at one
complex instrument panel that was a flickering galaxy of
exploding sparks and melted metal. Broh studied the ruined panel and the metal that had run beneath it, then
moved on to examine a similar console that was still intact.
It boasted a screen in its center and bulky controls below.
More interesting was the saddle set into the deck before
it. It had to be a saddle, since it seemed an unlikely place
to put an abstract sculpture. It was much higher off the
floor than any Thranx could manage. Not that they could
have rested on it even if it had been lower. It was impossibly small and

flat,

yet very different

dles the science council

“I don’t see

to

how

had

from the

AAnn

sad-

studied.

any large intelli“It seems too small

that could belong to

gent creature,” the first observer said.
to support anything but a krep-size animal, yet everything
else aboard this ship hints that it was built and used by
large creatures. The dichotomy is puzzling.”
“It

seems certain that whoever they

pletely alien,”

creased.

Broh

said.

The

are, they’re

com-

Outsiders’ nervousness in-

34
Every screen they encountered thereafter was placed
well above normal eye level. Only standing on one’s hind
legs would enable one to see the topmost controls. Everything save the peculiar stunted saddles pointed to creatures
larger than the Thranx or the AAnn.

They moved deeper
tervals to

into the ship, pausing at regular in-

check in with the two Outsiders running the shut-

tle.

The one

Broh had wished for and which they
hadn’t encountered were alien atmosphere suits. Used, perthing

haps, while abandoning ship? Stored elsewhere?

He

know, but

crew was

his

mental reconstruction of

this ship’s

didn’t

not very pleasant.
Still, his conceptions might be way out of line. The drindars of Hivehom, for example, though primitive dumb
creatures, could conceivably fit the alien saddles.
They entered a new chamber, much larger than any
they’d seen so far, and found long platforms and dozens of
small saddles that were not fastened to the decking.
“A communal meeting hall,” suggested the second ob-

“For the carrying out of clan rituals, perhaps?”
“Maybe,” the third murmured, “but something makes

server.

me think otherwise.”
They walked through it into still another room of uncertain function. It was filled with a profusion of portable devices.

Rummaging through

*

cabinets that opened to the

touch, one of the subordinate Outsiders discovered a collection of what appeared to be personal items.
“Utensils, possibly,” suggested the first observer.'

They crowded around the
facts.

tiny collection of alien arti-

There were open-ended containers and low-relief con-

cave slabs of vitreous material. Nowhere did Broh see anything resembling a drinking vessel. Surely the crew of the

consumed liquids, Broh thought.
They found other devices of obscure purpose, but a
whole drawer was full of knives, something with an oval
scoop attached to one end, and a multipronged tool that
ship

resembled a miniature fishing spear.
“I believe their intake would not prove entirely bizarre,”
said the second observer. “It’s possible we might be able to
eat

some of the same food.”

That brought forth a thoroughly disgusted noise from

35

one of the Outsiders, for which he promptly performed a
gesture of third-degree apology, mixed with two degrees of
embarrassment.
“An experiment that

Broh

to

fighting

said,

would prefer

I

conceal his

to forgo for

own

distaste

now,”
at

the

thought.

Since there was no other way out of the room they returned the way they’d come, through the chamber of the
long platforms and inflexible stunted saddles, and into the
corridor beyond.
They continued on into the bowels of the ship and soon

found a new chamber filled with fresh mysteries. There
were multiple platforms, but they differed considerably
from those in the meeting hall. There were also small videoscreens and a great many garish objects decorating the
walls.

To

everyone’s delight, these platforms resembled

much

enormous sleeping lounges.
“The first real indication of any physical similarity,”
said the Outside officer. “Perhaps they are more like us

nothing so

than

we

as

thought.”

“Then how do you explain those impossible
dles?” asked one of the two subordinates.

little

“I don’t,” the officer replied. Without waiting for

sad-

word

from a member of the science council he elected to climb
up onto one of the lounges, that being as good a name for
them as anything.

“How is

it?”

the subordinate wondered.

“Almost normal. Comfortable, even.” He glanced over
his captain. “Permission to remove suits, sir.”
“I don’t

know

.

.

The first observer nudged him. “Let him. The
ment should be tried. The air tests acceptably well.”
“If

at

you concur,” Broh

said reluctantly.

He

experi-

signed to the

officer.

Carefully Anzeljermeit unsealed the right-center portion
of his suit, exposing his thorax to the alien air. After an
anxious pause, he did the same to the seals covering his
spicules on the left side. His thorax pulsed.
“Reaction?” inquired the third observer.
The reply came as a momentary gasp, grew slowly
stronger and more normal. “Dry enough to rust your blood.
It’s

a

bit

of a shock.”

He

unsealed and flipped back the

36
upper section of the
piece,

and

suit,

including the transparent head-

sat unsuited to the shoulders. His

antennae

flut-

tered, then spread unrestrained as

he sampled the air.
“You can smell the dryness, and the cold chills your

guts, but those details aside,

it is

quite breathable, as the

instruments indicated. Add a lot of moisture to it and cook
it some and I’d say it would be comfortable enough. What
is your opinion, Quoz?”
The Outsider standing next to the lounge unsealed the
upper third of her own suit and flipped it back. Now two
pairs of antennae waggled freely in the chamber.
“I agree,” she finally said, with somewhat more enthusiasm than her superior. “It’s quite palatable.”
The first observer began to unseal her own suit. “I, for
one, am tired of canned air. It’s not every day one has the
opportunity to sample an alien atmosphere.”

Soon they were

working at their suit seals, keeping
the lower section in place and well heated. Lounging on the
peculiar alien platform, Anzeljermeit watched them easily,
pleased in the knowledge that he’d been the one with the
courage to go first. Then he made a gesture of uncertainty
compounded by concern and sat up fast.
“Where’s Iel?” He looked toward the far comers of the
chamber, his gaze coming to rest on the doorway leading
out into the corridor beyond.
The other Outsider turned a slow circle. “I don’t know,
all

sir,”

The

officer slid off the lounge. “I’ll

Wandering

have

his

rank for

without authorization.”
“Gently go, sir. You know Iel. Impulsive and easily
bored. Well, maybe not impulsive, but incautious.”
“That may not matter much on board the Zinramm , but
here we

this.

off

—

Distant, frantic whistling

sounded from somewhere far

away.
“Quickly!” the officer commanded.
Suits were hurriedly resealed and the burrowing party
rushed in the direction of the whistles. They hadn’t gone
far from the chamber with the lounges when Outsider Iel
rounded a far comer, running on all sixes as if the Ruler of
the Distant Darkness itself were after him. On their suit

37
communicators they could hear his frantic breathing, his
breaths coming in short, tight gasps.
“So something’s given you a good scare, has it?” said
Anzeljermeit sharply, not immediately noticing the attitude
with which the Outsider held himself, antennae folded flat
back inside his suit, mandibles clenched so tightly together
Broh thought they must shatter. “Serves you damn well
right, too, for going off on
” His voice faded like a fast-

—

moving

breeze.

A thing had materialized in the corridor behind the terrified Iel.

raced in pursuit of him, moving with horridly fluid
loping movements of its lower limbs. The massive shape
towered over the diminutive Iel. It seemed to fill the corridor, though in reality it was not all that large. Its voice was
a deep-throated thunder that reminded Broh of Hivehom’s
more dangerous carnivores.
Surely that’s what it had to be, a beast escaped from
some on-board holding pen or traveling zoo. But it wore
clothing, and moved with more than feral purpose. Despite
It

what his revolted insides shouted, Broh knew
one of the alien crew.
It
Iel.

it

had

continued to utter incomprehensible noises as
Broh drew his stinger but determined not to

the last possible

At

it

to

be

chased

fire until

moment.

that point the abomination noticed the burrowing

party crowded together at the end of the corridor. It halted
abruptly, generated a tremendously violent sound that rat-

and vanished back the way it had come.
Outsider Iel finally reached them and skidded to a stop.
He started to say something. Then a shadow darkened his
ommatidia and he keeled over on his left side. His superior
and Broh bent over him, dividing their attention between
the unconscious Iel and the now deserted corridor.
Broh watched while Anzeljermeit inspected his subordinate. “He doesn’t appear to be injured, sir,” the officer
finally concluded. “His suit is intact and the seals don’t
seem to have been breached but it’s difficult to tell, since
they’re self-repairing. In any case, his breathing is normal,
tled Broh’s head,

—

if

labored.”

“You mean he

does not appear to have been injured

38
physically.”

awe and

The third observer was gazing with a mixture of

revulsion

down

He made

a gesture of
astonishment mixed with fourth-degree worry.
“I don’t wonder that he went comatose,” the first observer said. “Did you see the thing clearly? What an impossible organism!”
“Surely it was one of the crew.” Broh rose to his feet.

“Much

as I

would

the corridor.

like to think otherwise, I fear I

must

concur,” said the second observer.

The

was on the still empty corridor.
“No telling how many of them there are. However, we
must keep in mind that this one carried no weapon.”
“If that was an attempt at a friendly greeting,” said
captain’s attention

Anzeljermeit,

“I’ll

eat

my left leg.”

“Which one?” asked Quoz.
“Both of them.

And without spices.”

“I’m afraid there’s no question but that violence was directed toward Iel,” Broh murmured regretfully. Things had
not gone as he’d hoped. He rechecked his stinger’s charge.
“Fall back to the shuttle. Have the Zinramm send over another. I want a full complement of our Outsiders here.”
“Yes, sir.” Anzeljermeit whistled into his suit pickup
preparatory to contacting his unit.
“Rifles as well as small arms this time,” Broh added
reluctantly.

“Your pardon, Captain,” the

third observer said, “but

is

would not have liked
to exchange positions with that poor fellow a moment
ago, but surely we have matured beyond mere shape-fear?
We must try to contact them.”
“So we will,” Broh agreed, “but I must note, with all
due respect, that you observers are my responsibility, as
are all on board the Zinramm I am instructed according to
procedure to use the most extreme caution should any new
alien intelligence be encountered. I have seen nothing thus
far that would induce me to relax such procedure.” He
that wise at this point? Admittedly I

.

continued to stare down the corridor, trying to visualize
once again the horror that had charged at them. “Least of
all

is

would I relax it now.”
“As you command,” said the third observer. “While it
not complementary to what is supposed to be my scien-

39
tific attitude, I

must admit that your position

is

perfectly

understandable.”

“Me

also.”

The second

“Did you see the thing?

I

observer was visibly shaken.

can barely allow that

it

may be

intelligent.”

“We

have no absolute measure of that yet,” Broh said
thoughtfully. “It is surely a member of the crew, but it may
be a subordinate type. The real masters of this vessel may
be another, higher species that employs the kind we saw
for menial functions. Our ancestors had specialized functions. Primitive Thranx workers were of superior intelligence
compared to ancient soldiers. We may simply have encountered an alien soldier, functional but comparatively mindless.”

“A plausible theory,” the first observer admitted. “Or it
may be a member of a different, less advanced race. The
relationship may hold between two dissimilar species.”
“Exactly. The one we’ve seen may have acted belligerently, but as yet

no one has been

hurt.”

Broh turned

“No one is to shoot until I give
“Very well, sir.” The officer was speaking

Anzeljermeit.

to

the orders.”

rapidly into

communicator, relaying via the shuttle the request
for reinforcements. He spent a moment listening, then
spoke to the rest of the group. “Pilot says that she has re-

his suit

quests

from Science for a more

detailed description of the

alien being.”

“In due time,” Broh told him. “We’ll provide visuals as
well. And if we can persuade or capture one, the department will have it to study in person.”
Again the officer relayed the message. “They say they’re
not sure they’re ready for personal inspection and study,
sir.”

“They’d best prepare themselves.” Broh used his most
authoritative tone. “That is our task. As an exploration
team we must deal with the ugly as well as the beautiful.
As to the request for a more detailed description of the
alien, you may relay our initial impressions.”
“I don’t know if the computer will settle for the simple
declaration that the alien ship is crewed by monsters,” murmured the second observer.
“It will have to, for now,” said the third. “Unscientific

40
and emotional the description may be, but it has the virtue
of concision. It should prepare the crew for actual contact.”

They waited in
ward the airlock,

the corridor, unconsciously edging totheir eyes

working constantly

lest

the

nightmare spring upon them again before reinforcements
could arrive from the Zinramm.

Fal turned up the volume on the teaching
unit and nudged her current charge. The
bulky, mottled-white mass stirred listlessly
in the cradle. She spoke to it in a gently

admonishing tone.
It was Learning Time, yet Vii was dozing off. That was
not permissible. Worse, it was not the first time. Tests revealed that Vii suffered from a minor chemical imbalance
that could be overcome through intensive conditioning and
without the use of drugs. Conditioning was safer, but harder on the Nurses.
So Fal devoted more time to Vii than to the others. She
held her patience as she prodded the would-be sleeper back
to wakefulness. While she waited for any questions she
thought again about the message she’d received from her
clan cousin Brohwelporvot.
It had been many years since she’d actually seen him,
that day long ago when he’d arrived in Paszex for her
Emerging. He’d been introduced to her newly adult form
by the clanmother of the Sa. Though only related to the Sa,
the clan was still inordinately proud of him because of their
connection to the Por. Willow-wane was a colonial world
and Paszex in its most primitive region, so there was little
for the town’s clans to boast about. Through connection
with the Por clan of Hivehom they could claim Brohwelporvot as a relative, and he was no less than a starship
captain.

For some reason Broh had taken a special liking to the
new adult, and they corresponded intermittently over
the years. Which made the most recent communication all
the more unusual. Normally Brohwelporvot was the most
prosaic and rational of correspondents. Yet his latest communication was not only rambling but infused with emotional overtones.

The

larva Vii broke into her thoughts with a question
regarding the information being displayed on the teaching

Fal strained to understand the awkward larval
words. Only a trained Nurse could easily comprehend the
soft-mouthed babble of the young.
She answered the question and then responded to the
screen.

by once again turning down the volume of
the machine. She watched Vii carefully, but her insistence
41

larva’s request

42
seemed

produced the desired result and the
larva gave no sign of drifting back to sleep.
Yes, a very strange communication, Fal mused. If she
hadn’t personally known its source she would almost have
thought it hysterical. She considered reporting it to her
clanmother. That would be a good idea, she decided. Perhaps a wiser head could make better sense of it. It could do
no harm to seek another’s opinion, even if Broh had instructed her not to mention the content of the communication to anyone else. She would tell Ryo also, of course. It
was his right, and his own intelligence might see to the
heart of the garbled communication.
Idly she checked the monitors set into the upper duty
strap of her vest. Soon it would be bathing time. That was
a chore she looked forward to; washing the grubs down,
knowing that their pasty white flesh would soon give way
to a jewel-like cocoon from which a new adult would eventually emerge fresh and glistening into the world. It gave
Fal never-ending delight that she and her associates in the
Nursery helped to bring about that miraculous transformato

have

finally

tion.

After evening meal, when she and Ryo had settled down
for a presleep of learning, entertainment, and conversation,
she moved to the apartment console and ran the personal
messages of the day. She slowed the one from Broh.
“Isn’t it the most peculiar thing you’ve ever seen?” she
asked him as the communication crawled slowly up the
screen. “So emotional and so disjointed. It’s not like him at
all,

Ryo”

But her mate hardly heard her. At first he’d concealed
his boredom by listening politely to her concerns as they’d
watched the message unravel. Lines and angles formed
words before him.
As the tone and content of the communication emerged,
however, something pierced him like a surgical probe. He
raised his head off the saddle cushion and stared fixedly at
the screen. Fal he barely heard.
When it was over there was a buzz and a light flashed to
the left of the screen. Ryo immediately left his saddle and
walked up to adjust the controls. The communication replayed,

“You

still

see

slower this time.

what

I

mean, then,” she

said,

when

the repeat

43

had concluded and the screen displayed daily news. She
leaned to the right and let her legs touch the floor.
“Yes.” Ryo’s reply sounded thinly, as if he were trying
to whistle through his spicules instead of his mandibles.

That was a trick some Thranx could manage, but he didn’t
seem to be doing it intentionally.
“Well, what do you think of it?”
“Think of it.” He turned to face her. His fingers were
twisting in instinctive patterns indicative of great excite-

ment. “It’s simply the most marvelous thing that’s ever
happened!”
That was not at all the reaction she’d expected from Ryo,
though if she’d thought more deeply about it she might not
have been so surprised. In fact, she might not have mentioned Brohwelporvot’s message at all.
“It means we’ve found a completely new, completely alien space-going intelligence!”
“A race of monsters, according to Broh.” Fal was put
off

by the strength and

“Initial impressions

direction of his response.

count for nothing.

I

have to see them

for myself, of course.”

“That’s an amusing thought.”
“I am very serious,” Ryo replied, adding an unmistak-

able gesture of fifth-degree assertiveness.
“I don’t believe you.

laboriously excavated?

Why

You make

munication.”
Because something inside

he thought. It all
he’d been missing

fill

me

with dirt the burrow so
less sense than that com-

says that I have to do this,

somehow with what he thought
these years. The message of a frantic,

tied in
all

had fanned the hidden ember into a forest
blaze. Now it was too late to put it out.
Fal was rambling, her voice and gestures full of bewilderment. “No sense, no sense. It’s not your place to do
distant relative

something like this. You cannot. What of your assignment,
your work?”
“It can be done by others.”
“That’s not what I mean. You’re about to be promoted to

— And what

Company council. The hive thinks well of you
of us? You have other responsibilities.” She

slid

off the

lounge and firmly entwined antennae with him. “You have
other responsibilities.” She caressed him warmly.

44

He

tried to think of a better

way

to put

it,

could not.

a thing I have to do, Fa!.”
“But you don’t say why. Can’t you explain?”

“It’s

“No
She

better than I already have.”
let

loose his antennae, backed away. “I can’t accept

decision without reason.

permit

You must

not do

this. I will

not

it.”

But Ryo was already moving through the apartment,
slipping on day vest and pouch, stocking items in his clothing. “I’ll contact you as soon as I’m able. I am sorry, Fal.
There’s nothing else I can do.”
“There is. Nothing is forcing you to do this.” She spaced
each click and whistle deliberately.
“I’ll contact you as soon as I can,” he said again. Then
he was out the exitway and into the cool night corridor
beyond.
Fal stood in the center of the front room, stunned. It had
happened so fast: he’d read the message, there’d been some
excitement, a little talk, and then he was gone. On the way
to far Hivehom and perhaps also to insanity. She was too
fond of him to allow it. There was too much to throw
away. She walked rapidly to the console.
The Servitors met him halfway to the transport terminal,
holding themselves a little more stiffly than was normal.
They were not dispensing aid to the aged or collecting garbage now.
“Good evening,” Ryo said, executing a hasty gesture of
greeting.

“Good eve

to you, citizen,” said the leader of the group.

There were four of them, all bigger than Ryo. Soldier
throwbacks, he thought. He tried to step around them.
They shifted to block his way.
“Is something the matter?” he inquired of the leader.
“Perhaps. Perhaps not We act on a request from your
clanmother and family.”
“I don’t understand,” he said as they turned him bodily
about, a foothand on each of his own. “I’ve committed no
crime.

“We

What does

this

mean?”

are not certain ourselves,” the leader told him.

“Only that our action has been sanctioned by the hivemother as well. I am sorry,” he added apologetically, and

45
“You are aware of the customs. Such a

seemed to mean it.
request must be carried out.”

Ryo turned the word over bitterly in his thoughts
he stood in the clan meeting hall. It was very late. The

Request.
as

four Servitors had departed, still apologizing.
Seated before him were at least a dozen Ryo recognized.
Fal was there . . . that surprised him, though it shouldn’t
have. His sire and dame. Two of his three sisters . . . the
other had moved away to Zirenba. Several clan elders.

“My

free

movement

as a citizen has been interfered

with,” he said. His gaze settled

on

Fal.

She looked away

from him, nervously cleaning one eye with a damp truhand.
“I am sorry, Ryo. I thought this necessary, best for you
as well as

me.

You have your responsibilities,”

“We’re not mated,” he said, more bluntly than he intended. She ceased her cleaning.
“I am aware of that. What I have done was done out of
my feelings for you, whatever you may feel for me. You
must believe that.” Her whistle was painfully plaintive.
“Come here, Ryozenzuzex.” It was a command, but a
gentle one. He stepped forward until he was standing be-

Thranx he’d met only twice before.
Twenty-five hundred members of the Zu clan lived in
Paszex, and Ilvenzuteck was their spiritual if not legal
head. The clanmother was very old. Her chiton had faded
to deep purple, was nearly black in places. Her antennae
drooped and her eyes were dull as death, but there was
nothing corpselike about her speech. Her gestures were
minimal but lucid, her whistles properly pitched, the clicks
sharp and devoid of any suggestion of uncertainty.
“Falmiensazex has told me of your desire to leave us.
Indeed, to leave Paszex and Willow-wane to fly off to Hivehorn on some bizarre quest.”
Ryo glanced toward Fal, who was not looking at him.
“Did she tell you that my reasons involve more than
fore a

merely a crazed desire?”
“She did not elaborate. She merely said that it had to do
with a desire that you felt required satisfaction but could
not describe in detail.”
“That much is true enough,” he admitted.

“Such feelings can be treated.”

46
“Physically I’m fine, Clanmother. Mentally I’ve always
been slightly different.” He noticed his sire making small,

half-unconscious gestures of sad affirmation. “But never
aberrant enough to warrant treatment.
personal

My

achievements and successes speak to that.” He did not need
to point out the shining star set in his shoulder. Ilvenzuteck
had witnessed its setting.
“They do indeed,” she said. “If they did not, we might
be holding this conversation under more difficult circumstances. But this has nothing to do with eccentricity or any
desire of yours.

You have

mot Company,

to your hive, to your family, and,” she

responsibilities here: to the In-

added with a gesture, “to Falmiensazex. To your family-tobe.

Many

ancestors are sitting in this

chamber with

us.

empty saddles and sit in judgment. You cannot abandon them, too. We all have our secret desires, our

They

fill

the

not so conthem.”

secret wishes. Unfortunately, the universe

structed that

we may be permitted to fulfill

—

is

“I’m sorry, but

She interrupted him, as was her privilege. “You must not
pursue this thing. It drives you toward destruction. I will
not let you throw away so promising a life, Ryozenzuzex.
As your clanmother, I forbid it. That holds no legal power,
as you are aware. But if you hold to your heritage at all,
such abstracts will not tempt you.”
“And if I try to go anyway, ‘heritage’ notwithstanding?”
“I have registered my decision with the hive council.
Hivemother Tal-i-zex concurs. So do your parents and
your premate. So will your employers. Many witnesses to
this conversation will testify to your oddness of habit. They
will do so to protect you from yourself, out of love for
you.”

Ryo calmly
saw

studied the assembled faces

and bodies and

be so. He would have expected nothing else.
your future happiness they hold dear. As I do,”

this to

“It is

Ilvenzuteck said gently.

do not doubt that,” he replied, truthfully enough.
“If you try to leave,” she continued softly, “your clanmates will stop you. If you get past them, the hive council
will have you recalled, citing your importance to the wel“I

fare of the hive.

47

“You have done

on the scale of this hive, slightly in
terms of Willow-wane itself, and not at all in terms of interplanetary society. Speaking practically, you could not
reach Hivehom. You have not the resources. Your credit is
well

locked in mutual file with your premate Falmiensazex, and
a limit node has been placed upon it.”
He threw Fal a sharp look.

“For the same reasons, Ryo,” Fal told him. “If our positions were reversed, you would do the same for me. I’ve
worked for that credit as hard and as long as you. You’ve
not the right to do whimsy with it.”
“Let me have my share then.” His tone was coaxing,
affectionate.

“No. When this attack fades from your mind and you
are your rational self once more, you will be grateful for
what all your friends have done for you. You have many
friends, Ryo.”
“It does not matter,” Ilvenzuteck said. “Even if you had
access to all the credit it would not be nearly enough to
carry you to Hivehom. You have no concept of the costs of
the greater society.

Your Learning Time did not

include

that.”

“I’d get there.

One way

or the other, I’d get there.”
“Is that truly your wish, or only what you think you
wish?” she continued shrewdly. “You’ve listened to me.
You’ve seen the reaction of all who love you most. Is it not
possible they are right and you are wrong? Against experience, tradition, and love you can marshal only a vague ‘desire.* Who then musters the better argument, Ryozenzuzex?
You are intelligent. Use that intelligence now and speak
truthfully with

He seemed

your inner

self.”

body

droop between his legs.
“I cannot fight your arguments, Clanmother. I suppose you
are right. You are all right.” He did not sound pleased, but
the intensity had left him. “It was the excitement of the
moment, the possibilities I saw. But I see now that they are
not for me. Foolishness. I am ashamed.”
He executed a gesture of embarrassment mixed with
mild humor. “When inspected dispassionately from outside,
it does indeed appear irrational and immature.”
“There’s no need to feel embarrassed,” his sire said.
to slump, his

to

48
are admired for your confession to reality. If your
curiosity is so great, perhaps you should have chosen infor-

“You

mation processing for a career.”
“Not a bad thought. Maybe someday
second profession.”

I

still

could, as a

“Perhaps,” Ilvenzuteck said soothingly. She was watching him closely. “How do you feel?”
“Not too well,” he said. “Tired.”
“Understandable. Enough of this silliness, now. Go back
to your admirable apartment with your premate.”
“If you want to, that is, Ryo.” Fal was worried.

want to.” He looked around gratefully. “I
thank you, thank you all, for what you’ve done. For your
concern and your affection. I’ve been an idiot, and not for
the first time. But for the last.”
Fal approached him and they entwined antennae lov-

“Of course

I

ingly.

“That’s

much

better.” Ilvenzuteck sighed in relief.

“A

We’ve all been roused from a sound
must work tomorrow. So, everyone to home,

night best forgotten.
sleep

and

all

and let it be the last said of this matter.”
Days passed. Unexpectedly a second message arrived
from Brohwelporvot. Fal didn’t hesitate to show it to Ryo.
The wording and phrasing were calm, controlled, wholly
typical of Broh as opposed to the previous hysterical and
communication.
Broh’s message explained that everything in the previous
communication was the result of overwork and overworry
and the pressures of a difficult command in which he did
not yet feel comfortable. No monsters existed, no contact
had been made with a spherical black alien craft, and he,
Broh, had been dispatched to a rest facility for a vacation.
He was feeling quite chipper, and she should not worry.
Someday he would explain in more detail about the nightmares that could afflict one in Deep Space, and they would
both have a fine long-range laugh over it.
Fal replayed the message a second time for Ryo. He absorbed it and immediately agreed that it explained sensibly
everything that had gone before. It was not even necessary
to repeat it at a slower speed because he’d arrived at a
similiar conclusion about the first message on his own. It
was good to have his theory confirmed.
life-disrupting

49
Clearly Broh had dictated the message himself, for his
own face was imprinted on the bottom of the communication.

part,

And

any possible lingering suspicion on Ryo’s
Fal had confirmed the message’s authenticity via a
to allay

expensive personal voice-picture conversation
with Broh himself, on Hivehom, a copy of which conversation she played for Ryo.
brief, terribly

The whole

had been a fantasy that had been
precipitated by a bad dream. No longer would it cloud their
lives. Ryo was quite in agreement, even chiding her for
having to show the recording to him. The first communication had not so much as tickled his thoughts since the
incident

meeting in the clan hall.
Now he had to rest, for tomorrow would be a difficult
day in the jungle. There was tiresome clearing to supervise,
and would she please stop troubling him with such trivialities?

But during sleeptime he lay conscious and awake, his
thoughts churning like a tropical storm. Something had
forced Brohwelporvot to compose and transmit the second
communication. Something or someone had decided to
cover matters with the one person, however indifferent,
who’d been informed of things she ought not to know.
Half a season passed. The incident seemed completely
forgotten. Life was easy and smooth with him and Fal. The
discreet surveillance the hive council had set on Ryo was
gradually withdrawn.
He received the expected promotion to the local Inmot
council and in-field supervison of clearing and planting
passed to another. The bexamin vines throve, increasing
still further his stature within the Company and the hive.
So when word came through Company channels that
Ryo was required in Company council in Ciccikalk he
showed no surprise and certainly no excitement over what

was

just

a boring business trip to the capital.

He made no

unusual preparations for the trip and was normal in voicing
his dismay at having to travel so far from home and hive.
Only he knew as he sped southward that he would not be
returning to Paszex very soon.
His otherwise empty eight-person module traveled fast
and silent. The first night an unexpected bump jolted him

50
awake, but it was only the sound of another module linking
to his own. A few passengers boarded at the next stop.
They took no notice of him. His anonymity would be preserved until he failed to appear at the Company council
meeting. Then communications would pass querulously between Ciccikalk and Paszex. With luck it would be some
time before his disappearance was linked to a possible recurrence of his youthful mental aberrations.
The module train curved southwestward, gradually turning and accelerating due south. In time it crossed into more
heavily populated country, and after four days the train
began to slow.
For half a day Ryo watched as roads, ventilators, and
surface facilities began to appear like growths on the land.
His module was in hill country and still slowing when the
train finally pulled into the transport center of Zirenba,

where he changed for Ciccikalk. Seven additional days of
steady southerly travel revealed vast panoramas of cultiput those of Paszex to shame. Huge black
ventilator stacks hinted at great subterranean manufacturing complexes.
And finally it was night again and the long train of
crowded modules was pulling into the central passenger
terminal at Ciccikalk. As each module halted the doors automatically sprang open. The simple portion of his journey
was at an end. From now on he would have to move as a
vated

fields that

fugitive.

Ciccikalk was a metropolis of nearly three million, home
to 20 percent of the planet’s population. The central termi-

was only one of a dozen of similar size that ringed
the city’s boundaries, and was as large as Paszex.
Ryo had expected great size, but not confusion. No statistic can convey the feel and scope of a large city to someone from a small town.
Overhead, myriad signs flashed showing modules and
their destinations or those arriving from outlying communities and towns. The terminal was filled with Thranx
pressing tight upon one another as they made their way to
tracks and exits.
Ryo found himself fighting for control. To one side, he
saw a line of rest saddles, forced his way through the
crowd to them, and settled gratefully into one. Now he could
nal

51

watch and study the teeming terminal without having to
fight for a place to stand.
He tried to remember what he’d learned about Ciccikalk.
Three million was the metropolitan population. There were
several million more living and working in the peripheral
cities and towns. As opposed to Paszex’s five levels, there
were forty-three beneath him here, wrenched from the rock
of the planet. In addition to this prodigious feat of excavation, a dozen upper levels had been cut into the hills that

ringed the Cicci Valley, and that was the hardest fact to
grasp; that there were more than twice as many levels here
above the surface as there were in all of Paszex.

Though

still

dazed he tried to review his somewhat

sketchy plan of action.
all

but his

last

The

unmonitored

fare to the capital
chit.

He had

had

cost

him

exactly eight cred-

That would not buy him the right to look at a
shuttlecraft, much less passage on a posigravity transport.
It might keep him alive for a month. That did not take
into account the problem of lodgings. He could not touch
his joint account with Fal.
He would have to ration himself very closely. Perhaps he
might find sleeping quarters in the poorer sections of the
city. When to eat was not a concern. Nothing ever closed
completely in a city the size of the capital. This was not
its

left.

sleepy Paszex.

The

buy time did not worry him, since
he doubted he would have a month. Eventually his image
would be circulated and connect with the observation of
some Ciccikalk Servitor and he would be picked up. He
would have to use his credit stick to purchase passage on a
ship. With luck, by the time the transaction was registered
and the authorities were alerted, he would be on a ship
making the break into Space Plus.
If he took a vessel’s last shuttle prior to departure, and if
that shuttle docked just before its ship departed Willowwane orbit, he might get away before the Servitors could
freeze the ship. Once away from Willow-wane, he was confident he could find some way to reach the surface of Hivehom undetected, even if the Willow-wane authorities meslack of credit to

saged ahead via Nullspace communications.
First Ryo had to find a place to stay while he studied
the transport manifests for the most suitable departing ship.

52
wanted a meal. The internal city transport module he entered was designed to assist travelers and was full
of helpful information, though its attitude became slightly
reproachful when Ryo indicated he wished to stay at the

He

also

cheapest hotel possible.
Noise and some of the confusion faded as the vehicle
slipped out of the frenetic transport terminal. Ryo relaxed a
delittle. The burrow corridors narrowed as the module
scended. It eventually went horizontal at the Thirty-third
Level, turned eastward, then north, and finally deposited

him at Level 33, Subannex 1,345.
At that point the corridor was just wide enough for two
transports to pass each other and the ceiling hung barely a
meter above Ryo’s antennae, but he

felt right at

home

in

the comfortable claustrophobic surroundings.
Nearby was the entrance to Dulinsul, the establishment
number
that the module had reluctantly recommended.
of simply dressed Thranx were at the saddles inside, conversing, drinking, or eating the evening meal. Ryo selected

A

a booth near the back, placing his order through the tiny
speaker set into the table surface, and stretched out on the
dour elderly Thranx with one
hard, unpadded saddle.
antenna eventually delivered the food by hand.
single curved spout emerged from the prosaic drinking
tankard. No intricate scrollwork here, Ryo mused. The tray

A

A

held steamed vegetables, two different
tuber pastes, a long section of Higrig fruit, and the requiflasite bowl of soup. The meat in the soup was tough but
vorful and the rest adequate. Ryo consumed all the food as
in the
if he were sitting in the finest gourmet restaurant
all the
city. He’d made it safely to Ciccikalk. Success was
that

came with

it

he needed.
“The way you’re inhaling that food,

spice

I’d say you’re pretty

hungry.”
He looked up. Standing next to him was a diminutive
with
adult. Female. Her face and wing cases were adorned
that
garish ornamentation; paste jewels and bright sequins
were simply glued on instead of being properly inlaid.
From her body vest and neck pouch metal tinsel hung
hung
nearly to the floor. Strands of imitation gold filigree
loosely

from her

ovipositors.

“Travel always makes

me

hungry,” he replied, turning to

53
his food.

He

took a long suck from the spout of the tan-

kard.

She eyed it curiously. “What are you having?”
“Quianqua fruit juice,” he said apologetically, and then
wondered why he’d used the apologetic inflection.
Piss juice, you mean.” The female turned, gestured toward the front counter. Without being asked, she settled
into the saddle opposite Ryo. Light flashed from her ommatidia. The thin gold bands that crossed the center of the
eye were wider than most. “You don’t look like the
assembly-line type.”

“I’m not,” he admitted. “I’m a raw land surveyor and

have been working to the north.”
“Out of the hive, then?”
“Yes. I’m here on exploration-related business and trying
to husband my credits.” She seemed to be enjoying the conversation.

As was

he could

talk to

was relaxing to have someone to
safe with. She did not strike him as a

he. It

feel

Servitor operative.

His descriptions of the jungle and wild lands to the north
fascinated her. By her own admission she’d never been outside Ciccikalk.

A

common

condition of large-hive citizens,
Ryo mused. It limits their horizons.
The kitchen worker arrived with two tankards of something that smelled wonderful. The drinking spouts were
slightly

more

elaborate than that of the tankard he’d
started with, each having a single neat spiral worked into
it. They were what passed for fancy utensils in the Dulinsul.

“I think you’ll like this,” she said, taking a deep suck
from her own spout.

The drink lightened his thoughts and lifted his worries.
The sensation was not unlike being tossed by the Southern
Jhe, though the fear of drowning

was

absent.

“You’re right, it’s marvelous. What is it?”
“Masengail wine. I’m glad you like it, since you’re paying for
“I

it.”

am?”

“I introduced

you

to

it.

Isn’t that

enough?” Again the

trilling laugh.

“Fair enough.”
lovely.

He

sipped

more

deeply.

It

made him

feel

•

.vv

•

'

-

...

-

'

H

;

He’d been wrong about many things in
his life, but never so wrong as he’d been
about the wine. It had lightened his thoughts
and lifted his worries, and while it couldn’t

drown him

Southern Jhe, it did help him bash
his head against something. Or bash something against it.
He leaned against the wall and gingerly felt of his head
with a foothand. The chiton was not cracked, for which he
like the

was grateful. However, his head did feel as if someone had
unscrewed it from his b-thorax and then replaced it backward and upside down. Improper orientation seemed to afthe street too, though the longer he stared at it the
more it seemed to right itself. But the pain intensified as
the view solidified.
flict

He took

a couple of steps and nearly toppled over. Eventually he succeeded in reaching a corridor comer where the
standard direction plate was imbedded in the wall. He read
it several times before he could understand it.
It informed him that he was on Level 40, Subannex 892.
Vaguely it occurred to him that he was not where he ought
to be. Squatting

down on

the street, he tried to order his

thoughts.

Slow inspection revealed that in addition to the lightness
between his eyes, his body had been lightened in several
other places. His single remaining credit chit was gone,
along with his pouch tools and anything else of value. Gone
were identification, personal effects, and the credit stick
that he now would not have to worry about alerting Servitors with. He’d been left his vest and pouch, and that was
all.

he reconstructed the far-away-and-long-ago
events that had left him on an unknown burrow corridor
with an aching skull. There had been the Masengail wine
and the lovely stranger. Teah, her name had been. She
never had given him her full name. Conversation and more
wine. A lot more wine, and then the suggestion that since
he had no place to stay that night he spend it with her.
There were implications of nonprocreative sex.
A walk through some unusually dark and ill-maintained
Patiently

then darkness descended. The dim feeling of being
moved. Waking up dazed, in pain, and on his side on the
streets,

55

56
left-hand

comer of burrow

street

nex 892.
I’ve been robbed, he thought

marker Level 40, Suban-

hysterically,

and

started to

laugh, his whistling filling the narrow corridor, bouncing
society,
off nearby walls. Our carefully planned, wonderful
every Thranx knowing his or her place and obligations,

laws firmly laid

down and adhered

to, led to this.

old Uvenzuteck, so steeped in tradiSuch
tion and custom, would have thought of the situation.
little
thing could never have occurred in the isolated, neat

He wondered what

a

from
hive of Paszex. The old wreck would probably faint
aghast
shock. Inside him a small sane fragment of self was
and family
at the insult he’d just composed. His own sisters
have shunned him had he said it in their presence.

would
Amazing how reaching part of your goal only to be repossessions
lieved of the rest of your dream as well as your
and nearly your life can enlighten you as to the true nature
of the world, he thought wildly. He continued to laugh.
A couple of Thranx coming home from late-night work
their
passed him on the other side of the corridor, keeping
they
eyes averted. He yelled and screamed at them and
scuttled a

little faster.

The laughter faded, the ill-modulated whistling died out.
He was alone on the dimly lit corridor between two silent
shopfronts.

For two days he wandered aimlessly through the hive.
Without planning it, he eventually found himself back in
the central transport terminal.
comIf nothing else, he thought dully, he could charge a
munication back to Paszex. He suspected his family would
reaccept him and hoped that possibly Fal might as well.
The' dream that had driven him to Ciccikalk, that had
pushed him so far, had faded to a persistent ache centered

somewhere along the back of his neck, where the robbers
had struck him.
He no longer bothered with his appearance. The reaction
of other citizens to his presence was evidence that he’d become something less than presentable. He’d had nothing to
eat for two days, but water was available from public fountains. His stomach contorted inside his abdomen, and he
was growing faint from hunger.
I won’t

make

that communication, he thought weakly. I

57
won’t admit defeat and return home. Ill die in Ciccikalk
first. Better a fool dead trying than a living failure. Yet he
retained enough sense to realize how foolish that declaration sounded. If something did not happen very soon he

knew he would send that communication. He would abandon the absurdity that had bothered him since Learning
Time, and return placidly to his proper home and work.
The Thranx in front of him was exceedingly well
dressed. His body vest and neck pouch were woven of rich
but unostentatious imported fabrics. His chiton was just
turning from blue-green to violet. The inlays on his upper
and lower abdomen were alternating insets of blue and silver metal arranged in simple patterns. Everything about his
posture and attire bespoke intelligence, breeding, and
wealth.

There was a
ably carries a

bulge in the elder’s neck pouch. Probfat packet of credit chits in there, Ryo
thought coldly.
nice, heavy roll of eighty-credit pieces
that he can boast about to the less fortunate. The elder’s
credit stick would be useless to Ryo, of course, but the
loose chits might be enough to buy him a one-way passage
slight

A

to

Hivehom.
But how?

He

couldn’t beg an eighth fraction of a chit

here in a public facility and certainly not eight hundred.
Talk to him, quick, before he goes on his way, came the
sudden crazy thought! Ask him for directions, for sympathy, ask anything so long as it will get him over here. No,

over there, behind that great

pillar,

out of

sight.

A quick blow to the neck just beneath the skull,

enough
to knock him out and if you break his b-thorax, so what?
Parading about the terminal as if he owned it! Does he
have any dreams? Doubtful, that. Probably inherited his
wealth from the maximum bequest allowed by law. Doesn’t
deserve it anyway, has no real use for it. Unlike those of us
who still have the courage to dream, even if such dreams
are unhealthy and involuntary because they drive us, compel us, force us

“Excuse me, sir,” he found himself saying
wonder if I might talk with you a moment?”

politely, “I

“Most certainly, friend.” The voice was perfectly modulated, an imperceptible blend of whistles, clicks, and sylla-

58

A voice

accustomed to conversing in High, not Low,
Thranx. Not like us simple country folk, thought Ryo.
bles.

“I’m new in the hive.”
“I can tell that,” the elder said sympathetically.
I’ll bet you can, Ryo thought grimly. In a few moments
you’ll be spared the necessity of thinking.
“Just over here, sir, if you would be that kind. I have my
map there.” He pointed to the huge pillar. Around them
modules whined and people talked loudly, intent on their
own business. It would only take a second, just a second,
and no one would notice. “It’s with my luggage.”
“I’d be happy to assist you, youth.” The elder dipped
antennae politely. “Let’s have a look at your map.”
They were very close to the pillar now. “That’s odd,”
observed the elder, peering in apparent confusion at the
floor. “Where did you say your luggage was?”
“Just there,”

Ryo

told

him encouragingly,

“just

back in

the shadows.”

Desperately he tried to swing the ready foothand at the
elder’s neck, but his quarry was far away now, far away on
the other side of the jungle, across the raging Southern Jhe,
looking back at him curiously and making sad sounds as he
faded into the distance.

Then someone threw the terminal floor at him. Very unfair, he thought, damnably unfair to throw an entire floor
at a drowning soul. The floor pressed him down, down into
the depths of the thundering, roiling river

The one

.

.

.

would not have expected to feel on a
return to consciousness was sunshine. It warmed his eyes
and forced him to turn away from its brilliance. He was
suddenly sick, but there was nothing in his gut for him to
thing he

throw up.

A

“You slept an entire day and
night. About time you woke up.”
Ryo sat up very slowly, rolling onto his side and raising
his upper torso. At once he became aware of several things
gentling voice said,

overwhelmed him: an impression of subdued wealth, morning sunshine, and the wonderful, throat-rending aroma of freshly cooked food.
“I would ask if you’re hungry, but the answer is clear
from the moisture at your mandibles.”
that in combination nearly

59

Ryo searched
on

for the source of the voice. Standing close

was the old Thranx he’d encountered in the
transport station. For an instant Ryo froze. But the elder
didn’t seem at all concerned. Slightly amused, if anything.
“Well, are you hungry or aren’t you?” He turned away,
his back presented fearlessly to the figure on the lounge.
“Of course if you’re not I can have it thrown
“No, no.” Ryo scrambled off the sleep lounge. “I am
his right

—

hungry.”
“Of course you are,” the elder said pleasantly as he led

Ryo

into the eating area.

was
for good
It

beautifully appointed, with that

same

clear eye

had been evident in the sleeping chamber. The central table was of laminated hardwoods that
were a rainbow of natural colors. The walls were compacted natural earth, glue-bonded and inlaid with crosswise
metal strips to form an ocher and silver dome overhead. No
taste that

natural light penetrated here.
Ryo attacked the waiting banquet with utter lack of
shame. His belly screamed its needs at him and they would

be

satisfied at the

expense of etiquette. The elder looked on

interestedly.

When

his insides finally signaled

enough and he leaned

back in the comfortable saddle, Ryo thought to study his
host. Yes, he was the same Thranx who’d nearly met an
early end in the terminal. The inlays on his abdomen were
the same, as was that peculiar forward inclination of the
skull. At first Ryo had thought the cranial tilt an affectation. Now he saw that it was a permanent part of the elder’s physiognomy.
His stare was noted. “I broke my neck oh, six or seven

—

years ago,” the elder said pleasantly.

been caught, Ryo looked away.
“I was climbing a tree, if you must foiow,” the elder

Embarrassed

at having

finished.

Ryo was

Yaryinfs climbed trees. Muelnots,
shrins, and ibzilons climbed trees. Thranx did not. They
were not built for it. Not their legs or their truhands. Only
the foothands were properly constructed for such an effort,
and you could not haul yourself up a woody trunk with
only two limbs.
•
“Why were you trying to climb a tree?”
startled.

60

The

elder whistled softly.
like from the top, of course.”

“Wanted

to see

what

it

was

“But you could have been lowered into the treetop by
a
hoverer or raised on a picker arm.”
You don t understand but neither did anyone else.

You

—

am a poet.” He stepped forward, touched antennae to Ryo’s across the table. “My name is
Wuuzelansem.”
“Ryozenzuzex,” he replied automatically. He thought
back to a bit of recreational reading, or perhaps it
was part
of a conversation on current aesthetics.
“The Eint Wuuzelansem?”
see, I

The
“I

am
“I

elder executed a third-degree declamatory
gesture.
the same.”

have hear<* of you. More than

that, I recall

your poetry.”

some of

“Well, that’s not necessarily a good thing.”
Wuuzelansem
let out a deprecatory chuckle.
“Nevertheless,

am

I

gratified.

What

suppose I

your profession?”
Ryo immediately went on guard.
is

The poet noticed the reaction. “Oh, never mind.
You
needn’t tell me if you don’t wish to.
I know one thing.
You’re not a professional mugger.”
Ryo was startled a second time.
“That was your intention in central station,
was it not?”
After an instant’s hesitation Ryo performed
a gesture of
embarrassed agreement.
‘‘Well, I suppose hunger can make
one do anything.”

“How did you know I

wasn’t a mugger?”
“Because of the way you went about it.”
Wuu spoke
matter-of-factly, as if discussing the
plumbing. “You see, I
know many muggers and robbers. They live in
a state of
perpetual danger and constant conflict.
That can provide
the basis for some interesting poetry.
I document in rhyme.
I am also fair with them, so
many are my friends.

“The hive authorities frown on that relationship,
of
course. Such individuals are not
supposed to exist in the
wondrous capital of Ciccikalk.” Whistling
laughter rose
from the experienced throat. “My boy, the
universe is full
of things which are not supposed to
exist but continually
confound us by doing so. Places in space where
reality disappears, suns that rotate not around one
another but among
dozens, Nullspace where things that are
too small to exist

61

suddenly become

real,

muggers and robbers

—

all difficult

to believe in, all subjects for poetical discourse.

“Now

then,” he settled himself into the saddle opposite

Ryo, “since I’ve hauled you back here and cared for you,
you can at least be honest with me. If I’d wanted to turn
you over to the Servitors I could have done so earlier, more
safely, and at considerably less personal expense.”
So Ryo told him, the whole story pouring out through his
broken confidence. When he’d finished, Wuu pondered silently for several minutes. Then he led Ryo wordlessly
from the eating area back into the sleeping chamber. A
wide pane of acrylic looked out of the side of the hill. The
sun was just below the horizon and rain clouds rose slightly
above it, their pink underbellies glowing as brightly as faceted kunzite.

“Alien monsters, hmm?” Wuu turned from the view to
face Ryo. “It sounds like a lot of garbage to me.” Ryo said
nothing. “Garbage strong enough to drive you to leave your
premate, your family, your clan, and your hive, to make
your way to a city like Ciccikalk. To some, I suppose, gar-

bage can become an obsession.”
not garbage,”
dream.”
“It’s

“Ah

Ryo

declared angrily.

“It’s

part of a

Wuu

sounded amused. “Very overrated,
dreams. Nonetheless your persistence and natural intelligence mark you as something more than a mere fanatic. It
strikes me you may have fallen into something worth
pursuing. It should be fun, anyway. What say that you and
I make our way to Hivehom and see if we can't find out?”
Ryo could not have been more startled had Fal suddenly
rushed into the room to throw herself wholeheartedly into
the journey. Fal he found himself thinking of her frequently, but always the dream surged into his brain, overpowering thoughts of anything else, goading him, guiding
him, inexorable in its demands, unrelenting in its mental
yes.”

—

pressure.

do you know what we may be
suspicions turn out to have grounds,

“Are you sure
ting into if

my

.

.

.

getsir?

There could be danger.”
“I would hope so! Otherwise there would be no fun in
this. If there were no fun and danger, there’d be no poetry

62
to

And

it.

if

was no poetry in it, there would be no
go. Now, would there?”

there

reason for me to
Ryo did not know how to answer that.
“Look, out there.” The Eint turned and indicated the
hillside window, from which the view extended across the
valley of the Cicci.

On

the far left towered silver tubes that belched the
scrubbed emissions from immense manufacturing com-

To

the right were the intake stacks that supplied
fresh air to the millions swarming below. In the distance,
plexes.

a tiny bright spot rose cloudward
a speed too extreme and angle too sharp for it to be an

slightly to left of center,
at

aircraft.

“Yes, it’s a shuttle. The port is that way.” Wuu stood
alongside Ryo, contemplating the rising dot of light. “No
telling where that one’s going, with its queen ship. To Hivehorn perhaps, or Amropolous or another world. We could

be on such a ship very soon,

Ryo

if

you’re agreeable.”

said nothing, simply stared at the distant reflection

vanished into the cloud layer. When it was gone he
turned to stare at his benefactor, hardly daring to believe.
“It’s not possible. You could follow the tale to its end,
could return and tell me about it. I cannot go with you. I
until

it

have no access to

credit.”

Wuu

executed a gesture not favored in polite society.
“Credit is nothing. I am showered with it for doing that

which I would do for nothing.”
“Well then, there is the matter of identification,” Ryo
continued stubbornly. “Mine was taken. Even if it had not
been, I’m not sure I could reach a ship before the Servitors
contacted it and had me held in confinement. I must be
listed in every computer terminal on the planet by now.”
“Then we must fashion a safe identity for you, my boy.”
Wuu considered the problem, then explained, “I have been
widowed twice. Both times through unfortunate accidents.
There are no natural offspring, but it would surprise no
one were I to announce that I had adopted several. You
can pose as my adopted offspring, which I suspect you are
already, in spirit

if

not legally.

know much of the underlife of Ciccikalk. In addition to those who prey upon the unwary I am
also conversant with many engaged in other forms of ex“I told

you that

I

63

Some

tralegal activity.

of them are writers. Such writing is
never particularly inspiring, but their limited editions are
masterpieces.

You

common enough
give

you a new

Ryozeljadrec.

will retain

your personal name, which

not to arouse suspicion, I think.
clan, family,

and

hive.

You

We

will

is

will

become

How does that strike you?”

“Heavily enough to make me a candidate for a long stay
in an adjustment burrow, but if you really think it will be believed

.

.

“Knowledge and money combined can work miracles,

—

my

boy. Alien monsters, monstrous aliens I feel a poem
coming on already,” and he rattled off a string of singsong

High Thranx

whistle words, harmonically arranged

and

lovely to hear.

“That’s fine,”

Ryo

said admiringly.

“Nothing, nothing. Garbage not worth setting to chip.
Rough words, but we will find inspiration worthy of publication, my boy.”
“I hope something good comes of all this. What if
your ah, forger proves not as efficient as you seem to
think he will?”
“I have a title, this ‘Eint.’ It must be good for something.
Surely it will enable us to brazen our way past any uncertainty. Since you don’t have the experience for it, I shall do
the brazening for us both. I do it all the time. Is not poetry a
method of brazening one’s way past a listener’s defenses, in
order to get directly at his emotions? Poetry’s more than
harmonics and math, you know. We’ll manage our way,
don’t worry.
“There is one thing. Have you given thought to your
family and premate?”
Suddenly Ryo did not feel very well.
“Constantly,” he murmured.
“That is as it should be. You struck me as a responsible
young fellow. We’ll draft a communication to one of them.
It will arrive in this Paszex of yours by a most circuitous
route so that its origin cannot be traced. It will not go off
at all until we are safely on our way and out of the Willow-

—

wane

system.

that

them your whereabouts or intentions, but
you are well and thinking of them. If what you’ve told

me

so far

“It will not tell

is true,

the last thing they will believe

is

that

64
you’ve succeeded in making your way off-planet. It will be
something of a shock to them when you return with the
truth, but until then they will at least not consider setting a
burial service for you.”

Ryo watched the poet instead of the scene beyond the
window. “You do realize what you’re doing?”
“What’s that?” asked Wuu. He’d settled himself before
a beautifully inlaid computer console and was busily running his fingers across the square touchboard.
“You’re breaking at least four laws on my behalf.”
“Oh, laws” Wuu made a shockingly rude sound. “What
do you think the task of poets is if not to break laws,?”
Information rippled across the console screen. “A transport
departs from Hivehom in three days. I think we can be
ready by then, my boy.”
“So soon? But don’t you have things to prepare, affairs
that need to be tidied up before you can leave? We’ve no
idea how long we’ll be gone.”
“My affairs always need tidying up,” said Wuuzelansem, adding a third-degree twinkle. “Ryo, there are three
great excuses one can use in life. To say that one is mad,
drunk, or a poet. It makes amends for a great many delightful outrages one can safely perpetrate upon society.
“As to the preparation of your new identification, admittedly that will require something of a rush job on the part
of the lady I have in mind, but I believe she can manage.
She is a true artist. Wait until you see her work. She uses
all four hands simultaneously with a flow nothing short of
erotic.
thing of beauty as your eventual identification

A

—

and believable both.
“I will book passage for us on the transport. Not upper
class, not lower, but middle. We don’t want to be pushed
around as we might be in lower and we don’t want to attract the attention that upper would bring.
will surely be. Beautiful

“We’ll travel with the average this time ’round, in search
of distinctly unaverage discoveries, and if no alien monsters
should be skulking about on Hivehom well, it’s been
a while since I’ve been off my home world. While the local

—

and familiar are soothing to the soul, the mind requires
somewhat more extensive stimulation. The journey itself
will be worthwhile. I take it you have never been to Hive-

hom?”

65
been outside Paszex until my journey here.”
“It will be something for you to see.
bucolic lad like
yourself. Yes, three days should be enough.”
“I don’t know what to say or how to thank you for this,”
said Ryo, adding a little click and gesture of amusement,
“I’ve never

A

“

‘Father.*

”

“Good. You’re beginning to get
fuge. Treat

me with respect,

real adoptive sire.

We

into the spirit of subter-

me

always as you would a
will surely gain acceptable verse
call

from the drama.”
Suitable attire

Wuu’s

was ordered for Ryo. In keeping with

intentions to stay as inconspicuous as possible, the

was new but not fancy. Those constraints aside,
the vest and pouch were attractive and sturdy.
A day prior to their scheduled departure a secretive little
Thranx appeared at Wuuzelansem’s entryway to handdeliver a tiny package. This produced a remarkable brace
of identification documents, including even a credit charge
stick. The latter was supposedly unforgeable, for the financial institutions of all Thranx worlds were extremely
security-conscious. Ryo would use it only in an emergency.
clothing

“I will handle

all fiscal

transactions,” said

Wuu. “No

sense in tempting fate. That stick will be the most difficult
to pass, but it’s important that you at least be able to show
one. No one travels intersystem without a stick.” He studied the younger Thranx.

“How do you like your new

cloth-

ing?”

Ryo dropped

to all sixes, rose again

per body, shook his abdomen.

The

and twisted

his

up-

vest stayed securely in

place.

“I hardly

know what to

say.”

“One wordless and one overflowing with words. We’ll
complement each other well.” The poet made a gesture indicative of second-degree amusement mixed with disavowal
of sarcasm. “Tomorrow then, we take ship.”
“And if there are problems?”
“We’ll deal with them as they present themselves. Spontaneity

is

one of the joys of existence,

you prepare for

it

in advance.”

my boy,

especially if

He wagged a truhand

at the

younger male.

Ryo

didn’t sleep well that night as

suring dreams that centered

on a

he dreamed unreas-

gigantic slobbering thing

66
with a mouth full of crooked, snaggly teeth, crimson fur all
over its Jbody, and a half-dozen claw-fingered hands that
groped anxiously after him. It wore its skeleton inside, like
the yaryinf, and it wanted to suck out his head.
He woke uneasily to the soft chimes of Wuu’s house
alarm.

They packed

carrying only hand luggage. “We’re
not going to an investiture ball,” Wuu had pointed out,

“and those who

little,

travel light travel fast.”

Exiting the level complex in which Wuu lived, they took
a shaft lift below surface and then a fourth-level transport
to the nearest module terminus, where they boarded a direct

module

to the shuttleport.

one thing that has happened thus far,”
said Ryo in the quiet of their private compartment.
“What’s that?”
“That those who beat and robbed me should escape with“I regret only

out punishment.”
“Who says they suffer no punishment? I know what
their lives are like. They are miserable most of the time
and at best a little of the simplest pleasures may trickle
down to them. They live in many ways worse than our
primitive ancestors who grubbed a bare existence from the
earth, for the advantages of modem society are denied
them. Yet ignorant and unhappy though they are, they

must somehow

live too.”

Wuu made

an all-encompassing gesture with all four
hands. “The universe is a jungle, my boy. You could spend
your life in Willow-wane’s wildest reaches fighting poisonous flora and carnivorous fauna, be healthy and happy,
and come to the Hive of Ciccikalk one day only to be run
over by a transport module. If you regard every place as
being dangerous and uncivilized you will find yourself
much more relaxed in mind.”
It was quiet in the module then. Ryo thought how very
far from home he was and how farther still he was about to
go. Very far from family and clan, and from Fal.
What would she make of the cryptic message he and
Wuu had concocted and sent her? Would she forget him
altogether? Assume he was lost mentally? He hoped she
would simply sigh deeply and return to the Nursery in
all

67
hope of

his reappearance.

Then

again, she might seek an-

other premate.

A mental shake shattered the thoughts like little crystals.
He was

pursuing a dream the way an addict pursues his
next fix. All that mattered now was getting safely offplanet.

His nervousness increased exponentially as they walked

up the ramp

“What

to the shuttle entrance.

if

the

identification

fails?”

he whispered to

.”
Wuuzelansem. “What if?
“Everything will be fine if you’ll simply relax and look
normal,” was the poet’s response. “Your antennae are so
stiff they’re going to crack. Straighten your posture, incline
your thorax properly, and act like you’re bored by the
whole procedure, offspring.”
“Yes
.
sire.”
There was a pause while their names were checked
against the passenger manifest. A line of Thranx waited to
ascend the ramp. A single official stood there, looking indifferent as the machinery monitored both manifest and
.

.

.

.

personal identification.
He didn’t even look up as Ryo and Wuu passed through
and announced themselves. Their ident slips were processed, checked, and efficiently spat back at them by the

boarding console.
Wuu appeared slightly miffed as they continued up the
boarding ramp into the shuttle. He hadn’t been recognized.
“Not a reader or listener,” he grumbled, referring to the
official who’d passed them through. “Civilization is really

run by unaesthetic illiterates.”
“Is there then such a thing as an aesthetic illiterate?”
They launched into a discussion so animated and intense
that

Ryo almost

didn’t notice

and the thick-bodied

when

the shuttle’s jets hissed

craft lifted into the air.

Airborne, Ryo thought in disbelief. Actually airborne.
Like a hesomic. Like a dream.
They quickly rose above the clouds. Only a dim red line
marked the horizon where the sun of Willow-wane was

What must

have been like, he
wondered, for his distant ancestors whose wings had been,
for the mating season at least, functional instead of vestrying to hide. Airborne!

it

68
tigial?

Was

intelligence such

mentary power of

a good trade-off for the mo-

flight?

Before long rockets took over from the starving jets. The
was
shuttle was now above the highest clouds, and the sky
fading from blue to purple, aging much like a Thranx.
Many songs had employed the analogy. Then they were
swi mming through the long night

and the

stars

were bright-

er than they’d ever been.

A scream rose from behind Ryo,

down

the central aisle.
her saddle and lay on her

A

female had tumbled from
back, kicking at the air with all four

legs,

pawing

at

it

with

her hands.
attendants rushed to her. One clamped a breathing
pack over her thorax and administered air from a tank
while the other injected a drug directly down her throat.
She quieted down immediately. Ryo glanced around and
shutnoticed that of the two dozen or so passengers on the
looks and sat in
tle, perhaps a fourth of them wore glazed
by
their saddles as if in a trance. He’d been too absorbed
questhe view outside to notice it earlier. Now he looked

Two

tioningly at

Wuu.

in distress experienced a severe attack of Outspend most
side. It particularly affects hive dwellers who
ancestral carryover that
of their lives underground.
some of the race is still heir to, when we dwelt almost exwas to
clusively below ground and when to venture outside

“The lady

An

expose oneself to the prowling carnivores that then roamed
first
the whole surface of Hivehom. This is probably her
could.
flight and she suppressed the feeling as long as she
“What about those?” Ryo indicated the strangely sub-

dued passengers.
“The same problem, but those are experienced

travelers.

Certain drugs safely counteract the Outside. The side effects are minimal but obvious. He turned to inspect Ryo.
“You feel no fear, no sense of panic?”

“Not a thing.”
“Have you looked out the port?”
been doing little else.
Wuu made a gesture of third-degree confidence mixed
with mild curiosity. “Most Thranx on a first extraatmospheric journey experience a certain amount of mental discomfort. After repeated travel the discomfort passes. Some,
“I’ve

69
of course, feel nothing. They are the exception rather than
the rule. As I mentioned. I’ve done considerable traveling
and therefore feel nothing at all. As for yourself, I should
not be surprised that you are the exception in this way as
well as in others.”

“Open spaces have never bothered me,” Ryo explained.
“That was one of the things, I think, that helped me to
advance so rapidly in

“Ah

my profession.”

yes, the exploiter of

new

You

put
food on my table, so I won’t start in on the morality of
butchering Willow-wane’s native jungle simply to plant
agricultural land.

asfi.”

developed that Ryo was not quite as immune to the
vagaries of Deep Space travel as he first thought. When the
ship passed beyond the last of the system’s six planets and
shifted into Space Plus he fell prey to the same nausea as
everyone else, experienced or otherwise.
It

The

stars

became

streaks

and

their colors

changed as

if

they were being viewed through a shaded prism. Once the
nausea passed there was ample time to enjoy the luxuries
of middle-class shipboard life.
Days and nights fled apace, with the only indication of
movement coming from the slowly changing starfield.
Eventually the passengers had to return to their cabins a
last time. The ship dropped from Space Plus into normal
space, stomachs were wrenched, and the stars resumed

normal colors and positions and shapes.
Ahead lay a bright and somehow familiar sun. There
were twelve planets in the Hivehom system, the home
world fully inhabited, of course, and three others less so.
Several timeparts passed and then they were in orbit around
Hivehom. The home world of the Thranx. The spawning

their

place.

The where-we-all-come-from.

.

.

.

:

-

«

\

As

Ryo stared avidHivehom was a beau-

the shuttle descended

ly out the long port.
tiful

Wane

world.

Not

so beautiful as Willow-

perhaps, but then his

own home was

a paradise.

Hivehom had 20 percent more surface area than Willowwane, but only a little more habitable territory because
it was a cooler world. As they dropped lower Ryo could
make out white smears at the northern pole—solid water,
he knew from his studies. It was hard to imagine a place
where there was little vegetation, where the air was cold
and yet so dry that your breath seemed to crackle in your
lungs.

Then

the shuttle fell too low to see that far north and
there was only green, green and brown like on Willow-

wane. Air began to scrape the little craft and it skipped
nimbly through the atmosphere as they dropped through
the rain clouds above Daret, the capital city of the Thranx.
Fifty-five million citizens claimed the Hive Daret as
their home. The capital city extended hundreds of kilometers in all directions, plunged two hundred and fifty levels
toward the center of the planet Low hills flanked the valley beneath which the city had been cut.
great river, the
Moregeeon, meandered over the metropolis. Long barges
plied its surface and for forty levels beneath its rocky bottom an intricate complex of artificial aquifiers soaked up
water to slake the city’s enormous thirst.
Air intakes rose a half-kilometer into the damp sky.
They vibrated slightly from the drag of immense suction

A

pumps

pulling air

intakes

and

down

to the lowest levels.

ventilators resembled

a

city of

The

forests of

windowless

sil-

ver towers.
Six shuttleports ringed the valley of the Moregeeon, the
smallest dwarfing the shuttleport serving Willow-wane’s
capital of Ciccikalk. The shuttle banked sharply to avoid a
cluster of cloud-spearing ventilators.
Wuuzelansem pointed out the port as they leveled off
slightly in preparation for landing. There, to the northwest,

shone sunlight on the towers of Chitteranx, a satellite city
of six million particularly wealthy Thranx. Still farther
north lay the important metropolitan complex known collectively as Averick,

famed for

incredibly ancient temples

71

72
Both lay hard by
the base of the vast frigid plateau that loomed like an island
in Hivehom’s sea of clouds and was rarely, even at this
raised

by some pre-Thranx

modem

intelligence.

date, visited or explored.

was

Hivehom’s equator. Its surface
boasted a mean temperature of 33° C and average humidity ranging from 90 to 95 percent. With such ideal climatic
conditions it was no wonder the valley of the Moregeeon
had become the center of Thranx civilization.
The little craft leveled off and soon bumped slightly as
its landing gear contacted pavement. They were down and
taxiing toward a dock. Ryo tried to count the shuttles,
lighter-than-air transports, and sleek aircraft as they eased
toward disembarkation, but soon lost track of types and
numbers.
The wonders of Hivehom from the air had fully occupied his attention during the descent. Now that he and Wuu
were on the ground, his early worries returned. Slipping
into Daret was likely to prove more difficult then leaving
Ciccikalk had been.
As usual, he was buoyed by Wuu’s bottomless supply of
optimism. “Worlds may differ but bureaucrats are everywhere the same. Do you recall our departure from Ciccikalk? Did that Servitospector linger over your new identifiDaret

itself

close to

cation?”
“I don’t believe

he ever looked

at it,”

Ryo

admitted.

“He

everything to the computer. But shouldn’t it be different here? Not only is this the mother world, but taking
things out is not dangerous. Bringing things into another
world can be.”
“I don’t think we’ll have any difficulty.” The debarking
tube and ramp were rising from the ground toward the
shuttle. No other structures marred the smooth surface of
the shuttleport.
“We’ve come direct from Willow-wane, a known world.
left

We’re not carrying produce or sample material; in any
case, there are few restrictions on what can be brought
in.”

were enough to inspire a very
thorough customs inspection, however. While Ryo and
Wuu had indeed come direct from Willow-wane to Hivehom, other passengers had not. Ryo fought to conceal his

Those few

restrictions

73
nervousness as a bright-eyed Servitospector went through
his identification. It seemed to Ryo that a lot of time was
spent studying the identiplate.
Eventually they were passed through, accompanied by
the kind of polite indifference the inhabitants of the capital
reserved for those citizens unfortunate enough to have been
born on other worlds. Ryo was too relieved at having successfully passed identification to feel any upset at such
chauvinism. Wuu seemed to know where he was at all
times and quickly located a hotel on Level 75, which
was reasonably close to the city center.
Save for areas of historic importance, the center of
Daret for twenty-five prime levels served only the growing
Thranx government.
As their transport module carried them along wide corridors Ryo noticed burrows with stone facings. This was the
heart of the eternal city of Daret, and Daret was the heart
of the modem Thranx civilization. History pressed close all
around him.
If he was slightly overwhelmed, Wuu was exactly the
opposite. “Doesn’t this mean anything to you?” Ryo asked
him, gesturing out the module’s single forward port.
“Doesn’t such grandeur inspire your poet’s mind?”
“Yes, it does. Ten thousand years of bureaucrats.”
They were to have begun their search the following
morning, but Wuu insisted there was no need for hurry and
offered to show Ryo more of the city. For example, there
were the fabled Echo Falls. These fell from an opening in
the underside of the River Moregeeon past a hundred and
fifty levels to a great artificial cavern where the tremendous power of the vertical cascade was harnessed to supply
energy for the city.
This and the poet’s descriptions of other wonders caused
Ryo to hesitate, but only briefly. It was unreasonable to
expect the authorities to trace him quickly, but it worried
him nonetheless and he was anxious to begin the hunt as
soon as possible. Wuu grumbled at the thought of having to
plunge so soon into the morass that was officialdom, and it
had been Ryo’s turn to supply the enthusiasm.
It was all basically so simple. “We just locate this Brohwelporvot,” he’d explained blithely to the poet, “and he directs us from there.”

74

Wuu

had executed a gesture indicative of third-degree
naivete mixed with fourth-degree intimations of absurdity.
“My boy, you are bright and persistent, but there is still
much you have to learn. Consider the second communication that was received by your premate, the one that went
to such pains to deny everything which had been communiinquire after this perplexing fellow we
would doubtless discover that he has been transferred to
a ‘rest* position somewhere many light-years from here.

cated before. If

we

That is, if we can find anyone or any machine willing even
to admit to his existence.
“In addition, such an inquiry would attract unwanted attention from whoever compelled him to send that second
negative communication. You must know, my boy, that I

am not at all

convinced there is anything to all this blather
about alien monsters and such. I simply find the prospect
of pursuing so outrageous a rumor attractive.
“But if the opposite should be in some manner true, then
we are likely-—unless we are very careful to find ourselves shipped off to some distant resting burrow until we
agree to drop our private search. In any case, we will not

—

we would discover the latter, we must be
we delicately circumvent.”

find truth. If

cir-

cumspect as
But even Wuu’s most persuasive manner and persistent
questions drew nothing in the way of useful information.
As the days passed Ryo was beginning to believe that Fal’s
relative really had suffered a temporary mental break-

down.
Likewise discouraging to further inquiry was the condescension with which they were treated, because they came
from a relatively undeveloped and unimportant colony
world. This didn’t trouble the philosophical Wuu, but it
rankled Ryo’s pride and went counter to everything he’d
learned as a larva about the equality of all citizens. Clanand hivemothers excepted, of course.

When

a month had passed, even the normally indefatigable Wuu was beginning to show signs of losing interest.
“We may have played the game to its conclusion, my boy,”
he murmured one evening in their hotel room. The hotel
ran from Level 75 to Level 92. It was comfortable and
boasted an exit on each level, but its novelty had long since
worn off for both of them.

75
only natural for the interest of a poet to wane, Ryo
thought. Desperately he tried to find some way to convince
his sponsor to continue the quest, for without Wuu’s knowledge and other resources Ryo knew he would never come
any closer to the truth of the matter.
It came to them both as they boredly watched a fictionalized dramatization of the confrontation between Twentieth
It is

Emperor Thumostener and King

Vilisvinqen of Maldrett

over possession of the Valley of the Dead between the ancient cities of Yelwez and Porpiyultil. It was tense, stylized,
and in keeping with proper anachronisms, militaristic.
“The military. Of course.” Ryo put aside his drinking

back into the wall as he raised up on
sleeping lounge. “We have to contact the military

spout, letting
his

it

slide

again.”

Wuu

sounded

you

my

boy, that
any direct inquiry as to the whereabouts or even the existence of this Brohwelporvot fellow will draw either useless
tired. “I’ve told

before,

and he made a
gesture of second-degree indifference, “since we have discovered nothing so far, perhaps it is worth a risk.”
“No, no I’ve no intention of going to the military au-

replies or

unwholesome

questions. Still,”

—

thorities

about Brohwel,”

Ryo replied.

Wuu set aside his portable drinking siphon and gazed
young companion. “Why

cu-

would we want
to contact the military? Unless, of course, you plan a simple march up to the nearest office and intend once there to
ask outright about the truth of their recent acquisition of a
riously at his

else

shipload of alien monstrosities?”

“Nothing of the

sort.

legitimate reason for

You

see, I

making

have another and wholly

my way

all

the

way from

Willow-wane to Hivehom to contact military authorities.”
“Don’t be abstruse with me, boy,” muttered Wuu. “I’m
tired and feeling my age. One puzzle at a time is enough.”
“It’s just this

.

.

.”

Ryo began.

was not located with the other government offices. It lay in a cube complex of its own near
the outskirts of the metropolis. The two supplicants paid the
transport module and entered through a triple-wide en-

The

military center

trance off the busy corridor.

76
Swarms
worked

of workers scuttled through passageways and
behind counters and at saddle-desks. Most of them

displayed inlaid military insignia. Here and there

Ryo no-

whose chiton gleamed crimson fourmatch his own. They were rather more

ticed individuals in

pointed stars to
common than he’d been led to believe, but his thoughts
were too busy for the revelation to depress him.
He turned to face Wuu and found the poet staring at
him expectantly, for now the burden of inquiry fell on

Ryo’s thorax. He led the way into the complex.
Eventually they found their way to a large information
booth. The eight-sided interior was filled with chattering,
whistling soldiers. No explanatory signs marred the various
sides, nothing differentiated one from its neighbor. Ryo
strode boldly to the nearest and looked across the counter
at a busy Thranx. Sixteen fingers flew across an intimidating keyboard.
“Pleasant day to you,” Ryo said to the soldier by way of
introduction and greeting.

She looked over at him and he saw the light glance from
the pair of emerald metal circles set into her left shoulder.
“This is Information West and what is it you need to

know?” she inquired

—

“It’s just that

pleasantly.

that

.

.

.”

“Yes?” His hesitation had not aroused any suspicions in
her. Not yet, anyway.
He looked helplessly back toward Wuu. The poet ignored his stare, was gazing past him and admiring the soldier’s ovipositors. Ryo inhaled, turned to the saddled soldier, and threw out the intricate half -lie.
“We are from Willow-wane. I am called,” and he
showed her the fake identiplate as he pronounced his
adopted name. “I have many relatives in a small town
called Paszex. It lies far to the north of the capital and is
the northernmost hive on the planet save for Aramlemet.
“Four years ago Paszex was attacked and ravaged by
a group of AAnn. Many died and property damage was substantial.

“At that time we were promised increased warship patrols for the isolated communities of the northern continent. No such developments have been forthcoming. I and

77

my

adoptive sire,” and he indicated the expressionless
Wuu, “have traveled all this way at our own expense, to

get

some

satisfaction.”

no comment. She swiveled her saddle to face the large console. The
information displayed there was canceled by the touch of a
“I see,” said the soldier thoughtfully, offering

key. Further touches produced different information.

“Here we are,” she said, speaking without turning from
the screen. “Record of the attack and related briefings.
You say you have relatives still living in this Paszex?”
Ryo stiffened, which is not easy for a Thranx to do, but
it was too late to back out or change his story. “I was there
myself during the attack. I know what it’s like firsthand.
Not a pleasant experience.”
He worried overmuch. The question had been put out of
curiosity, not suspicion.

The

soldier did not follow

up.
“I’ve never had the chance for combat patrol myself,” she
said, a mite less stiffly, “but I’ve studied many records of
such incidents. I sympathize with you informally, of
it

—

“You need

someone in the office of the Supervising Officer in Charge of
Ground-Side Protection, Colonial Burrow. That can be arranged, I think, and
Ryo hurriedly interrupted, making the complex gesture
necessary to excuse his discourtesy. “If you don’t mind,” he
said, “I’ve promised my relatives and clanmates back home
that I’d try to find out exactly why the AAnn chose our
poor little hive for attack. Paszex contains nothing of military interest Their purpose in attacking it remains a myscourse.” She hesitated, considering.

to see

—

tery to all

who live there.”

“Death without purpose

is

ever a mystery,”

murmured

Wuu.
“The dead are dead.” The soldier eyed Ryo curiously.
“What benefit could you and your friends derive from
knowing the AAnn’s motivations?”
“Such information would ease the pain that arises from
uncertainty in the minds of the living,” Wuu put in, “and
perhaps also show us how to make ourselves less attractive
to attack.”
“I can understand that,” the soldier said.

“So we’d

prefer, at least at first,” said

Ryo, “to see

78

someone

—oh,” and he

in charge of

casual, “general xenology.

tried to

make

Then we could go

it

to the Colo-

nial

Burrow Division of the Ground-Side Protection

and

find out

why

sound

we’re not getting the protection

Office

we were

promised.”

The

was uncertain. “The Xenology Ministry

soldier-clerk

of Information
offices at

is

located

Daret Center.

among

the general administrative

I fail to see

why you’d put such a

request to a military office.”

“Because the motivation resulted in military action and
a military psychology is involved,” Ryo replied.
She stared back at him speculatively a moment longer.
Then her curiosity vanished. Others waited impatiently behind Ryo and Wuu and it was not her business to analyze
the requests of Outsiders, only to answer them.

“Of

course.

A

perfectly reasonable request,” she

“The department you wish to

mut-

normally closed
to nonmilitary inquiries. But since you’ve come such a long
way, I will see what I can do for you.”
“Thank you,” said Wuu. “Up till now we’ve had very
little help. We’re very tired. Your assistance is most welcome.”
tered.

visit is

“It’s

no bother,”

The

soldier studied her readouts as her fingers

said the soldier, gratified.

danced
and sub-

on the keyboard. “Xenology has its own divisions
burrows, and a staff devoted to Motivational Analysis.”

“That sounds promising,” Ryo said.
“Here you are, then.” She touched some keys and a pink
plastic wand emerged from a hole. She picked it up, inserted it briefly into another hole. There was a pulse of
light within the counter and a soft buzz. Then she handed
it across the counter to Ryo.
“That’s your directional pass.” Rising in the saddle, she
pointed to her left, toward a corridor. Stripes in a dozen
different fluorescent colors ran along the framing walls,
parallel to the floor.

she instructed them. “Eventually you’ll reach the Xenology Burrow. Motivational Analysis is located on the right. If you become disoriented or

“Follow the pink

stripe,”

have any questions,” she indicated the hole in the counter,
“there are information-access points like this one set in the

79
walls. Insert

your pass for additional information.” She

set-

back into her saddle.
“Thanks to you. Thanks greatly,” said Ryo, taking the
tiny wand. “Good day and night and a second metamor-

tled

phosis to you.”

“Good

luck.”

The

the next supplicant.

was already
Ryo was far more
soldier

talking politely to
gratified

than of-

fended by the abrupt dismissal.

The

and corridors of the military complex
seemed endless, but no more so than those of Central Administration where they’d wandered hopelessly for days.
They descended a dozen levels and crossed whole cubes
before the use of the pass stick and judicious questioning of
passersby finally brought them to an entranceway marked
XENOLOGY MOTIVATIONAL ANALYSIS. Ryo slipped the pass
into the hole in the door, which parted obediently.
They stood in a circular, domed chamber. Three desks
occupied the three triangular divisions of the chamber to
left, right, and straight ahead. Peculiar creatures were
mounted on the walls and tridimensional murals of alien
landscapes camouflaged chip files and ceiling. Ryo shook
as if he were preparing to mate.
tunnels

—

An

efficient-looking

soldier

them. Three metallic green

in

stars

a green vest greeted

and one brown one were

set into his shoulder.

“What service may I perform for you, sirs?” He did not
ask what they were doing in the chamber. Without the
proper pass, they would not have been admitted. He naturally assumed they were on legitimate business.
Ryo repeated the story he’d told the information clerk.
“Yes, I recall
attacks

many

of those sporadic and nasty

on Willow-wane,” the

soldier said sadly.

little

“Your

world is not the only colony to suffer such attention. There
have been many such incidents. Too many. But we are scientists here, not combat burrow. There is no penalty for
expressing opinion, however.”
“It’s

refreshing to hear,”

Ryo

admitted.

“Nothing of the sort ever touches us here, on Hivehom.
The A Ann would never risk that extreme a provocation.
Their elaborate explanations would not be strong enough to

80
rationalize

away an

attack

on the mother world

itself

assuming they could get through the defenses, of course.
“So they content themselves with irritating us. Eventually such practices may bring about the war they strive so
assiduously to avoid. Meanwhile they test our weapons and
reactions and readiness far from areas of Thranx power.”
“Precisely the problem we’re here to address,” Ryo said.
“And redress,” Wuu added, for good measure.
“Naturally, I sympathize with your concern,” the soldier
said. “You wish explanations and answers. You’ve had no
trouble from the AAnn since the incident you speak of?”
“No,” Ryo admitted, “but we—”
“Come with me, please.” The officer stepped back,
made a sign to his busy pair of associates. There was some
enigmatic professional discussion following which Ryo and
Wuu were led into another room behind the outer chamber.
A large screen dominated the far end. Banks of chips set
in proper file casings covered the entire right-hand wall.
dozen comfortably padded saddles filled the floor of the
dimly lit room.
The officer moved along the wall, finally settled on a
key, touched it. A sliver of rectangular plastic popped into
view. He inserted it into the projector in the back wall,
then handed Ryo a small cube dotted with indentations.

A

“This controls the speed, direction of movement, and other
functions of the projector,” he explained. “I’ve run it up to
the section that deals with the attack on your home. Other

such incidents are also documented on this chip. The chip reviews the history of such attacks and goes into detail on
AAnn motivational psychology.” He started toward the
doorway to the outer chamber.
“If the material displayed does not answer your questions, I’ll be happy to talk further with you if you finish
before I go off shift. If I’m gone, the evening shift will be
happy to assist you.” The door closed behind him.
Wuu looked disappointed. “I haven’t worked this hard
and come all this way to look at sanitized military histories.”

“Nor have I,”

a start, at least. Running
the chip will give us time to decide what to try next.”
They activated the projector and soon Ryo’s thoughts
said Ryo, “but

it’s

81

were not on what to do next but on the material playing
across the screen. He was at once fascinated and appalled
as the reconstruction resurrected those confused, frightened

moments of

so long ago

.

.

.

After discussion of the attack and lengthy
dissection of AAnn attitudes, the chip
reported the stepped-up patrols around

Willow-wane, the official protest lodged
with the AAnn by ambassador Yeltrentrisrom, and a statistical summation integrating the attack on Paszex with all
similar

AAnn

adventures.

Words, Ryo thought bitterly. Words and figures. Lives
lost and burrows shattered
all interpreted statistically, for
the benefit of study. He let the machine run. It began to
describe other attacks on Willow-wane and on Colophon.
When the chip concluded Ryo was no nearer an idea on
how they should proceed. Wuu was seated in one of the
saddles, contemplating
or sleeping. Either way he was not
to be disturbed, Ryo knew.
He peered through the doorway into the outer chamber.
Three new soldiers occupied the three desks now.
The nearest looked toward the partly open door. “Hav-

—

—

ing trouble with the projection unit?

The depth

perceiver

has a tendency to go flat sometimes.”
“No, nothing like that,” Ryo replied. “I thought I had a
question, but it can wait until the others return.”
“That will be tomorrow morning,” the soldier said pleasantly. “Are you sure I can’t help?”
“Perhaps later.” Ryo shut the door and retreated back
into the study room. “Wuu, I wonder if perhaps we

might

—

The poet was not

in his saddle.

He was standing

opposite

the chip bank, studying numbers and readouts.

“What

are

you doing?” The poet did not comment, how-

ever, simply continued to scan the wall.

“Ah,” he muttered at last. “Here we are. Index.” He
touched controls and the little scanner set in the wall began
to run through its enormous volume of information on alien
contacts in which the military had been involved. In addition to the AAnn, there was material on the Astvet and
Mu’atahl, two semi-intelligent nonspace-going races. The
bulk of information dealt with nonsentient species with an
emphasis on the carnivorous and belligerent types that the
military was most likely to confront. But nothing touched

—

on the mysterious rumor they’d come a

A

click

tracking.

sounded as the three sections of the door

slid

83

84
apart.

The

soldier

who’d offered to help Ryo walked into

the room.

“You’re not supposed to be doing that,” he told

Wuu

reproachfully.

“Sorry.”

Wuu made

he shut down

a gesture of polite indifference as
the index scanner. “You can understand our

anxiety to learn

all

we can

after

coming

all this

way. Un-

fortunately, the information we’re seeking doesn’t

seem

to

be in here.” He gestured at the quiescent scanner.
The door sealed behind the soldier as he scuttled over.
“See,” he said to Ryo, “perhaps I can assist you after all.
I’m very good with the files.”
His eagerness to help, the friendliness that seemed genuine, led Ryo to exchange a gesture with Wuu that literally
meant, “Why not?” They’d reached a dead end, their burrow search seemed blocked with granite.
When they put the query to him he responded with a
reaction they’d already encountered: laughter. Not as loud
or hysterical as some, but laughter still.
“I’m sorry. You must excuse my discourtesy,” he told
them, “but what you say is nonsense. Fascinating how rumors acquire a life of their own.”
“Isn’t it?” Wuu agreed resignedly. “And yet, rumor is
the seed from which the flower of truth often blossoms,
nurtured by hope and persistence.”
“That’s true.” The soldier’s attitude suddenly shifted. “I
think I’ve heard that parable before.”
“Really?” Wuu looked pleased.
“Yes. A colonial poet is the author. One of the better
known outworld wordweavers. Quuzelansem.”
“Wuuzelansem,” Ryo said, gesturing toward his companion. “This

For an

is

he.”

instant the soldier

was stunned.

Wuu

executed a

gesture of modest affirmation.

and my pleasure it is to meet a reader/listener.”
“I am an avid follower of your work, sir, and that of
Ciccikalk’s Ulweilber and Trequececex as well
It’s an
honor to meet you, sir.”
“Tut! Small honor, when our inquiries are met with
laughter and scorn.”
“Now, what then did you honestly expect, sir?” the sol“It is I,

—

dier said unapologetically.

“A

question like that, a query so

85
absurd as to

—to—” He broke

Neither of the
two visitors was laughing with him. Without a word he
turned, checked to make certain the door was sealed, then
returned to confront them.
When he spoke again it was softly, his whistles barely
audible. Then he chose a chip from the wall files, seemingly at random, inserted
playing.

The

it

off abruptly.

into the projector

and

set

it

to

actual material he ignored, pausing at the

control cube only long enough to set the

high

—

just

loud enough to

volume moderately
mask their conversation, low

enough not to attract attention.
“Wuuzelansem, I know your three books and hear that
you’re working on a fourth epic.”
“As indeed I am, and a shadow play as well.” It was
then that Wuu had his small inspiration. “Would you like
to hear something of the

work

in progress?”

“Would the eriat worm like to grow in a manure pile?”
The overwhelmed soldier settled himself back into a saddle.
Wuu then gave a bravura solo performance from his new
shadow play, executing all six parts and all six shadows as
well, including that of a crippled larva. Ryo watched with as

much

delight as the soldier while the poet perfectly

the limbless larva with

its

blank, hungry stare

mimed

and then

shifted without a gesture break into the part of a hundred-

year-old hivemother.

When

all

was done,

it

was everything the two

spectators

could do not to whistle their applause. Wuu stood before
them, panting heavily.
“Something of an exertion.” His sides were heaving. “It’s
difficult enough to write theater without having to be the
theater as well. But one performs where one must, in the
presence of demand, just as one takes inspiration when it is
offered. I hope it was enjoyed.”
The soldier left his saddle. His gestures, which until now
had been acclamatory, turned suddenly furtive. He leaned
close, the projector continuing to declaim nearby.
“Inspiration? I will give

you some

inspiration,

Eint-

Master. Inspiration of the darkest kind. Can you write blind
poetry, as full of threats and nightmare and fear as the
surface of a moon? Oh, I’ll give you inspiration, yes!”
“Can it be that the stories are true, then?” blurted Ryo,

unable after

all this

time to believe.

86
“No, the stories are not true, but the rumors are. As true
as rumors can be. Understand, I am only a liaison, not even
a subofficer. I’m far too low in the castes to know; merely
one of second rank. To reach the truth you would have to
meet with an officer of the fifteenth rank, and even then I
am not so sure he would know.”
“So high,” Wuu murmured. Only one rank lay above the

Thranx military hierarchy, and

fifteenth in

Marshal

that

was Burrow

level.

“What of the substance of these rumors, then, if not of
truth?” Ryo pressed their sympathetic friend.
“The substance is the stuff of nightmare. As the smoke
says, one of our ships was prowling out the Arm along the
galactic plane and higher.” His whistles were short and
sharp, the clicks brief

Nobody seems
just the

to

“It

found something .

precisely what.

Many who know

and nervous.

know

rumors are convinced

it’s

part of a complicated

exercise to prepare us in case such a find should

someday

actually take place.

a hereditary fear, of course, this anticipation that
some immensely powerful, malignant alien race is lying in
wait for us Out There. It stems from our ancestral terror of
the ancient surface world. Now all Hivehom is our burrow
and other worlds as well, but the immensity of the night pit
is a greater and more threatening surface than any we’ve
“It’s

ever faced.

“For all their boasting and tooth-gnashing, the AAnn
have the same fear. Some horrible alien something awaits
Out There the terror that encircles a burrow dug by unThranx hands. The Throle that waited in hidden lair for
our primitive ancestors.
“But if the rumors are true, that wandering ship found a
horror that’s grounded in reality, not our racial subcon-

—

scious

.

.

Ryo

decided not to mention his knowledge of Brohwelporvot. Loquacious the fellow had so far been, and Ryo did
not want to close down this wondrous source of information by letting the soldier know that the military secret, or
rumor, or whatever, had been partially breached elsewhere.

and whatever they found,” he was concluding,
rumored to be horrible beyond imagining.”
.

.

“Intelligent?”

Wuu asked.

“is

87

“As

I say, I don’t

even

know

found, only that rumor says
life.

Intelligent or not, I’ve

that anything
is

it

no

was actually

some form

of frightful

There

intelligence,

idea.

is

and then there is alien intelligence.
“The joint-shaking stuff comes not from those in a position to know about shape, which after all can only take so
many forms, but from those whose specialties involve
mental characteristics. Some rumors say the creatures are
racially homicidal. That they have an inherent and inbred
desire to kill anything and everything that comes their
way, including even

their

own

kind.”

Wuu muttered.

“Cannibalistic,”

“Like our ancestors.”

worse than that,” the soldier said grimly. “Our
ancestors at least slew out of purpose. Apparently these
things kill because of abstracts.”
“They don’t sound properly sentient to me,” the poet
confessed. “Though I must say I know certain bureaucrats
who might fit the same description.”
“It is not a description
only rumors. And it’s no joking
matter.” He was so deadly serious that even the normally
irreverent Wuu was compelled to subside.
“You simply haven’t heard the stories that have trickled
down. Even among the bravest and most foolhardy of the
highest ranks
those who are for mounting an attack on the
AAnn home world even they are absolutely terrified by
the prospect the discovery of these creatures opens up.
Which may, I remind you again, be nothing more than
“It’s

—

—

a clever

—

training exercise conjured

up

to test the entire mili-

tary caste.”

seem to be doing a lot of work to
from affecting most of its intended subjects,”

“If that’s the case they

keep the

Ryo

test

said.

“But

that’s part of

earnestly.

it,

don’t

you see?” the

“The uncertainty adds

rumors are only

soldier said

to the effect. Besides, the

to test the military. If the information

reached the public, the test would be ruined because its
source would have to be disclosed to prevent panic among
the general populace.”

might be a rumor planted to cover
the real rumors.” Wuu sounded intrigued. “The web is

“Sounds

like the

‘test’

complicated.”

“Whatever

it is,

truth or rumor, I

want no part of

it,

as

88

you seem to. If they’re trying to find out who’s brave or
curious enough to come forth and challenge the rumors in
person, they’ll have to find someone besides me.”
As he listened to the soldier drone on, for some reason
Ryo found hims elf thinking of Fal. So very far away now,
she was. His thoughts turned to his clanmates, always so
supportive and proud of him. He thought of his life assignment. It wasn’t so dull compared to most. Sometimes it had
been downright exciting, even when he had spent most of
his time deliberating in an office chamber instead of working in the field.
Aren’t there enough challenges in life, he found himself
wondering, without trying to ferret out the darker secrets
of the universe, without trying to probe regions best left to
those appointed to search diem?
What am I doing here? came the sudden thought He
looked around the study chamber, feeling the whole ancient weight of Hivehom, of endless Daret and its secretive
and bustling military establishment What was he doing in
that chamber, a simple colonial agricultural specialist, a
glorified fungus tender who followed in the path of those
who’d tended growths in damp tunnels before the coming
of reason? Perhaps . • .
Unexpectedly, the soldier emphasized a whistle, a proper
name: Sed-Clee. It meant nothing to Ryo, but the
force the soldier had put into the whistle and the terror
embodied in his movements when he’d said it were enough
to shock

Ryo from his momentary uncertainty.

Something was happening here on Hivehom. Something
of vast and threatening import. It drew him onward while
at the same time that damnably persistent part of his brain
which had tormented him since birth pushed him from behind. He plunged recklessly, hungrily onward. “What is
Sed-Clee?”
“Nothing,” the soldier replied solemnly.
“Nothing?” Wuu said.
“Nothing.
great deal of nothing, I think.”
“Now you’re not only being contradictory, young
fellow,” the impatient poet muttered, “you’re being ab-

A

surd.”

“Not

was the respectful reply. “When
searching, one occasionally comes across irrelevant but
at

all,

sir,”

rein-

89
teresting information in the

This information destined
for Sed-Clee.’ ‘That report returned from Sed-Clee.’ But
never any details, any exposition. Don’t you see? Entirely
too much nothing comes and goes from what is cataloged
as a tiny military outpost. The volume is far larger than a
post of such size should warrant, and the information is
directed to and dispatched from some of the most esoteric
burrows of the military. This one, for example.
“When specifics are absent, an efficient researcher can
sometimes glean information from inference. Rumors constantly emerge about the place. The one you study is not
the

files;

first.

“There is more. I’ve never encountered a soldier who’s
actually been there. I’ve been unable to find anyone who
knows of anyone who knows anyone who’s ever been
there.”

“Secret military burial chamber,”

“Not so secret. After
known,” the soldier went

all,

Ryo

suggested.

the existence of Sed-Clee

is

so obscured.
There’s so much formal indifference surrounding the
place, not to mention deliberately casual obfuscation, that it
makes one wonder if something of real importance is studon. “It’s just that

it’s

ied there.”

“You just

Ryo

pointed out.
“Statistics characterize it somewhat. The hive of SedClee itself is small. Twenty thousand citizens or so supporting a few small industries and a military base, reportedly of
modest size. Its exact size is classified above my level. Certainly the known information doesn’t point to the installation’s being responsible for anything remarkable.”
“Yet you believe it may have something to do with the
called

it

a place,”

rumors we are tracking?” Wuu asked.
“Pardon if I seem simplistic, sir, but there is nowhere
else these rumors can be ascribed to, so it seems to be the
logical place to seek out. However, a number of other
frightening things about Sed-Clee are well known and have
nothing to do with rumor.

am

not able nor personally interested in going there.
If the rumors are no more than rumors then it would be a
waste of time. If they are true then I especially do not want
“I

to go there.

“But since you two are interested, and because of the

90
admiration I hold for your work, Eint-Master, and the
honor you’ve done me in performing here this day, I have
told you all that I know. There is nothing more
save that
I will show you what is known to be intimidating about
Sed-Clee.”
They returned to the outer chamber. Under cover of innocuous conversation designed to allay the interest of the
soldier’s two associates, they proceeded to study his personal desk monitor.
Touches of the keyboard generated a map of Hivehom’s
northernmost continent. This map was then enlarged and
the resolution steadily increased until they found themselves looking at a map of a comer of that continent.
Near its polar crest lay a region of cold where water
sometimes never became a liquid, where a Thranx could
survive only with environmental protection barely a step
simpler than that required for survival in space.
Slightly to the south of the tiny permanent ice cap, just
below the thin line of tundra that marked the end of the

—

a tiny hive: Sed-Clee. The military installation
it supported was not revealed until the soldier touched several additional keys, whereupon a bright red dot emerged

treeline, lay

to the north of the hive.

A true destination, at last! Ryo stared at the map, at the
source of rumor. “There must be some transportation if it’s
an integrated, formalized hive.”
Other keys were touched.
network of green threads
appeared on the map. Only one, so thin it was almost invisible, ran from the northern city of Ghew
through six
smaller hives scattered across vast undeveloped plains to
Sed-Clee.
“If I had a secret I wanted to hide, I’d be hard pressed

A

—

to find a

The

more

isolated place,”

Wuu declared.

him and gestured with his ankeep their whistles down. The other two

soldier glanced

tennae for them to

—

up

at

operatives were staring curiously at them.

“Yes,” the soldier said a little too loudly. “Now, if you’re
interested in other worlds on the periphery of our current
The other soldiers returned
sphere of exploration . .
to their respective tasks.
“I’d agree that this hive,” their friend

went on more

91
about as isolated as you can get and still be on
Hivehom.” He scrambled the map and shut down the
monitor. When he returned his attention to them his manner was entirely professional.
“I wish you luck and good hunting in your research,
gentlesirs.” He turned to gaze appreciatively up at Wuu.
“And special thanks to you, sir, for your kindnesses.”
quietly, “is

“A

trifle,

my

They made

estimable young friend.”

their

own way

out.

There was no doubt now where their hunt was going to
take them, Ryo mused, but there was a city stop Wuu insisted on making first.
Though they would have no reason to go outside the
shielded environs of Sed-Clee, the poet insisted they travel

prepared for any eventuality. Even a transport module
could break down.
Despite the diversity to be found in the immense hive
they

still

had

difficulty locating a firm that sold as exotic

an item as cold-climate attire. It took several days.
The purveyor who provided the clothing asked no questions. However perverse, hobbies were the business of none
but their adherents. So she simply accepted credit from
Wuu and did not inquire what the two oddly matched
strangers intended to do with their bizarre purchases.
They checked out of their hotel and took an internal
transport to the northernmost main module terminus. From
there they traveled for more than an hour in line with
hundreds of similar modules, until they reached the outskirts of the metropolis.

Soon they had been switched and were accelerating with
perhaps fifty other modules in a train heading due north.
At regular intervals modules split off from front or back of
the column. Forty, thirty, then twenty-two, according to

Ryo’s count, were traveling steadily north-northwest.
Some time earlier the transport train had emerged from
subterranean concourses to travel on repulsion rails above
the surface. The character of the landscape had begun to
change. In place of the valley of the Moregeeon and its
towering forests of ventilation pipes and air intakes,
patches of steamy jungle alternated with cultivated fields

92
and stack clumps marking the location of underground
manufacturing facilities.
Hives were scattered more widely as they entered the
second day of travel. They had already passed the goodsized cities of Fashmet and Pwelfree and hives were farther apart. Most of the modules they had departed Daret in
concert with had split off, but they periodically acquired
others and, on balance, the train had shrunken by only half
a dozen.

,

Wuu’s considerable resources enabled them

to

have the

luxury of a private long-travel unit, about a third the size
of a normal eight-passenger module, with two sleeping
lounges and extensive hygienic facilities. The comparatively lush method of travel was something of a risk to
their carefully cultivated anonymity, but one that Ryo was
glad they’d decided to chance. It was a long way to SedClee.

Though

module was equipped with automated food
from time to time they varied their diet by pulling

service,

the

out of line to sample the distinctive regional cuisines of
hives scattered along the route. Meal concluded, they
would slip back to the main track and link up with the next
cluster north.

Gradually the stack clusters marking the locations of
subterranean industrial complexes gave way to taller, thinner pipes belching treated gases, each above a welldeveloped mine. Hives became smaller, were set farther
apart, and the jungle began to thin out. In clumps and on

grew vegetation Ryo did not recognize.
“It makes one appreciate Willow-wane all the more,”
Wuu observed one day as they sat watching scenery fly
past their module’s right-side port, “when you realize that
the mother world itself is a harsher place.”
shady

hillsides

“I’ve thought that

Ryo

many

times these past several days.”

from the passing landscape.
found them climbing through a rugged moun-

didn’t take his eyes

Days

later

tain pass. Jungle assaulted the lower elevations, but higher

up the rocky

slopes they could just discern

cal growths. Scrapers,

that
flat

had

thin,

Wuu

said they

tall,

were

symmetri-

called.

Trees

sharp excuses for leaves instead of the broad,

variety they

were familiar with. The exteriors of such

93
plants were hard

smooth skin of
normal vegetation. The covering was tougher and thicker
and rough, not

like the

than the bark enclosing the toughest jungle hardwoods.
Vines and creepers turned thin and sickly, though lichens

and mosses seemed to thrive. It was very strange.
Three days before endmonth, they came downslope out
of the mountains. On their northern flanks the jungle had
vanished completely. Plants were still cultivated, but
sparsely. Only a few vegetables flourished on the frigid
northern plain. Hardship made locally grown vegetables
terribly costly, but the price was high enough to encourage
their planting.

On endmonth,

twenty-two days after leaving Daret, they
reached Ghew, the northern hive city. But Ryo and Wuu
did not pause; as soon as the transport computer switched
them through they were hurrying north toward the first of
the six hives that were links in an irregular chain leading to
distant Sed-Clee.

was when they were

between Ublack and
Erl-o-Iwwex, ascending through a stretch of open hilly
country at just forty kilometers an hour, that Ryo woke to
the nightmare. He was lying on his right side, preferred for
sleeping, near the rear of the module. Only two units traveled in tandem with them now, both ahead of their own.
He’d once studied the nightmare he now lived, but the
shock of seeing it just outside the window was enough to
make him cower on his lounge and pull the cocoon wrap
practically over his antennae. “Wuu!” The poet raised himself sleepily and stared across the module at his companion.
“What’s the trouble? What is?
Then he noticed the
direction of Ryo’s motionless gaze and turned to stare at
the same window.
Wuu climbed down from his sleeping lounge and walked
over to the window. He pressed a truhand against it, felt an
odd tingling sensation which he didn’t identify until he
touched the tips of his antennae to the glass. It was Cold.
Deep Cold that seeped even through the sealed port.
Moving to the module’s self-contained climate controls,
he turned up the interior heat and humidity. When the
room had warmed further, Ryo, not wishing to appear the
It

traveling

.

.

from his own lounge to join
the phenomenon dominating their view.
larva, slid

Wuu

in inspecting

94
“It looks like rain,”

member

studying

it

amazement. “I relong ago. During Learning

he whispered

briefly,

in

Time.”

Wuu

said in grim
“I’ve seen recordings of clith myself,”
fascination, “but never thought to see in person. It is rain.

Perfectly ordinary, everyday rain such as falls every
ing in Ciccikalk. Except this is frozen.”

morn-

—

“Frozen,”

Ryo

echoed, not savoring the modulation of

the strange term.

white flakes continued to beat and smear themselves against the module window, reminding Ryo of nothing so much as white blood falling from a cracked and
bleeding sky. Cracked wide open like the body of an unLittle

wary traveler such as himself, much as he might be if he
were trapped outside in such a region for more than a few
minutes.
The frozen rain continued to

fall.

Once the immediate

Wuu

rushed to dictate into his recorder,
to record several lines that he intended to incorporate into
a long narrative poem of delicious horror, to be completed
and refined after their return to Willow-wane.
The climb leveled off and soon they were descending. As
they did so the frozen rain thinned and blue sky showed
novelty wore

off,

—

through not the familiar pale blue of home or Ciccikalk
or even Daret, but a sharp, terrifyingly brilliant blue that
seemed only one step removed from the blackness of empty
space.

Oddly enough, Ryo was more afraid of such Deep Cold
here, on the surface of the mother world, than he’d been
while traveling from Willow-wane to Hivehom. Deep Space
was supposed to be deadly. But to see rain ordinary,

—

friendly lung-moistening rain

—

falling in

hard

little

chunks

on the surface of the center of the Thranx race was

more

far

horrifying than the cold of interstellar space ever

could be.

The

scraper trees continued to grow tall but not quite as
thickly as they had on the other side of the hills; undergrowth was dense and dark. Clinging to branches and accu-

mulating in mounds and drifts was the omnipresent white,
frozen rain.
Ryo stood back from the window. Surely, he thought,

95
even

if

the rumors are true, even

if

there

is

something to

the tale of alien monstrosities being held at Sed-Clee, noth-

ing could be
sterile,

more

white land.

alien or frightening than this awful,

#

The

fourth hive in the chain of six

was well behind them and they soon

hummed

through the fifth. Then they
were alone save for a couple of passengers in the single small module ahead of them.
Eventually, with the frozen rain still falling slowly from
the sky, the module mercifully dipped underground again.
Ryo was unreasonably thankful for the familiar warmth of
confining earth. Lights soon intensified around them and
they pulled into the dirtiest terminal he’d ever seen.
Every carrier station he’d ever passed through had centered on a switching circle, a nexus of repulsion rails that
fanned out in different directions. Not in Sed-Clee. The
track simply curved up against an unloading platform before arcing back the way they’d come.

End

of the

rail,

Ryo

thought.

No

travel,

no transport

Nothing lay beyond Sed-Clee. He helped
Wuu with their bulky baggage, whose contents he fervently
hoped would never have to be unpacked. They ambled out

beyond

of the

this point.

module

into the chill but reasonably comfortable air

of the station.

The two who’d occupied

the

module ahead of them

could be seen talking with several other citizens. Other
than that the terminal was largely devoid of activity.
As Wuu and Ryo walked past the small moduleservicing section Ryo overheard terms and words as unfamiliar as ancient Thranx hieroglyphs. The locals displayed
a slowness of movement and an irritability that bordered on

was probably understandable in light
they had here. He wondered at the reason

the discourteous. That

of the harsh

life

for establishing such a hive.

“Experimental perhaps,” he suggested to Wuu. “Surely a
formal hive isn’t required simply to aid in support of the
military base.”

some research prior to our departure, my boy. A
small chromite mine lies nearby, and some cobalt as well.
The ore bodies lie directly beneath the town, of course.
“I did

Both minerals are

sufficiently

important to justify the es-

tablishment of a small hive. Ah, there, you see?”
pointed to his left.

He

So small was the terminal that the passenger and freight
lines ended in the same chamber. Ryo noted the huge hop-

97

98
per modules, some already loaded with ore. Machines
could be heard, working behind the modules, though it was

hard for Ryo to imagine operators who could function
ciently under such isolated and depressing conditions.

effi-

and much grace they managed
to wangle the location of the hive’s two small hotels from a
passing terminal worker. The one they selected was hardly
appealing, but at least they didn’t have to worry about attracting attention by choosing accommodations too luxurious none such were to be had.
The hotel was located on the sixth of the hive’s twelve
levels. Actually it was the eleventh level because there were
five “zero” levels above the first, a phenomenon neither
Wuu nor Ryo had ever encountered before. The five were
of the same dimensions and were filled not with homes and

With considerable

effort

—

work

areas but with insulation, to help shield the comfort-

from the heat-sucking surface.
Upon inquiring, out of morbid curiosity Ryo thought,
Wuu was informed that the surface temperature was currently -5° C and that even in midseason summer it rarely

able climate below

rose above 15°.

To Ryo,

zero degrees, the solidifying point of water,

seemed cold enough to freeze the blood in his body. The
idea of being somewhere where the temperature was actually below that was like visiting hell itself.
They settled in, taking the evening meal at the hotel’s
own small restaurant. The fare was simple, devoid of dressings or gravies. The meat was pungent and tough, but edible. The following morning they started to explore the hive
and ask questions.
Seeing no reason to conceal it, Wuu announced himself
to be the well-known colonial poet, but was disgusted to
learn that none of the citizens they questioned had ever
heard of him. “We don’t have much time for poetry or any
other kind of entertainment here,” one informed them. He
was a middle-aged male whose body looked like it had been
run through the ore crusher a few times. “I’m afraid what
few pleasures we have are of the less refined variety.”
Ryo had never thought of poetry as being particularly
refined. It was just something any moderately aware
intelligence paid homage and attention to. But the principal recreation in Sed-Clee appeared to consist of various

99
forms of strenuous physical activity, surprising
the hard work required in the two mines.

in light of

Several days’ indirect questioning failed to elicit the location of the military-complex entrance, so they decided to
chance asking one of the citizens directly, rather than risk

a formal information terminal.

“The base?” The

stunted, old female did not appear sus-

picious of the question. “It’s sixty kilometers north of town,

of course.”
“Sixty north?

.

.

“But the transport

we came

in

on

Ryo was momentarily

.”

line

—

ends here in town

confused.

at least, the

one

did. Is there a separate, special spur that

runs from here to the base?”
The old lady responded with a gesture of second-degree
negativity. “No, there’s no other transport rail, youth. All
traffic to the base moves on the surface, in individual vehicles.”

my

dependable old A24 crawler back home, Ryo
thought, but something much tougher. “Isn’t there any kind

Like

of general transport?”

“The workers and

from the base come into town
often enough,” she told them. She didn’t have to. Both Ryo
and Wuu had seen military personnel, circles and stars
shining from their shoulders, wandering around the hive
soldiers

since their arrival.

“But they come on military transport at regular intervals. Very few hivefolk ever go out to the base. No one
wants to.”

“Who does travel out there?” Ryo inquired.
“A few do special work and have permits and
clearance.

don’t

They use the same

know why

military transportation. I

You

you’re so anxious to go out there.

don’t look like fools. But

help you a

special

little.”

if

you’re determined to try,

I

can

She gestured past them, back down the

corridor.

where the information ofand speak to them. Perhaps someone at

“Third cube, second
fice is located.

Go

level, is

the base will be in the

mood

to indulge idiots. Perhaps

be lucky and they’ll turn down your request.” She
cocked her head to one side. “Tell me, why do you want to
subject yourselves to such a journey?”
you’ll

100
“I’m a poet,” Wuu said, not bothering to give his name.
“I’m doing a long spiral poem on the military.”
“Well, I don’t think you’ll raise much material out there,
if you get that far,” she replied. ‘They’re an uncommunicative bunch. Can’t say as how I blame ’em. I can’t imagine a worse place in the civilized worlds to be stationed. I’d
leave here myself if I could, but I’ve two unmated daughters working in the mines and they’re all the family I’ve
got.”

Having always been surrounded by family and clanmates, Ryo found her confession particularly touching.
“I

am sorry.”
“We all have our place,”

she said philosophically.
“So all nonmilitary visitors have to be cleared through
this information station?”
“I would think so.” She preened at a badly damaged left
antenna where some of the feathers were missing, then

glanced around and whistled softly. “If you’re as determined as you are crazy, however, you might have a flagon
of juice in the first-level public eatery and ask for an individual name of Torplublasmet.”
“Why could he help us?” Ryo asked eagerly.
“He could if anyone could.”
Wuu made a gesture of wariness mixed with lack of
comprehension. “I don’t understand. Even if this person
were capable of doing so, why should he?”
The ancient one let out a delighted, wheezing whistle.
“Because he’s crazy too!” And she turned and waddled off

—

down the corridor.
“What do you think?” Ryo asked Wuu
was out of

as soon as she

sight.

The poet

considered. “I

poem

made up

that story about seek-

any suspicions she might
have had and to answer her question as to our purpose, but
why should we not continue with that? My credentials can
be verified. We are traveling outside official channels because such interference would inhibit artistic inspiration.”
ing material for a

Ryo

to allay

gestured hesitant concurrence. “I accept that, but

will the authorities at the base?”

“A

poet’s palate can accomplish miracles,

perhaps our friend

Torplublasmet—

“He’s not our friend yet.”

my

boy.

And

101

—

“

have a suggestion or two.”
They ambled off uplevel and located the
will

eatery, but

two

days passed before the enigmatic Torplublasmet chose to
show himself. As soon as he did, Ryo found ample reason
to agree with the old matriarch’s assessment of him.
Tor was a solitary trapper, one of the few Thranx courageous or foolhardy enough to brave the howling, arctic wilderness above ground. He wore the skins of dead animals
instead of proper clothes, and it was some time before Ryo
could face him without experiencing nausea.
Wuu, on the other hand, seemed to find something
kindred in this bucolic spirit, and by promising the chance
to see something “no one else even suspects may exist,” he
succeeded in convincing the trapper to convey them to the
distant base.

A faintly voiced hope turned out to have substance when
the resourceful Tor did indeed propose a reasonable excuse
for their presence. They would be fellow trappers, visitors

from

far-off trapping grounds,

portunities for peddling

come

to sound out the op-

some merchandise among

the iso-

lated citizens of the base.

Days of wandering on

the hunter’s loosp cart through
frozen forest eventually brought them to a place where the

shrank to a stunted embarrassment and the land
stretched into the windswept horizon, white and completely

last tree

barren.

looked like a moonscape to Ryo. He’d never been anywhere plants didn’t flourish the year ’round. To find such
a blasted landscape here, atop the mother world itself, was
It

shocking.

Before long they could see the familiar silhouettes of
ventilators ahead, misty in the cold fog.
fence seemed to
spring from the ground before them. It was three meters
high and ran to east and west as far as the eye could see.

A

No

signs

hung from the

fence,

no

identification.

Ryo

forgot the cold, the dry, and the desolation as he
struggled to recall the cover story that Tor had tried to drill
into

them during the

frigid days of travel

from Sed-Clee.

am

a hunter- trapper, he told himself slowly: I’ve
marched over from the western bulge of the Jezra-Jerg to
I

visit

my

old friend Torplublasmet.

My

old associate and I

102
our pelts and rare meats in Levqumu because it
lies in warmer territory than Sed-Clee.
We have a few exceptionally fine mossmel skins with us
and we might sell them at the base. Our old friend Tor is
escorting us over so we can check out the prospects ourselves, as is only right and proper.
Such was the tale that Tor strove to impress on the
hapless guard who emerged with great reluctance from the
angular entryway. Moist, warm air roared from the opening like the breath of a gleast. After more than a quarter
month of dry cold, Ryo nearly swooned when the blast
reached him. He was careful, however, to control his reactions lest the guard notice something not in character for a
back-country trapper.
After some polite exchanges and minor formalities between Tor and the guard, they were waved inward.
“Enough talk of this miserable weather, friends,” the guard
said disgustedly as they strolled in. “Come inside and moisten your spicules.”
As they entered, the door closed quickly behind them,
the three triangular sections meeting tightly in the center.
The whisper of the outside vanished.
Following Tor’s example, Ryo kept his furs on but unstrapped the belly latches and shoved the hollowed-out
skull and clith goggles back off his head. He wiggled his
newly erect antennae gratefully, glad to faz and smell once
usually

sell

again.

The hunter

them down a winding ramp. Before long
a modest, busy avenue. Not far above them

led

they exited into

Hivehom’s hostile arcwas as if they were back in

lay the frozen, clith-coated wastes of
tic.

For the moment, though,

it

Daret.
Military personnel scurried everywhere,

emerald and

crimson insignia sparkling from shoulders and foreheads.
Only rarely did they espy a civil worker. The three oddly
garbed strangers drew only occasional stares, testament
to Tor’s frequent visits.

Their guide knew precisely where they were headed.
From time to time he stopped to chat briefly with pas-

Soon they stopped for a drink at a concesobservation of the crowd and the size of the

sersby he knew.
sion.

From

his

103
corridors they’d already traversed,

base was

much

larger than Sed-Clee

artificial

military shuttles.

guessed that the

itself.

down

a corridor that paralleled an
cavern filled with hybrid aircraft and

Later they strolled

immense

Ryo

The

latter,

part of the planetary defense

network, were narrow, round-winged craft armed with missiles and energy weapons. To Ryo’s amateur eye they
looked almost new, and, indeed, none had been flown on
anything more strenuous than training flights.

Having

lived through

an off-world

attack,

Ryo

felt

a

surge of confidence at the sight of the deadly craft, hibernating peacefully beneath the clith but ready to leap space-

ward in defense of the mother world. Everything required
to mount such a defense was here, safely underground, except for the ventilators and the forest of electronic receptors that doubtless lay camouflaged somewhere above.
If only we’d had two or three of these warcraft when the
AAnn attacked, he thought. Those broken-plated invaders
would have received a lot more than a simple diplomatic
reprimand!
Dwelling on the past was useless, he reminded himself.
There was nothing constructive in retained bitterness. He
forced the incident from his thoughts, concentrated on admiring the ranks of gleaming ships. Then they’d passed beyond the hangar and were once more making their way
through the warren.
They’d been walking for some time and Ryo’s feet were
beginning to hurt around the single footpad and trimmed
claw, for his feet were still swathed in the fur shoes Tor
insisted they wear to complete their hunter’s garb. He
moved next to Tor. “I know we must be headed somewhere but where? If this is a tour, I’ve seen enough.”
“It’s no tour. Our roundabout course is intentional. So is
our walking instead of taking an internal module. Walking
can’t be traced.
“There are only two sections of this place I’ve never
been into. Three, actually, but one of them is the battle
command center and we’re not likely to find our answers
there. No one’s ever told me what goes on inside the other

—

never bothered to go there and inquire for myThat’s what we’re going to try today. Surely the best

two and
self.

I

104
place to hide something that doesn’t exist

is

in

a

section

where no one’s allowed to go.”
“You say no one’s told you what takes place in these two
sections,” Ryo said. “Does that mean that you’ve asked?”
“Of course. Even on this visit and I mentioned the pos-

—

of alien monsters this time. Either my friends are
not as friendly as I thought, or their ignorance is genuine.
sibility

Not one

them professes to know anything about what
goes on in the two maximum-security areas. Even officers
at the level of Burrow Marshal aren’t allowed inside withof

out special permission.

“As

to the possibility they

harbor captured

aliens, the

thought was met with derision and laughter.”
“Then how are we going to learn anything?” Ryo muttered concernedly.
“Let us find the sections first, my impatient friend,” the
hunter advised him, “and proceed from there.”
Gradually foot traffic thinned around them and they
came to a turn where the corridor was blocked. No side
branches here, only the single dead end.
It was very impressive, in its understated fashion. Bold
and effervescent as ever, Tor sauntered unhesitatingly up
to the low barrier that blocked the tunnel.
gate was cut
into the left side, near the tunnel wall.
single officer was
seated behind the barrier. Two emerald stars shone on her

A

A

shoulder.

There were also two guards, one before the gate, the
other behind. They were not resting in saddles but stood
stiffly at the ready. To Ryo’s amazement, each was armed
with a large lethal-looking energy rifle held in firing position, tight in both foothands with a truhand on the trigger
stud.

Neither of the guards turned a head to study the new
arrivals. They stared in opposite directions, one up the corridor and the other down. It seemed as if their sole purpose
in life was to insure that nothing approached the barrier
unseen. They reminded Ryo of pictures he’d seen of ancient warriors standing ready, jaws agape, to defend the
primitive hive.

The officer saddled behind the barrier, however, looked
up readily at Tor’s approach and favored him with a greeting movement of her antennae.

105
“You’re Tor the hunter, aren’t you?”
“That I am. At your service.” He executed a fluid gesture of third-degree obeisance combined with two degrees
of sexual admiration.

did not have any visible effect on the officer. “I’ve
heard of you.” She seemed open and friendly. “I am BurIt

row Tacticianary Marwenewlix, tenth level.”
Tor took note of her insignia. “Greetings and warmth

to

you.”

“What may
their pelts

do for the three of you?” She was eying
with curiosity and none of the disgust Ryo
I

would have expected.
Moving forward. Tor rested his truhands on the barrier
as he spoke. “My friends are hunter-trappers, as am I. We
deal in the skins and skeletons and corpses of those beasts
favored for aesthetic and culinary application, which beasts
the hive dwellers would rather avoid while the fearsome
things
“I

still

know

live.”

that,” she replied. “I

have a byorlesnath thorax

bought from a concession in the service corridor.
The proprietor told me you were his supplier.”
“Fourth booth, level two?” She gestured in the affirmative. “Young Estplehenzin, yes, I remember. I hope you
find the muff to your liking.”
“It is quite attractive in its barbaric way
and very

muff

I

—

warm.”
“Then you can understand, as an appreciator of such
items, why my friends and I are always on the search for
similar items with which to supplement our stock.”
For the first time she sounded uncertain. “I’m not sure I
follow you.”

Tor leaned

tone turning conspiratorial. “It’s
come to our attention that you might be studying some
creatures whose pelts would be especially marketable. More
than just the usual novelties, if you follow my meaning.
Something will have to be done with them when you’ve
finished your studies.
would be glad to handle any postexperiment disposal, with mutual profit to all concerned.”
closer, his

We

no idea what you’re talking about.” She added two
degrees of politeness and one of puzzlement. “No such
“I’ve

creatures exist in this section.”

“Come now,

tacticianary,”

he urged

softly,

“we’ve

all

106
heard the rumors. Since no such creatures are being studied anywhere else on the base, they have to be back there.”

He

down

the corridor. “Or else over to
the south in Section W, right? Those are the only two
places in the installation tight enough to hold them, as well

gestured past her,

as the rumors.”

“They are not

W,

because no such
things exist,” said the officer. “The cold has weakened
your reason while stimulating your imagination, hunter. I
can enlighten you no further.”
“It’s not that I’m doubting your word, tacticianary. It’s
only that the tales I’ve been told have been so persistent
and inconsistent. If we could have a quick look for ourselves, why then we could leave easy in mind that we’re not
missing out on a special opportunity. Just a quick look. We
wouldn’t tell a soul. Don’t but rarely meet anyone else to
tell anyway, Outside.” He forced a laugh.
“I can’t allow you past this point.” She was not amused.

“You know

here, nor in Section

that.”

“Well then, what goes on back there, anyway?”
“Research.”
“Real secret research,

“Come now,

hmm?”

Enough badinage. Surely you realize that
if I must turn away military personnel I could never let one
of you past this station, any more than I am able to relate
sir.

what kind of research takes place here. I can say that most
of the time I do not know myself.”
“Then let us pass,” Wuu interjected, speaking only because he saw chance slipping rapidly away, “and upon our
return we’ll enhance your store of knowledge from our
own.”
She eyed him intently. For a moment Ryo thought that
Wuu’s instinctively elegant speech had betrayed them.
The officer’s mandibles moved and Ryo feared she was
about to ask the first of many unanswerable questions,
when something whoomed! from the far end of the corridor. Even the fossilized guards unbent, whirling with their
raised weapons. Flakes of sealant fell from the corridor
ceiling.

Tor had clung to the desk for stability. Ryo and Wuu
barely managed to keep their own balance.
There was a disquieting pause as the officer took a step

107

A

second blast shook
flare of orange flame
filled the far end. The flame disappeared, the smoke began
to dissipate, and shouts and whistles sounded from unseen
Thranx.
Several appeared from behind the smoke, running toward the barrier. They gestured urgently. Without a word
the two guards rushed to join them and the little group
hurried around the bend that had produced the smoke and

toward the source of the explosion.
them. This time smoke and a brief

fire.

The

officer

her inquisitive
“I’m afraid

had hesitated before turning back

to face

visitors.

I

must ask you

gentlesirs to return to the

central sector, preferably to the concession area.”

An

inter-

com

video console was built into the barrier. The status
indicators on it were going berserk. From down the corridor they could hear the shrill blare of warning whistles.
“We won’t get in the way,” Tor said with admirable
calm. “Maybe we can help, if you’ll allow us to
” He
broke off suddenly, speechless with amazement.
The officer had produced a pistol, which she held in a
foothand. It displayed not the civilized snout of a stinger or
of an energy weapon, but that of a charged-projectile de-

—

whose

blow a person’s chiton to splinters. “Please return the way you came,” she instructed them brusquely, with maximum-degree assurance,
“or I will be compelled to kill you here.”
“Kill?” Wuu repeated stupidly. It was the first time Ryo
had ever heard the poet at a loss for appropriate words.
“We haven’t done a thing. We
.”
“You have five seconds. One . two
“Enough. We can argue later.” Tor turned and started
running. Ryo did not need further urging. As he ran he
turned to glance back over his shoulder. The officer had
resumed her saddle, her hands flying over the console’s controls. The ugly projectile weapon lay close at hand atop the
vice

tiny explosive pellets could

—

.

.

.

.

barrier.

“Outrageous!” Wuu was muttering. “Whatever trouble
they are experiencing is no excuse, no excuse. Such a
breach of common courtesy, of farewell custom! They can-

not—”

108
“This is a restricted military installation,” Tor interrupted him firmly. “They can do anything they wish.”
“Surely she would not have shot us with that thing?”
Ryo said wonderingly. They turned down a bend in the
tunnel.

“Did you not see her posture or note the inflection in
her voice?” Tor asked. “No question in my mind. She
would have blown us apart as we stood there gaping at her;
bang-bang-bang, one-two-three. Good-bye hunter and his
curious friends, just like that.”

“But whyV Wuu wanted to know. “What trouble could
have provoked such a threat? It’s unthinkable, a throwback
to the primitivism of the hive wars.”

“She would have done it because she’d been ordered to,”
Tor told him. “I can see that neither of you has spent much
time around the military. We can consider her reasoning
later.”

“We

He

turned sharply to his right.

come this way, I think.” Ryo looked backThey were alone now. “Do you think it’s pos-

did not

ward

again.

sible

.

.

.

those explosions

.

.

damn

what’s possible,” snapped their
guide. “We’re not going to ask questions until they put
away projectile weapons and such. I want no part of any“I don’t give a

thing that’s got

them so jumpy.”

“Don’t you see, though? This may have something to do
with the monsters,” Ryo told him.
“And maybe it has something to do with a top-secret
weapon that’s going haywire,” Tor responded. “We’ll find
out later, when mysterious explosions aren’t going off and
attractive officers aren’t threatening to shoot us.

moment

.

For the

us to do is follow her
advice and relax with the other nonmilitary back in the
concession area.”
By this time they were running through a particularly
narrow corridor laced with conduits and pipes. “Maintenance tunnel,” Tor said, stating the obvious. “There’s going
to be a lot of confusion in the nearby corridors. This way,
we’ll miss the traffic and come out close to the concession
level. I could use a cylinder of hot cider right now, as well
as a little calm. If there’s been a general mobilization, we’ll
learn about it just as fast and a lot more comfortably while
we’re drinking.”
I think the sensible thing for

109

“Two

explosions,”

Ryo was

muttering. “I heard at least

two/*

boy.” Wuu was breathing hard
and having trouble keeping up with his younger comrades.
“I thought the second closer but smaller than the first”
“I’d give a great deal to know exactly what’s going on,”
“I also heard them,

Ryo

my

said.

“Perhaps we’ll encounter personnel in the concessions
who know something and are more willing to talk about it,”
the poet replied. “Confusion and excitement can loosen the
tightest of throats.”

Ryo moved on as Tor dropped back to assist the slowing
Wuu. Noise sounded from ahead.
“They’re probably trying to shut down power and so
forth to the affected area,” the hunter declared. “Maybe
the maintenance workers can tell us something. I may be
more

cautious, but I’m as curious as either of

you as

to

what’s happening.”
“I’ll

ask.”

Ryo

sent a greeting whistle toward the hidden

work crew. “Greetings, friends Do you know what is happening? Did you hear the explosions? Can you tell us?
He turned the corner and stopped.
The work crew he’d expected to find was not there, but
1

.

something

.

else was.

The horrors

that turned to confront

him held Thranx

energy rifles in pulpy, pale fingers. Ryo could not understand how anything so soft-looking could hold even a
drinking tankard. Each of the two upper limbs ended in
five digits instead of the normal four, and only one was
opposable.

They

stared at each other,

surprised.

Ryo wondered

if

Thranx and monster equally
the two were a mated pair.

There were some superficial differences between them, but
that was no assurance of mating or even gender. Certainly
neither displayed anything like a pair of ovipositors, but
then, he reminded himself, most mammals practice live
birth.

Despite the presence of fur he couldn’t be certain they
were mammals. Their bodies were heavily clothed and
what fur he could see was restricted to their heads. So startled was he by the unexpected sight, he forgot to sound a
warning.

110
It

“What

wasn’t necessary.

something the matter?”
“Yes, do they

is it,

Wuu

boy?”

—” Tor pulled to a

know

halt

called. “Is

down

the

bend as Ryo had in his
haste, but remained out in the main tunnel.
One of the monsters made a throaty, gargling sound and
raised its rifle. Tor and Wuu immediately turned and
bolted back the way they’d come.
Whether out of desire to protect the elderly poet or from
some unconscious urging (he never really knew), Ryo
stepped in front of the rifle and dropped all four arms. The
corridor.

They did not round

the

monster glared down at him out of tiny single-lensed eyes
and hesitated. Ryo had confused it.
It did not run after the retreating Thranx. Ryo noticed
that the energy rifle was similar to those the two barrier
guards had wielded. Its tip dropped away from him, but as
he took a step backward it came up again.

Ryo

stood quietly, staring up at the monster, his antennae working furiously as he examined the creature. There
was nothing remarkable about their smell. It was oddly familiar, in fact.

For

their part, the

monsters seemed puzzled by Ryo’s

They continued to make the strange
clearly their method of communication.
calm.

gargling noises,

There were other differences besides the amount of fur
they displayed. One was slightly larger than the other and
they had different shapes. The latter could be due to clothing as much as physiognomy, Ryo reminded himself.

They displayed the flexibility of leuks. Their outer skin
was mostly bare of fur but was not hard and composed of
jointed plates as was that of the AAnn. The softness fascinated him. The creatures had outer coverings as thin as
paper.

They seemed to

fit

no known

life

grouping.

As

endoskele-

beings they probably belonged to a lower order, though
the AAnn were an exception to that otherwise universal
tal

physiology followed Thranx norms then the
larger of the two should be the female.
rule. If their

They appeared

Their faces were flat and
they had external nostrils instead of antennae; it was likely
they could not faz. When they conversed they showed only
to

be

tail-less.

four canines, two upper and two lower.

The

rest of their

Ill
teeth

seemed

relatively flat

and

blunt.

That suggested they

were herbivores, but they didn’t act like plant-eaters. Omnivorous like us, perhaps, he mused.
Since they were clearly bipedal the lack of a substantial
tail puzzled him. Such an arrangement seemed designed
for instability, yet they appeared to balance themselves
without difficulty in the awkward upright position.
There were only two upper limbs and he wondered if
they could double as another pair of legs like the Thranx
foothands. He doubted it. Both upper and lower limbs appeared too specialized for such duality of employment.
The energy rifles were designed for use with three
hands. The monsters managed by holding the stock of the
weapon in the space between arm and body, thus freeing
one hand to work the lower grip and the other the trigger.
They seemed to know exactly what they were doing and he
had no doubt they could fire the weapons whenever necessary.

All these observations registered on his brain in seconds.
As he’d hoped, by stepping between their weapons and his

companions he’d prevented shooting. Now they were probably trying to decide whether he was sacrificial by nature
or merely insane.
They were neither as terrifying nor as familiar as he’d
hoped. If it came to physical combat, he thought he had a
good chance. They were each twice his mass, but that skin
looked terribly fragile. He hoped there would be no bloodshed. It was only a matter of time before they were recaptured anyway. Surely the hunt had already begun.
His thoughts returned to the two explosions and he wondered if anything besides property might have been hurt.
As he considered that unnerving possibility the taller monster tried to stand erect, bumped its head hard against the
corridor ceiling, and made some loud mouth noises. Its rifle’s muzzle dipped and Ryo took a step back.
Immediately the smaller one swung its weapon to cover
Ryo. He halted. Clearly this was an escape attempt, and
just as clearly it would soon come to an end. Before that
happened he hoped to acquire some interesting information.

He was
with the

quite

rifle

calm

as the taller

muzzle. Evidently

it

monster prodded him
desired that he move.

112

Ryo responded

with a second-degree gesture of negativity.
Keeping the tremor from his voice, he politely whistled
that he had no intention of going anywhere and that it
didn’t matter because they would be recaptured any moment.
There was no way of telling if the creature understood.
In any case it prodded him harder with the rifle and made
a loud mouth noise. Not wishing to tempt their instincts
further, he turned resignedly and walked in the indicated
direction.

The monsters paced him,

the larger one taking the lead

and the other walking behind Ryo, occasionally glancing
over its shoulder for signs of pursuit. There were none as
yet.

The maintenance tunnel rambled on and on, but they
encountered no one. Ryo used the opportunity to study at
close range the monsters’ remarkable method of locomomarveling continually how they kept their balance
on only two legs and with no tail as counterweight. They
looked very agile. Being more primitive, they were probably capable of good speed over a short run.
The concealed feet tantalized him. Though larger than
his own, the pad design did not seem all that dissimilar,
hinting that each foot probably formed a wide base ending
tion,

in a single claw.

That would make them

efficient diggers.

They turned still another comer in the dimly lit tunnel
and found themselves facing a sloping ramp. Unhesitatingly, the taller monster started up the ramp. Ryo followed,
noticing

with

interest

how

the

creature

automatically

leaned forward to compensate for the slope.
As they ascended, new noises sounded faintly from far

down

the corridor. Distant whistles and clicks grew

mo-

mentarily louder, then faded as a search party turned in a
different direction.

Ryo

derived perverse pleasure from contemplating the
panic that must exist among those responsible for insuring
the isolation and security of these creatures. For

all their

appearance they seemed sensible enough.
These were not ravening, bloodthirsty beasts.
Still, there was the nagging matter of the two substantial
explosions and of how this pair came to be in the posses-

nightmarish

113
sion of a set of energy

rifles

whose

original wielders did

not likely surrender them without contest.
The ramp continued to ascend, turning a gradual spiral.
Soon the lead monster halted, put out a hand that would

have forcibly stopped Ryo had he not slowed willingly.
“I beg your pardon,” he said, slightly out of breath, “but
this really is a waste of time, you know.” At that point the
creature did a remarkable thing. Showing that it had done
some studying of its own, it reached out with a single flexible hand and clamped all five digits around Ryo’s mandibles. Ryo instinctively tried to pull away, but the monster

Was quite strong and did not loosen

its

grip.

Slowly the monster released its hold, put one digit across
the two soft fleshy mandibles that bordered its mouth. It
had no horizontally opposing mouth parts, Ryo. noted. He
had no idea what the movement signified, but the grip on
his own jaws was clear enough. He kept silent.
The creature disappeared ahead, was back in seconds. It
made a wonderfully fluid gesture to its companion, who
prodded Ryo forward. They emerged from a tiny exit no
larger than an enclosed saddle, the monsters barely squeezing their bulks through the opening. Only their astonishing
flexibility permitted it.
They were standing in a storage compartment filled with
ventilator cleaning material. To the right was an unguarded
doorway.
The taller monster moved unhesitatingly to the door and
worked the controls with a confidence that hinted at care-

There was a hum. Clith was falling heavily
outside. Icy wind poured inward and Ryo instantly flipped
down the headpiece of his skin and the protective goggles.
“Surely,” he told the smaller monster, “you don’t intend
for us to go outside? Neither of you has proper clothing.”
Though extensive, their attire was not nearly as thick as his
byorlesnath pelt, and they had no head covering whatful preparation.

soever.

The second monster prodder Ryo forward. After a

brief

pause during which he thought he might prefer a quick,
hot death from the energy rifle to a slow, freezing one outside, he opted to survive as long as possible and started into
the driving clith.

114

They staggered through the frozen rain. Ryo did not notice when they crossed the boundary fence. He was certain,
though, that they’d left the base well behind because before
long they were making a path through the forest.
That they’d been able to slip out undetected did not
shock him. After all, the weather was dreadful and as slim
as the thought was that someone might try to break into a
military base, the concept of breaking out of one verged on
the absurd. He had no doubt the search for the escaping

monsters was continuing more intensively than ever, just as
he had no doubt that it was still confined to the interior of
the burrows.
Clearly these creatures were better adapted to cold than
his own kind. They moved steadily through temperatures
that would have killed an unprotected Thranx in minutes.

Or an AAnn, he
from

told himself, taking

some encouragement

that thought.

From

time to time one would simply wipe accumulated

from its face, ignoring the freezing liquid that ran
down head and neck. This redoubled their alienness in Ryo’s

clith

eyes.

Yet they were not immune to cold. Onrushing night
brought a further drop in the temperature. The clith had
ceased falling, which was some relief. At that point the
monsters did the first sensible thing since leaving the base.
They located a considerable hollow beneath several fallen

and beckoned him inside. One of them removed a tiny,
thin metal tube from its clothing. Ryo did not recognize the
tube, but he was familiar with the faint aroma of the particles the monster sprinkled from it.
These fell on a pile of reasonably dry wood, which immediately burst into flame. Ryo edged as close to it as he
dared, not wanting his pelt to catch fire. The monsters extended their bare hands toward the warming flames. The
cold was deep enough now to trouble even them.
“Listen, I don’t know what you intend to do with me,”
he said softly, “but I won’t make you a very valuable hos-

logs

tage.”

This brief speech caused them to begin making strange
mouth noises at each other. Ryo tried to see how they
formed the sounds, and it did not take long to figure out
that they employed air from their lungs, or at least from

115

Modulation probably came from movements of their flexible mandibles and the peculiar fleshy
organ soft creatures sometimes possessed inside their
mouths. They did not communicate by making word-tones
with their mandibles. Soft as the creatures were, that was
inside their bodies.

not surprising.

They made

the sounds in their throats, not at the mandi-

He

did not have that internal mouth appendage, but
he thought he could approximate some of the sounds.
first try produced a mildy surprising little bark. He
bles.

A

was not nearly

as startled

by the attempt

as the monsters

The smaller one, after a brief pause, looked straight
at him and repeated the noise. He tried again, forcing himself to keep his mandibles apart and utilize only moving
were.

air.

,

This had an interesting effect on the creatures, for they
once again set to gargling furiously among themselves.
He made the sound a third time. The monster responded
with a different one. When Ryo tried to imitate it, he
failed completely. His initial confidence evaporated. His
mouth-parts simply could not duplicate that volume and
pitch.

As an

he responded with a whistle and click
of his own. The monsters did not make any more noises.
Instead, they huddled close to each other.
Ryo gave a mental shrug and pushed himself into a corner. He lay on his left side, watching them. It was dark
outside now. The monsters still cradled their energy rifles,
and they watched him intently.
It suddenly occurred to him that they might be afraid of
him. That was a ludicrous thought. They were twice his
size, twice his number, and heavily armed. The only thing
he had in his defense was the fact that they were strangers
on his world.
I suppose that’s frightening enough, he thought sadly.
Poor monsters. I mean you no harm, and I hope you can
feel the same about me.
One of them closed both eyes and he wondered what it
might be like to have eyelids. The creature was going to
sleep, and it was another relief to learn they had that in
common. The taller one remained conscious, watching Ryo.
Watch all you wish, he thought. I am going to sleep myalternative,

116
self.

He

very

tired.

let his vision

He was

dim, his thoughts weaken.

He was

so tired the dim realization did not rouse him. I
thought their smell was half familiar, he thought exhaustedly to himself. Now I remember what it reminds me of.
The aliens smelled very much like the yaryinfs . . .
Thranx-eaters.

Search parties came close the following
day but did not find them. By the third day
Ryo and the monsters were so deep into
the forest Ryo doubted anyone ever would.
Occasionally, search aircraft would slowly pass overhead. At such times the monsters concealed themselves and

beneath tree roots or overhanging rocks. Once
they even buried themselves into the clith, which badly
strained the temporary truce between monster and Thranx
because the thought of immersing himself in that numbing

their hostage

cold was nearly too much for Ryo to bear. They settled for
his remaining motionless against a small rock, trusting to

camouflage him.
The next day one of the monsters demonstrated its familiarity with the energy rifle by using it to kill a small
emlib. The furry herbivore jerked once and was still. Ryo
watched with interest as the creature drew a small Thranx
knife from a pocket and neatly butchered the carcass,
which was then roasted over an open, largely smokeless

his pelt to

fire.

The

While he normally would have disdained so uncivilized a meal, he knew
that if he didn’t eat hunger would kill him before the cold
did. He accepted the meat, holding it under the head of his
pelt as he bit off small chunks with his mandibles and
swallowed them whole. Some vegetables would have
helped, mixed together with the meat in a proper stew, but
he was thankful enough for just the protein.
It was comparatively warm that night. The next day,
they crossed ground that was mostly devoid of clith. As
they walked Ryo was startled when one of the monsters
suddenly began to whistle. There was rhythm but no sense
to the sounds. It was very similar to the crude speech of a
newly hatched larva.
Perhaps it was simply their mode. He tried imitating the
sound, managed to match it almost perfectly the first time.
It was simple compared to the monsters’ more common
communications noises.
The monsters looked pleased and whistled back at him.
At that point Ryo wondered if the researchers who’d studied these creatures had concentrated only on trying to learn
their guttural language instead of trying to teach them
larger monster offered a piece to Ryo.

117

118
Thranx. If

they probably tried to use electromechanical
interpreters. And for various reasons the monsters might
not have been interested in cooperating with the study.
Stopping, he pointed importantly to the nearest bush.
so,

He

gestured again, adding movement
indicative of third-degree importance. “Slen.” He repeated
it several times, much slower than normal, drawing out the
“Slen,” he whistled.

whistle comically.

The monsters

hesitated.

The

larger

seemed

to argue with

the smaller. That was only Ryo’s impression. For

knew

all

he

they might have begun a mating ritual.

Turning to Ryo, the smaller monster hesitated a moment
longer, then formed its pair of flexible mandibles into a
circular opening. The sight was so disgusting Ryo had to
force himself to watch.

But

produced a

it

fine whistle.

pointing at the bush.
“No, no,” he said. “Try again.”
“Slen.”

“Zh

.

.

.

slen,”

it

“Zhlen,”

He

it

said,

touched the bush.

said.

Ryo again touched the bush* said “slen,” and added
movement for affirmation. The monster repeated
word, but

At

left off

that point

also

the

the

the gesture.

Ryo glimpsed

part of the trouble and

was

further amazed. These creatures spoke only with their lungs!

They apparently never

whole bodies.
Without thinking, excitement completely overwhelming
normal caution, he walked up to the monster and took hold
of one of its upper limbs. Both reacted sharply, but the
smaller one did not pull away. Ryo pointed to the bush,
said “slen,” and made the affirmation gesture again.
This time, after the monster repeated the word, Ryo

moved
moved

utilized their

limb in the gesture of affirmation. The limb
freely, but the feel of it made him a little ill. He
fought to retain his composure. If the researchers studying
these creatures had thought to try the same thing it would
not have surprised him to learn that the larger monster had
its

thrown its inquisitor into the nearest wall.
Sometimes physical contact means more than mental, he
mused. Fal had told him that. It was an important rule to

remember while teaching

He

let

larvae.

go of the arm, stood back, and made the click

119

sound signifying “do you understand?” The monster stared

He

at him.

repeated the sound.
The monster slowly made the gesture for “yes,” then
pointed at the bush and whistled “slen.” He was about to
try the word for clith when the larger monster, which had
been watching intently while keeping the muzzle of the rifle pointed at Ryo, suddenly walked over and touched the
bush. It looked at Ryo, made a gargling sound, then pointed

Ryo and used some part of its
click, “Do you understand?”
Ryo was so overjoyed he almost
at

internal mouth-parts to

forgot to

ture of affirmation.

said “slen”

tate the

Then he
monster’s own mouth

noise.

that point the monsters

made

At

make

and

the ges-

tried to imi-

a whole series of very

loud mouth noises accompanied by a great deal of mutual
touching.

The

he knew, were produced by forcing air
past those soft mandibles. It took him a while and the patience of the smaller monster to discover how they produced
their clicks. These sounds were softer than his own. Instead
of grinding mandibles together as Thranx did, the monsters
apparently utilized their peculiar mouth appendages
against the upper parts of their jaws. The resultant words
were sloppily executed but, if one paid attention, quite
whistles,

comprehensible.
The point of communication which had eluded them the
longest, that of gesturing and posture, turned out to be the
simplest for them to duplicate, once they began to understand that civilized speech was more than merely a matter
of atmospheric modulation.

By

Ryo was imitating some of the monwell. As they marched they all engaged in

the fifth day

terms fairly
an orgy of identification, beginning with the bush and
working up to more complex terminology. Trouble was had
with certain gestures because the monsters were short the
sters’

correct

number

of limbs.

They solved

this

by using one of

an arm or sitting down to use all four limbs if
a quadruple complicated movement was required.
By midmonth they were carrying on crude conversations.
By the end of the month and yet another meal of carbonized
emlib Ryo was convinced the authorities had given both
him and the monsters up for dead.
their legs as

120

The monsters were not members of different
which was one thought he’d given some credence

species,

Like
the Thranx their kind had two sexes, but the larger turned
out to be a male, the smaller a female. Ryo readily accepted this mild perversion of the natural order. They were
not, however, a mated pair, but simply members of the
same ship’s crew. Their name sounds were “loo” and “bonnie.” They did not have clan or hive names, only personal
and family. Ryo allowed them the unusual familiarity of

him by his personal name alone, since
verged on the unpronounceable for them.
calling

to.

his full

name

He

learned that their skin color and slight difference of
eye shape were due to internal racial variations. Other
things he already knew by observation, such as the fact
that they were omnivorous.
“Our ship,” the larger monster Loo was explaining one
day, “hurt by other ship.” The term hurt required a double
click. Ryo took personal pride in the monster’s tolerable
pronunciation.
other, ship?”
“What different
The monster stopped. In damp mud he sketched the outline with one digit. Ryo recognized it immediately. It only
.

.

.

confirmed earlier thoughts.
“AAnn ship,” he said. As he repeated the word he
picked up a rock and threw it forcefully at the drawing,
sending mud splattering. That was one gesture that did not
require elaboration.

“Bad. Not good,” the monster agreed, making a gesture
of fifth-degree and maximum affirmation. Clumsy and unsubtle, Ryo thought, but a least they are learning how to
get their thoughts across. The monster emitted a long, rippling whistle. “Very bad.”
At least we have one thing in common, Ryo mused. Neither of us has any love for the

not

allies

AAnn. These

creatures were

of the Thranx’s hereditary enemies.

“Why we

imprisoned?” the monster suddenly asked.
Ryo thought, constructed a simple reply. “My people
afraid you AAnn-friends.”
The monster made a funny noise that Ryo had not
learned how to translate. He asked for an explanation.
“Funny. Very funny.”
So that was monster laughter, Ryo thought. Most pecu-

121

“Understand.” He then demonstrated the gestures and
whistles for first- through fifth-degree amusement. “No like
A Arm my people,” he said. “My people afraid you and

liar.

,

AAnn

friends.”

The smaller monster said, “Funny. We
Thranx people and AAnn friends. Very funny.”
“Big mistake,” Ryo agreed.

afraid

you

“Very big mistake,” the larger monster agreed. “All you
Thranx people afraid of us people when capture us. Why
afraid? Because afraid we AAnn-friends?”
“Partially,” Ryo said. That required further explanation.
Understanding was coming quicker to both sides now.
“Also another reason.”
“What reason other?” the monster asked.
“‘
Other reason,’ ” Ryo corrected it no, him, he reminded himself. He hesitated, then decided that if they
were offended there wasn’t much he could do. It would

—

have to be brought out sooner or later.
“My people, the Thranx, certain type.”

He

tapped the

chiton of his thorax, then a leg, then his head. “On this
world, on other my people Thranx worlds, many creatures
“Such crealike you.” He pointed to each of them in turn.
tures eat Thranx.”

took them a moment to digest this. Ryo had learned to
recognize some of their emotions, which were transmitted
of
not by distinctive gestures but by certain positioning
being angry
their flexible face parts. He saw that instead of
It

they were confused.
The she-monster said,

“On our

worlds,

my

people afraid

smaller.
of creatures like you Thranx people, only much
“Eat your people?” Ryo wondered.
“Not people. Eat our people food. For long time. Very

long time. History.”

“Mine also, all history fear of your creature kind.”
They walked on in silence. After a while he thought

He touched his antennae with
too. You people smell not good.”

safe to continue.

“Other things,

The

smaller monster

made

it

a truhand.

the gesture of apology, with-

out adding degree.

“Not your

fault,” said

Ryo.

Thranx kind all
She
good.
history trouble our people. You smell very
“You,” she

replied, “smell not like little

122

mud. Ryo did not recognize the species,
but the flower outline was unmistakable. “Like that.”
“Your color also,” the he-monster added. “Very pretty.”
“Thank you,” he replied. “Your colors not so pretty but
not so bad as your smell.”
.”
The smaller monster reached out
“Your feel
drew

halted,

in the

.

flinched, forced himself to hold his ground.
touched them while demonstrating proper gestures,

slowly.

He’d

.

Ryo

but neither of them had touched him since Loo had
clamped five massive fingers around Ryo’s mandibles.
“Just want to touch,” Bonnie said.
Feeling like a museum exhibit, Ryo stood motionless
fur
while the monster ran its fingers under the byorlesnath

and along

“My

his body.

turn now,” he said.

The monster opened its clothing, exposing itself to the
had to remind
air. The sight made Ryo shudder, and he
cold.
himself of the creature’s extraordinary tolerance for
He ran a delicate truhand along the exposed surface, won-

and internal organs would match up. Too much botany, he told himself,
and not enough zoology. Though alien design would not
renecessarily conform to similar Willow-wane shapes, he

how

dering

closely their bodily divisions

minded himself.
The most remarkable thing about the body was

#

its flexi-

pressed in lightly. The monster did not complain
his finger
or pull away. Fascinated, he watched the tip of
covsink into the flesh. When he pulled his hand away the

bility.

He

ering sprang back.
Such a reaction

.

was normal for

plastics

On the exterior of a living creature it
turning. He pressed again, a little firmer.
changed color slightly. He could even see
fibers.

and artificial
was stomachThe exoderm
bodily fluids

moving beneath it. Utterly remarkable, he thought. The
more so when one realized that the beings inhabiting that
thin envelope were intelligent.
inside,
“Strange, so strange,” he murmured. “Skeleton
flesh outside.”

“We

find

flesh inside.

you same,” Bonnie
Very different.”

said.

“Yes,” he agreed, “very different.”

“Skeleton outside,

123

day instead of twice. As
they were finishing their odd midday meal Ryo thought to
ask a question that had been lost in the excitement of mu-

The monsters

ate three times a

tual education.

“Where are you going? What are you going to do?”
They looked at each other. “I do not know, Ryo,” Loo
our
said. “We thought you were those who had attacked
ship. We thought you enemies. We were treated like prisoners.”

“Remember,” Ryo reminded them, “my people think
you are allies of the AAnn. How then should they treat you
but as enemies?”
“But we’re not,” Bonnie said. “Especially if you tell
truth when you say it was AAnn who attacked our ship.”
The challenge to his veracity was cause for combat. He

calmed himself. Remember, he told himself, these creatures have but primitive notions of courtesy and common
etiquette. They will for some time be as clumsy in their
perceptions as they are in their speech.
“Big mistake,” he said. “Cosmic mistake. You must do
something. Out here,” and he gestured at the surrounding
forest, “you will die.” He did not include himself in that
prediction. It

was

self-evident.

“Better to die here,”

Loo

said roughly, “than in captiv-

poked and prodded at like an exhibit in a zoo.”
“No need for that,” Ryo said encouragingly. “Silly mistake. Silliness in proportion to size. We must go back. I can

ity,

can interpret for you. When mistake
explained by me, will be clear to all. We will be friends,
allies. Not enemies.”
explain everything.

“I don’t

indecision.

I

Loo made a gesture
“The way we were treated

know

.

.

.

of third-degree

.

Are you dead?”
“No, we’re not dead. We’ve been reasonably well

“Were you

killed?

fed.

He made

a face gesture of mild disgust.
“More mistakes. Must return and explain
Ryo implored them with gestures. “Trust me.

all

mistakes.”

I will

explain

everything.”

“We would wander

this place forever to

keep our free-

dom,” Loo told him.
“Not a logical end of itself,” Ryo countered. “Also another factor.” Maybe, he thought, it wasn’t self-evident. I

124
.

.

.

my

—Thranx—cannot

people

long

tolerate

cold

slowing the past several
nights. “I will surely die. Will you kill me to preserve your
freedom, which has no logical end of itself?” There, he
thought as he leaned back against the log. There is the real
test. Now he would learn just how civilized they were.
“Most of what you say is truth,” Bonnie declared fi-

weather.” He’d

felt his circulation

not like to be responsible for your death.
We have been careful not to kill. Yet. You have been
friend. There are misunderstandings here, on both sides.”
She looked up at Loo and for a moment Ryo thought they
nally.

“We would

might also be telepathic.
“Friend speaks truth,” she

restated. “We’ll

go back with

you.”

“Next problem,” said Loo. “Can we

Ryo

way back?”
any case, if we

find our

gestured skyward. “In
make our presence known when a search ship
we will be found.”
“I think so.”

flies

over,

down nearby. There was a tense confrontation between Ryo and a group of net- and stingerwielding soldiers. Disbelief gave way grudgingly to guarded
astonishment. The two monsters were conducted to the
The hoverer

set

base under watchful eyes instead of netting. There they descended via a heavily sealed entryway to a section Ryo had
visited before. The gestures of complete amazement performed by the officer who’d previously refused him admittance were lively to behold.
Torplublasmet was not present to greet him, having been
questioned and allowed to return to his burrow, but Wuu
was. “My boy.” He spoke while looking past Ryo at the
two monsters towering nearby. “I’d given you up days ago.
I’ve been asked many questions, which I answered sorrowfully

and

freely.

How we came

be here, and why. But
thought they would have

to

you appear whole and healthy. I
consumed you by now.”
“Not at all. That would have been impolite, and these
are civilized creatures. They can’t help their appearance.
Their ship was attacked by the AAnn. They thought we
were responsible.
“If we can overcome the unfortunate beginning our respective species have managed to make, they may prove to

125
be strong

allies.

There has been mutual misunderstanding

of colossal proportions.”

Ryo?” Loo asked.
and the other Thranx looked properly shocked.

“What

Wuu
“By the

are

you

saying,

central burrow, they can talk!”

“Sometimes situation and precedent can combine to
blunt, rather than facilitate communication,” Ryo explained smoothly.

He

looked up

at

Loo. “This friend of

mine,” and he pronounced the alien name, “is a he, the
other a she.” He then gestured at Wuuzelansem, gave his
name, and tried to explain what a poet was.
The monsters soon deciphered the gestures and clicks.
Then they shocked the assembled researchers, guards, and
Wuu alike by simultaneously gesturing at the poet with a
movement indicative of third-degree respect mixed with
mild admiration.
“They may be monsters,” Wuu decided, “but they display an unarguable ability to recognize higher intelligence
when it is presented to them.”
“Come, let’s go in,” Bonnie said to Ryo. “We want you
to meet our companions.”
Ryo followed, Wuu hanging back just a trifle. The
guards hesitated but the Thranx scientists and researchers
in the group gestured them aside.
The party passed through several corridors, the monsters
having to bend to clear the ceilings. Eventually they entered a large chamber. The saddles inside appeared unused,
for obvious reasons of physiology.
Six monster males and four females lay alone or in small
groups on the floor. To Ryo’s untrained eye, half of them
looked damaged.
As he watched, the aliens suddenly recognized Loo and
Bonnie.
great deal of noise and physical contact resulted.
Alien greetings, he explained to the enraptured scientists,

A

who

stood clustered in the open doorway, recorders run-

maximum speed.
When the greetings were

ning at

concluded,

Loo and Bonnie

turned to Ryo. “Well, it was good to be outside for a while,
anyway,” said Loo.
Ryo responded with a gesture of mild negativity. “Good
to be

back inside .”

two monsters made

He added
their

own

a whistling laugh while the

laughter noises.

It

was

diffi-

126

who was more

Thranx

scien-

“Different preferences,” Bonnie said, running a

hand

cult to tell
tists

flabbergasted; the

or the other monsters in the chamber.

through her cranial fur.
“Yes,” Ryo agreed. He gestured past her.

“How

are your

friends?”

“Pleased to see us alive,” Loo said. “Disappointed that
we could not do more. I explained to them that we now
have a friend. This they understood, for a friend can often
be worth more than freedom.”

am

be so,” Ryo replied confidently. “I
will explain all to these authorities.” He indicated the rows
of busy Thranx crowded around them. “This mistake will
be straightened out soonest. There is much to do between
our peoples.”
“Yes,” Bonnie said. “There is nothing like a mutual enemy,” and she made the gesture for the AAnn, “to produce
“I

sure

it

will

understanding among potential friends.”
One of the officials was gesturing urgently to Ryo. He
turned back to his friends. “They want to talk to me now
and I am equally anxious to talk with them. Will you be
well?”

“Well enough,” Loo replied.
“Then all is calm for now. I will return as soon as I am
able. Burrow deep and warm.” He inclined his head
slightly and extended his antennae.
“Be warm,” Bonnie said, reaching out to touch the tips
of the delicate organs.

away or otherwise

Several of the Thranx guards turned
indicated their disgust.

and

Of

sterner stuff, the researchers

simply recorded the exchange with cool detachment. Then Ryo turned and joined Wuu and the little
cluster of specialists gathering around him. The two aliens
rejoined their own companions, who crowded excitedly
around them.
Ryo was escorted to a nearby chamber and promptly sat
scientists

comfortably padded saddle. The scientists who’d
packed in around him immediately threw a barrage of
questions at him.
“What was it like? . . What did they do out there?
What did they do to you out there? . . How did you
learn the language so quickly? . . . How did they learn

down

in a

.

.

127
ours so quickly?
ties

for so long?

.

.

.

.

.

.

How

did they avoid the search par-

How?

“Slowly, gentlesirs. I will

When?
—” HeWhy?
paused, suddenly
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.”

dizzy.

Wuu

stepped close. “Leave the youth alone for now.
Can’t you sense his exhaustion? Doubtless he is weak from

hunger as well.”
Ryo looked gratefully up

at the poet,

made

a third-

degree gesture of assent. “I am far from starving, though it
would be wonderful to have a good soup. I’ve had little but
meat and raw greens for a month.”
“Then they are omnivorous like us?” one scientist inquired anxiously. “It seemed thus because they ate much of
what we supplied them, but it is helpful to have it confirmed by nonlaboratory experience.”
“I said, no questions,” Wuu broke in firmly.
But Ryo gestured his confirmation. “Yes, though they
take their meat largely in burnt chunks and not in proper
soup or stew.”
There was muttering among the assembled researchers at
this fresh assurance of alien oddity.
“They don’t boil it or cook it with any other liquids?”
“Not that I saw.”
“But they eat soups and stews here,” another pointed
out.
“It

may

not have been by choice,”

Ryo

told her.

“When

one is in prison, one eats what is supplied.” There, let them
ponder that one, he thought.
After a few additional questions Wuu began to shove officials from the chamber. A hot meal was delivered that
was among the finest Ryo had ever enjoyed. Upon devouring it he had a second and then a third serving. Following
that he lay down on the sleeping lounge provided, the
warm feeling induced by the food overpowering his excitement, and fell into a deep sleep from which he did not

awaken

for over a full day.

V

V

'

After rising and performing hygiene he
was ready to face his interrogators. Apparently someone had decided that it would

be better not to swamp the unfortunate
wanderer with a hundred questioners at once, so only a halfdozen assembled opposite Ryo in the discussion chamber.
Each brought audio and video recorder units integrated
with autoscrolls. Two were not much older than he, while
the other four were clearly experienced elders. Wuu was
present at his
“It’s

own

insistence.

not necessary,”

Ryo had

argued. “I can handle

things.”
“If not for
plied. “I feel

me you wouldn’t be here,” the poet had reit my responsibility to see that you are not

intimidated.”
“If not for

me, you wouldn’t be here.”

have acquired sufficient material to keep me composing for the remainder of my life,” Wuu declared. “Such
heady rhythms and couplets and stanzas as have never
been heard. They will shock the civilized worlds. I owe you
that. Time enough to work later.” He gestured toward the
saddled group. “These sirs and ladies wait patiently, yet
“I

their brains fester with curiosity.”
at the poet’s

words but waited

A couple shifted uneasily

their turn. “I

would not

them wake you.”
“For which I am very grateful,” Ryo admitted. “I
awake and ready now, so let them ask what they will.”

Ryo accepted

let

am

the questions slowly, sharing his knowl-

edge of the aliens freely and imparting

it

with as

much

pleasure as the scientists seemed to feel in receiving it.
“The business of communication came about almost ac-

he informed them. “Furthermore, if you use
lungs, mandibles, and spicules carefully, you can duplicate
their language quite well.” He demonstrated with a few
words that he was especially good at, and was rewarded
when a couple of the researchers who’d been inscribing information suddenly looked up as startled as if one of the
aliens had just strode into the room.
“Do that again,” one of them requested.
They listened while Ryo repeated the phrase and added
several others. “It is difficult, but by no means impossible,”
he said. “They do seem, however, better able to master our
129
cidentally,”

130

we

language than

Yet

venture to say it can be
done. I’ve no doubt an experienced linguist such as yourself,” and he gestured at the Thranx who’d asked him to
repeat the sounds, “could do far better.”
“Let me try.” The researcher listened. On his second attempt he made the noise comprehensible. It had taken Ryo
many more attempts than two to voice the term that
clearly, but communication was the elder’s specialty. He
should have thrown away his machines.

The

theirs.

I

had to break in or the discussion would have
quickly been monopolized by an impromptu language lesothers

son.

“Pressure of circumstances,”
“Foolish of us not to realize it.”

the

elder

commented.

“They are mammalian,” said one of the younger scientists, whose name was Repleangel. “We’ve already established that. However, they are almost completely bare of
fur. Most extraordinary.”
“We thought at first,” one of the other scientists said,
“that it might be due to a seasonal variation.”
“I don’t think so,” Ryo said. “I saw no evidence for it.
Devoid of fur or not, their ability to withstand extreme cold
is

unarguable.”

“From our

point of view, not necessarily theirs,” said

Rep.

“They were always cold, but never dangerously
continued. “I often saw them remove portions of

so,”

Ryo

their ex-

tensive clothing to expose their naked, furless bodies to the

while they cleaned themselves. I would guess that the
climate they would consider ideal must average some ten to
air

twenty degrees cooler than our own. Furthermore, they
seem to have no need whatsoever for moisture in the air.
They must therefore find the environment you have produced in their room both overly hot and humid.”
“Are you certain of this lack of need for humidity?”
“All I can say is that in this polar region my lungs would
have cracked without the moisture pack I wore. The monsters had no such device and seemed to thrive. I still shudder to think of their breathing that untreated air. I venture
to say they could even survive on the worlds of the AAnn,
which are notoriously dry if pleasantly warm. That is another factor which makes

them valuable

allies.”

131

As he

said the last his gaze

So

questioner.

nothing.

He

went sideways

to the sixth

had asked
comment any

far the military representative

did not react visibly to Ryo’s last

any of the previous ones. He simply
sat in his saddle and monitored his instruments.
Ryo let it pass. At least the thought had been planted.
The questions went on and on. “How many sexes do
they have?”
“Two, like us.”
“Male and female?”

more than he had

to

“Yes.”
“Do they lay eggs or bear their young alive?”
“I have

no

idea.

That wasn’t a question that entered into

general conversation.”

“Do

they have sexual taboos?”
“Your line of questioning strikes me as peculiar, elder.”
“They cook their meat by burning it over an open fire?”
“Their cooking facilities were restricted. Maybe they require the additional carbon. Or it might be purely a ritual
thing. I never asked.”
“Is their vision comparable to ours? They utilize only
those two simple single-lensed eyes.”
“It

seems to be. They can see

much

farther, I think, but

not as well up close or in the dark.”
Then came the voice of the military observer, speaking
for the first time, in a soft whistle. “They took energy rifles from two of the guards.”
“Something I meant to ask,” Ryo said quickly. “Was any-

one injured during

their escape?”

“Injured, yes, but fortunately not killed.
ticed, they are physically

ance

As you’ve no-

more massive than we. Their

bal-

unexpectedly good.”
“Yes, I noticed that right away,” Ryo admitted.
“They are not as vulnerable to a severe blow as we are,”
the military elder went on, “but they are far more susceptible to damage from cuts and scrapes. Their thin exoderm is
is

incredibly fragile. However,

if it is

torn

it

heals far

more

rapidly than a chiton break. There are pluses and minuses to

such a structure.”
“Beauty is not one of the pluses,” commented one of the
two younger scientists, adding a gesture of third-degree disgust.

132

“The two guards,” the tenth-level officer continued,
“were merely stunned during the escape, when their rifles
were taken. The planning was admirable. They set off two
explosions

—

“We heard them both,” Wuu

said.

“They were set to create a diversion. This was accomplished. Those who misinterpreted the situation have already been disciplined. The creatures took, as I said, two
energy

rifles,

dle, putting

yet did not use them.”

a

little

He

shifted in his sad-

urgency into his tone. “You said you

observed them in use?”
“Yes,” Ryo replied. “I’m sure they studied the weapons
around them before settling on the rifles. Despite having
only two arms and hands, they seemed to manage quite
well. I have no doubt that had the circumstances required
it, they could have employed them against soldiers as efficiently as they did against game.”
The officer did not seem surprised at this, simply entered it into his recorder. “Did they talk at all about their
home world or about their vessels?”
“Nothing about their planet of origin save that it was
colder than Hivehom seemed to be. Little about their ship
except that the principles behind its method of propulsion
seemed similar to ours. Neither of them is an engineer.”
“Anything about weapons, military strength, or posture?”

Ryo had been

waiting for that question from the time
the officer had taken his saddle. Nevertheless, he was surprised at the resentment he felt when it was finally asked.

“Nothing whatsoever. They are explorers. Their sole
concern and principal subject of conversation was survival.
Military matters were not mentioned.”
The officer mumbled something half audible.
.
.
couldn’t expect much . .
Then louder, “For your own
information, we found nothing during our study of their
ship to hint they are especially advanced militarily. What
we have been able to glean of their social structure indicates
they are not, for example, organized in a paramilitary
society like the

AAnn.”

have told you that,” Ryo said confidently.
“However, they display certain worrisome characteristics
of both social and individual temperament.”
“I could

133
uncertain how to
interpret the officer’s last statement. “I’ve already told you
that they thought we were the ones who’d attacked them.
They are more than ready I would even say anxious to
“I don’t understand, elder.”

Ryo was

—

form an

—

alliance with us against the

unfortunate

differences

of

shape.

slightly less disconcerting physically

“That
searcher

One

is

difficult

to

believe,”

AAnn. This despite
They find us only
than we find them.”

the

second young

re-

murmured.

of the elders scolded him. “That

is

not a scientific

not, but I cannot so easily

wipe out thou-

attitude, Drin.”

“I

know

it’s

sands of years of mental conditioning. They are mammals,
no matter how similar their minds might be. Soft of exterior and flexible of form. My insides turn whenever I have
to look at them.” He swiveled to eye Ryo.
“I understand you actually engaged in physical contact
with them, even to the point of extending formal farewells.”

“They are not

at all that repulsive,”

Ryo

insisted. “It’s

merely a matter of seeing them as people. As I’ve mentioned, they feel the same way about the tiny arthropods on
their own worlds. We are each the stuff of the other’s
nightmares. These are primitive attitudes that both races
must fight to overcome. There is no logic to them.”
“All of which I understand,” Drin admitted without ofWe are
fense. “Still, thousands of years of nightmare
professionals here, used to dealing with the incredible and
outre.” He surveyed his colleagues. “How do you think the
populace will react to the existence of these beings? And if
what you say is true,” he said to Ryo, “these monsters will
have similar problems on their own world of Earth.”
“Odd,” one of the elders commented, “that they should
name their home planet after the ground when in fact they
live above it, exposed to the open sky
or so you tell us.”
He turned to Ryo.
“There are many such fascinations awaiting us,” Ryo
told her confidently, “as soon as formal contact is opened.”
The words of the officer returned to haunt him. “You said
certain characteristics worried you. What characteristics?”
Silence reigned in the chamber. Ryo studied his questioners curiously. “They are allies, you know. Or will be
.

—

soon.”

.

.

134

More

silence. Several of the scientists

looked away. The

others did not.

“We

them leave here, of course,” one of
the elders said finally. “Surely you realize that.”
“I do not. That’s absurd. How do we open negotiations
with them if they are not allowed to return home to begin
discussions and make introductions.?”
“There will be no introductions,” the military observer
remarked quietly. “Not for a long time. Not with this
can never

let

group.”

“But

.

.

strong the

.

who can make us so
prowl among our colonies.

these are the people

AAnn

will not dare

Their presence here

is

indication

enough they are a tech-

nologically advanced race.”

“Of that we never had the least doubt,” the officer informed him. “That is one of the things that troubles us.”
“You have to let them go. It’s indecent to keep imprisoned those who’ve done you no harm. I’ve talked with
them two of them, anyway. I know them. They are ready

—

to be friends.”

“So they have told you,” said the elders. “Are you a qualified xenopsych then, that you can positively interpret
their motives?”

“They were

telling

and

me

the truth.”

Ryo

struggled to con-

What was wrong

with these
elders? At least two of them wore the black star of
Eint. Did that stand for nothing here? “They had no reason
tain his anger

to lie to

“No

frustration.

me.”

reason by your reasoning, perhaps, but what of their

own?”
months with them, in a difficult Survival situation. Once communication was opened they were
no more than cautious toward me. There was no continuing
hostility. After a while there was honest friendship. So
much so that they allowed me to persuade them to return.”
“We are aware of that,” Drin said, “and very grateful to
you for doing so. Not only was their escape scientifically
disruptive, but had you somehow made your way south into
more populated regions, your companions could have pre“I spent quarter

cipitated a panic.”

“I

still

don’t see

what you’re

“We’ve had a chance

all

to study

so afraid of.”

them

for

some

time, in a

135

spokesman said. “The rehe hesitated significantly, “do not hold out much

closed environment,” the elder
sults,”

promise for interspecies cooperation.”

The
first
it

military observer

was more

direct.

“When

they were

and placed under continuous observation,

settled here

was immediately evident

their social relationships are

well, disturbing.”

“What would you expect,” Ryo argued. “They thought
you were the ones who’d attacked their ship.”
The officer made a gesture of denial. “We treated them
kindly, realizing they might not be allies of the

was

AAnn.

It

one another that was so unexpected,
not their reaction toward us.” His tone filled with remembered amazement.
“They fought among themselves. It’s still hard to believe.
Here they were, twelve aliens trapped by possibly hostile
creatures, yet their anger was vented not so much toward
us as each other. Though we could not understand their
language, battering a companion into unconsciousness can
only be interpreted in one way.
“One actually damaged a companion so badly that it required medical treatment. When that was provided their
attitude toward us softened visibly, but they continued to
act in an unrelentingly hostile manner toward one another.
“It is the opinion of the behavioral psychs who have had
them under surveillance that their actions suggest a racial
paranoia of heretofore unimagined dimensions. Compared
to these creatures, the AAnn are models of harmonious cooperation. Do we really want to ally ourselves closely with
their reaction to

such a race?”
“But they showed no such tendencies with me,”

Ryo

said, bewildered.

“It is a fact that certain

do when

mammals

act far differently in

Drin said somberly.
“They are rather like subcritical fission masses harmless
when kept apart, explosive when brought together. We do
not know what the mental ‘critical mass’ of these creatures
might be, but I would not like to be around when it
clusters than they

is

isolated,”

—

reached.”
“It is the

considered opinion of the xenospsych

the entire race

spokesman

said.

may be

staff that

collectively psychotic,” the elder

136
“There

may be

other explanations,”

Ryo

protested.

“The

pressure they’ve been under as prisoners, their confinement
underground when they prefer the surface .
Drin was making a gesture of negativity. “We’ve allowed
.

for that.

“You

The

signs are

see

now,” the

them

possibly let

go.

still

there.”

officer said gently,

“why we cannot

They now know the

location of Hive-

horn. These are a sophisticated, space-traversing folk. This

composed of specialists in exploration. Surely some
of them would be able to find their way back here. We
cannot possibly let so dangerous and volatile a race return
home knowing the location of our mother world while we
know nothing of theirs. They destroyed all their records and
charts during the AAnn attack, you see. Further evidence

group

is

of their paranoia.”

“No more

so than you’ve just admitted to,”

Ryo

noted.

“Perhaps.” The officer was not offended.
“But I tell you, gentlesirs, that I know these people.”
“You know two of them,” Drin pointed out. “That is
hardly sufficient evidence by which to classify an entire
race.”

“Maybe
ship when

But I know true friendit is offered to me, and I have received that
from two of these beings. I can probably gain the confidence of the rest of them if you’ll give me some freedom
not.

I’m no

statistician.

with them.”
“I

would hope

so,” the elder

spokesman

nestly desire your help, Ryozenzuzex.

said.

“We

ear-

Your companion,”

and he indicated Wuu, “has explained your history.”
“Better to provide voluntarily what will become known
anyway,” the poet said. Ryo saw no reason to argue that.
“We can notify your family and clan,” the elder continued. “It will be explained that you are working on a government project of great importance. No lies will be told.
We will merely exercise judicious concealment. They
should be quite satisfied. Meanwhile, you will be given as
free an antenna as possible to work among these creatures.”
“Then why not let me tell them they can return home?”
Ryo wondered.
“I

am

interested in a species of carnivore called the pro-

dubia,” one of the elders said. “It lives in the jungles of

137
Colophon. While

no

I

am fascinated by its

desire to explore

We

its

method of

eating habits I have

digestion

from the

inside.

remain friendly with these creatures, but cau-

will

tious.”

would

“I

rather,” the military observer interrupted, “risk

the loss of a potential new ally than expose Hivehom to the
attentions of a race that cannot even control its most primitive instincts.”

Ryo’s

initial

reaction to these

trolled fury. This gave

The

way

comments was barely con-

gradually to rationalization.

by the six
questioners in the chamber, was dreadfully wrongheaded.
But there was nothing he, Ryo, could do about it. The aliens would never be allowed to leave.
That would mean that the Thranx would not gain the
benefits of interspecies cooperation. Neither would the
attitude of the government, as represented

monsters.

As

to the business about their being subject to

and homicidal tendencies, he simply refused to believe it. The xenopsychs were misinterpreting
their data. Machines again, he thought bitterly. Statistics.
No readout would ever convince him that the time he’d
spent in the wilderness with Bonnie and Loo had been
filled with deceiving data. But for now all he could do was
be patient and try to make friends with their associates.
racial paranoia

“Yes,

I’ll

help you.

“We knew

It’s

my

duty, of course.”

would be your reaction.” The elder
spokesman was most gratified as he checked his chronometer. “I had not realized we’d been so long. We do not wish
that

to strain you.”

am

Ryo admitted honestly.
“No. Enough for now,” one of the other

“I

fine,”

elders said.

“We

can reconvene tomorrow.”
“I need to meet the other monsters,” Ryo said.
“Of course. As soon as you wish,” Drin told him. “Quarters have been prepared for you. You will have all the assistance you need. I envy you. I too would like to be able to
study these creatures and interact with them at first hand.
For now, however, we have to rely on you to interpret.”
Not only because I can communicate with them so well,
but because I’m the only one they trust, Ryo thought bitterly.

138
$

#

«*

Wuu

discovered him resting on his sleeping lounge in front of a viewer. The poet had been working
hard and had filled nearly a whole chip with prepoetry.
His pleasure was dampened by something in Ryo’s attitude. He’d come to know the young agronomist quite well

That evening,

during their travels and he was concerned about him. He’d
been subjected to unusual pressures for one of barely midage and those pressures would intensify in the months to

come.
“Greetings,

Wuu.” Ryo looked over

“How

as he switched off

your composing coming?”
“Extraordinarily well. The guild will be well pleased.
And what of you, my young friend? I worry about you.
You have been thrown into a situation few are prepared to
cope with.”
the viewer.

“I

seem

is

to thrive

on

contact I think I reacted

The poet

Ryo replied, “although
much as a larva would.”

it,”

at first

onto a saddle opposite the lounge and
sighed deeply, the air whistling out his spicules in a long
gasp. “I will remain if you wish me to, although they have
slid

no need of me here.”
“I would like that. I need someone

familiar nearby, for a

while, at least.”

“That

understandable. These scientists are a little better than bureaucrats, but not much. I suppose the nature of
is

encourage individualistic thought.”
“It certainly doesn’t,” Ryo agreed. “For example, anyone
with a modicum of hive sense would see that we have to let
these people return to their home world so that formal exchanges between us may begin. Don’t you agree?”
The old poet stared back at him. “Certainly not, and it’s
about time you started purging your own head of such addled notions. They are the major reason I worry about
you.”
For a moment Ryo simply could not reply. “But
.
these will become our allies, our friends against the AAnn.”
“Did you not hear the findings of the researchers, the
opinion of that officer?” Wuu asked. “As an individualist,
I can empathize somewhat with these creatures. Naturally
their positions does not

.

they would like to return home.

were

I in their position, I

would

I

.

would want the same

also understand our posi-

139

He

leaned out of the saddle and added a gesture of
fourth-degree emphasis. “The safety of our entire race is

tion.”

at stake here,

Ryo. These are a powerful and dangerous

people.”

“I’m sure the AAnn will think so.”
“Are you such a master diplomat?” Wuu snapped. “Are
you then completely confident they would ally themselves
with us because of a single incident involving one ship and
its crew?”
“There is always some risk in such a situation,” Ryo admitted, “but it must be chanced. We cannot hide ourselves
from them forever. Eventually contact will be established.
If we take the initiative now we can avoid a potentially
disastrous misunderstanding. Future contacts might not begin so auspiciously.

“And what of the AAnn? They are as masterful at diplomacy as they are at slaughter. What if they were to realize
their error in attacking this first ship

and contact these

people before us and instead of attacking them again, forge
an alliance with them against us? What would be our position then?”
“All unlikely and all a problem for the future,” Wuu
replied, though it was obvious the scenario Ryo presented
concerned him. “For all we know they may lie on the other
side of the galaxy and we may never encounter them again.
The universe, my boy, is vast.”
“If, as the military observer says, their ship’s propulsive
system is not very different from ours then they cannot
dwell very far, in interstellar terms, from Hivehom.”
“We know nothing of their life spans,” the poet pointed
out. “Indeed, we still know little about them. That ignorance
is yet another reason why we cannot let them leave.”
“Such a position is morally indefensible,” Ryo insisted.
“I beg to differ with you, my earnest young friend. It is
eminently defensible, from a moral as well as military
standpoint. You would feel differently if you had seen
them fighting among themselves, much as our distant
group of Thranx placed in a similar
ancestors used to do.
position would be mutually supportive and calm, not hysterical and violently combative.” He made a gesture of
disbelief. “It is quite unbelievable. They possess dominantinternal traits they are not even aware of. Such ritualized

A

140

combat is a part of their basic nature. How could we possibly be allies? Mentally as well as physically we are nothing
alike.”

“Don’t you see,”

Ryo

argued, “doesn’t anyone see that

what makes such a union worthwhile? The
differences would complement each other. What is there to
be gained from mating with someone exactly like yourself?
There is never anything new, never any surprises.”
“Surprises are delightful,” the poet agreed, “in art and
that

is

precisely

music. Surprises are wonderful in science.

When

the des-

and survival of your entire race are at stake, I am not
so sure that surprise is welcome. Even were what you say
to be so, what of their psychoses?”
“Every race has its distinctive problems,” Ryo admitted.
tiny

“We

are not perfect, either.”

“No, but neither are we inherently homicidal, as these
creatures appear to be. While they might act quite sanely
as individuals or even in small groups, it is en masse that
we would deal with them through treaties. There is simply
too much at stake to take such a chance.
“Besides, I disagree with you when you say they have
something worthwhile to offer us. From what I have seen,
an alliance between us would work largely to their advan-

They are a clumsy,

whose technological achievements have outstripped their moral evolution.”
“They are being treated as prisoners, looked upon by many
with disgust. That is hardly an atmosphere conducive to
cultural understanding,” Ryo argued. “They must have all
sorts of things to offer us, from the arts through the scitage.

primitive people

ences. This in addition to military affiance against the

AAnn.”
“I

am

sorry,

my

boy.

The only

thing I’ve noticed about

of an impression on me so far is
their violence and their smell, both of which I believe we
could survive without. I am surprised you cannot see this.”

them

that has

“Perhaps

—perhaps you’re

luding myself.

“The

strain

thetically.

made much

The days out
is

right.

Perhaps I’ve been de-

there in the clith

quite understandable,”

“You have nothing

.

Wuu

.

.”

said

sympa-

to apologize for.”

“I guess you’re right. Surely all the specialists cannot

be wrong.

I

need

.

.

.

just

some

time.

The excitement

of

141

moment

the

there
“I

of contact, of mutual supportiveness out

.

.

know

it is

consideration of

discouraging, but this
all

is

the time for calm

the facts, not just those

you may have

been exposed to personally, my boy. You were not alone in
your thinking, by the way. Many of the scientific study
group favored expanding contact with these people. But at

when time came

make

the actual decision, they
too realized it was better to err on the side of caution. Enthusiasm always gives way under the assault of reason and
the

last,

to

good judgment.
“You have come a long way from the fields of Paszex. It
must be discouraging to see the adventure come to an end,
but eventually youthful enthusiasms must give way to real-

The

not regarded as advantageous by the majority of elders here. I am pleased you
ity.

reality is that

have matured

such contact

is

sufficiently to realize the truth of this.”

“What you say about my enthusiasm is undeniably true,”
Ryo quietly confessed. He sighed and his thorax pulsed.
“At

least I will

be permitted to remain to study these

fasci-

nating creatures further.”
“It is not a question of permission, as you well know.
The authorities actively solicit your assistance. It is con-

had you not agreed to do so, they might have
invoked security edicts to keep you here. Your experiences
ceivable that

your relationship with the monsters.
“At least you will have one nongovernment friend here
while I remain, though flexible and ingratiating as you are,
I’ve no doubt you will soon have many friends among the
are unique, as

is

staff.”

be comforting to know you are around,” Ryo
told him. “Such discussion as we have just concluded is
“It will

exhilarating as well as enlightening.”

“For

me as well. More material for the

massive volume I

intend to compile that will detail our entire journey. An
arduous work, but one which I look forward to completing.
It will

be a monument.”

They continued
enjoyably, as they

the discussion, arguing animatedly and

made

their

way down

the corridors.

Their rooms were located close to the large chamber where
the aliens were being kept.

142

X

learned more of the layout of what was called
Section he was able to see how the authorities had managed
to conceal the aliens. The xenology section was completely
independent of the main installation. It had its own supply
and power facilities, its own staff, even its own entrances

As Ryo

and exits.
Only three narrow corridors connected it with the rest
of the base, which had been built as part of the planetary
defense system. Those Thranx who staffed the latter prepared for an attack that they hoped would never come,
blissfully ignorant of the sensitive research being carried

out close at hand.
Ryo relaxed in the hygienic comer of his comparatively
luxurious quarters and cleaned himself with the damp
scented cloth.
Wuu had immediately accepted Ryo’s conversion to the
majority opinion. The old poet was clever, even brilliant,
but his brilliance did not make him a master of deception.
Ryo was certain others were assigned to watch him.
Poor Wuu, he thought.
composer of the Eint order.
For all his imagination and abilities he could see no further
than his own specialty. Wuu was a poet, and a masterful

A

one.

He was also an elder whose thinking had become as pre-

dictable as the midseason rains. Petrification of the imagina-

seemed to have infected everyone of any authority.
Ryo was coming to believe he was the only one able to
spark a new thought, a fresh idea.
That was only natural. That had been his talent since
larvahood. Yes, that's my profession, he thought excitedly.
That's what I was intended to do
to initiate newness, to

tion

—

break convention. All

this time, all these years, he’d subli-

by breaking jungle ground, when
the topography he should have been attacking was that of
conventional wisdom.
If Wuu was convinced Ryo had come around to the accepted way of thinking, then there was no reason to suppose the staff scientists would think otherwise. But Ryo
would still have to be patient, would have to bide his time.
He smiled inwardly. I’ve done that before. This time, however, the unknown territory I have to cross is somewhat
greater then the distance between Paszex and Daret.
This time he would also not be fleeing by himself.

mated

his real profession

Arranging a private conversation with
Loo and Bonnie was less difficult than he’d
|
imagined. When the monsters understood
what was wanted they simply organized a
group singalong. The rest of the monsters generated sufficient noise to drown out the most sensitive directional
pickup. In addition, the new phenomenon of collective
sound kept the fascinated researchers busy at their instrumentation. The volume was much greater than an equal
number of Thranx could have produced.
“This is a tremendous burden you’ve taken on yourself,”
Loo told Ryo softly. “You’re going against the considered
opinion of all your superiors.”
“They’re not

“Your

my superiors.”

elders then,”

Bonnie

said.

She looked away from

him, a gesture he’d learned indicated general uncertainty
of approximately the third degree. “It may be, Ryo, that
they are correct. I realize I’m hurting our own cause by
saying that, but this is not the time for prevarication.
Throughout human history, we’ve often questioned our
own motives for fighting among ourselves. Many times we
cannot come up with satisfactory explanations for what we
do. It may be that, as your psychtechs insist, we are inherently homicidal.”
“Then this alliance will be of more benefit to you than
you can imagine,” Ryo told her. “We Thranx are not very
excitable. We are very good at reasoning things through
and seeing to the heart of misunderstandings. Perhaps what
you’ve always needed are friends who will not fight with
you, but who are ever available to explain and to soothe.”
“Perhaps.” She looked back at him. “I do know one
thing. Regardless of what our governments decide to do,
we three have consummated our own little alliance.” She
reached out a hand to touch one of Ryo’s truhands.
He grasped it firmly, having learned the significance of
the gesture many days ago. There was considerably more
power in her fingers than in his, though with a foothand he
could have matched her grip. She was careful not to bruise
the more delicate upper digits.
“Our ship,” Loo whispered, “is still functioning. It’s in a
synchronous orbit above us right now.”
“How do you know that?” Ryo asked, a little startled.

143

144
“Because while Bonnie and I were free, they ferried
some of our friends to it to answer questions about design
and function. Certain queries were answered. Others were
not. There was no coercion.”
“Naturally not.” Ryo was upset at the very thought.
“Our people are different,” Loo murmured. “Anyway,
our shipmates report no dismantling of components. Not
yet, anyway. We’d nearly completed repair of the damage
the AAnn had done to the drive when your own exploration ship stumbled into us. Our engineers are confident
they can finish the few repairs remaining in sufficiently
short time to make an escape feasible.”
“How are we to reach your ship? I’m an agricultural
expert. I know nothing of astrophysical matters.”
“But that’s not a problem!” Bonnie told him excitedly.
“They wanted to study our mechanics and design with advanced diagnostic equipment, so they induced Alexis and

two of the wailing monsters, “to
bring one of our shuttles down. It’s right here, in the base.”
“Separate hangar,” Ryo muttered, “to conceal it from

Elvira,” she pointed to

the general personnel.”

“Our

Eventually Alexis agreed
because they threatened to take the shuttle apart inside our
ship. Getting to the shuttle will be the problem. I’m sure
it

friends argued about

it.

must be under heavy guard.”
“Not necessarily.”
Loo made the frown gesture with

rubbery mouthparts. “I don’t understand. Why wouldn’t it be?”
“What reason is there to guard a shuttle? There is only
need to guard its pilots. You are here, the ship is elsewhere.
Keeping you apart is security enough. No Thranx, of
course, would think of assisting a bunch of monsters.”
“Thanks,” Loo said drily. “Except you, of course.”
“And I am possibly mad. By helping you, I will become
something of a monster to my own people.” He paused reflectively, added in a different tone, “You realize, of
course, that

if

there

is

no

his

resultant alliance, that

if

friend-

ship does not materialize between our races, then I will be
effectively dead.”

Neither of them said anything.

“Excuse me,” he said apologetically. “That was impolite.

145

Those are not thoughts to be inflicted on others. This is my
own free decision. Nothing compels me to do this.
“I demand only one thing in return for my assistance.
That if our escape should be opposed, under no circumstances will you or any of your hivemates kill to facilitate
it.”

They looked uncomfortable. “We can promise

for our-

Bonnie agreed, “but I don’t know about the others.
If we’re close to making it back to the Seeker Tm not sure
one or two would not hesitate to use any method to insure
our successful boarding.”
“Precisely such traits,” Ryo noted solemnly, “have convinced Thranx scientists that it would be unwise to expand
contact between us. You must impress this on your companions. Opinion is still uncertain among some members of
the research staff. Killing would forever solidify the feelings against you and would make further contact impossiselves,”

,

ble.”

“We’ll do our best,”
convince the others.”

“Who

Loo assured him. “We’ll

try

and

clanmother among you?” He made a quick gesture of embarrassment. “I am sorry. I forgot. You have neither clan nor hive organization. You go from family to

some

is

must make you feel
think that may be part of your

sort of loose tribal federation. It

very alone sometimes. I
problem.”
“Maybe we are loners compared to the Thranx,” Loo
said, “but I think we have more individual freedom. Your
own experiences are proof of that.”
“From this undisciplined freedom comes perhaps your
tendencies to but enough philosophy.” He was concerned
that their long conversation might attract the attention of
the hidden researchers.
“I shall try to divine the location of your shuttlecraft,
ascertain the difficulties involved in reaching it, and decide
on a propitious time to attempt an escape. Since your first
successful attempt, security measures have been strengthened, I am told. You are all closely and constantly
watched. It will be more difficult this time.”
“That’s oniy to be expected,” Loo noted, “but we didn’t

—

have an

ally

working for us outside before,

either.”

146

A

strange feeling rippled through Ryo, a
combination of the way both monsters had stared at him
out of their vitreous single-lensed eyes and the way Loo

“Very

true.”

had pronounced the word

“ally.”

passed, stretched inexorably into months. Eventually Ryo was allowed to communicate freely with his family. From Fal to sire to clanmates, all were pleased but

Days

puzzled. They’d been told that he
portant, serious

work

was engaged

in very im-

for the government. This

had been

openly accepted.

Ryo was

pleased to learn that his initial
perfidy in ignoring family and clan directives had been put
aside. All were content to accept that he was doing useful
work and that he would return home when feasible.
As the days rolled on and the monsters were more tranquil and cooperative, the authorities relaxed their surveillance somewhat, but not even Ryo’s continued assurances

For

his part

that the monsters

had come

to terms with their fate

was

enough to convince every member of the observation-andstudy

staff.

Most of the monsters could now speak some Thranx. A
few Thranx were struggling to acquire fluency in monster
speech, though this was deliberately and subtly discouraged
on Loo and Bonnie’s orders.
Ryo was given a formal position with the research team
and the title of assistant consultant. The income momentarily took his breath away. It was considerably more than he
accumulated as board member for the Inmot Company’s
Paszex operations. He felt guilt at accepting such position
and compensation when he was spending most of his time
planning to contravene everything he was being paid to do,
but he accepted it all with apparent gratefulness.
time came when even Wuu was ready to return to
Willow-wane. The old poet assured Ryo that once his affairs were back to normal he would take the time to travel
to Paszex so he could meet with Ryo’s family and assure

A

them of

his

good health

in person.

In addition to his research work and mastering the human language Ryo also casually acquired a thorough knowlSection and all security measures. The monsters*
edge of
shuttlecraft was located in a small hangar nearby. It was

X

147
subject to intense study by Thranx engineers. Occasionally
several closely guarded monsters would be allowed aboard
to explain design functions

them as interpreter.
During such visits

and Ryo would accompany

security surrounding

and on board the

Given such precautions, it took Ryo
some time to formulate a plan promising even a slight

shuttle quadrupled.

chance of success.

The

would ignore the corridors save for one.
Since Loo and Bonnie’s escape, everything larger than a
water pipe was constantly monitored. This time, all would
flee quickly topside, then cross to another exit and use it to
fugitives

reenter the base as close as possible to the hangar. Ryo
hoped the authorities wouldn’t consider the possibility that

once outside, the aliens would then try to escape back

in-

side.

was difficult to be patient. Ryo’s pleas for time were
backed up by the burrow master “Captain” of the aliens, Elvirasanchez. She did not talk much, but her words
were listened to.
Eventually Fourth Season came to an end with the festival
It

—

—

of Teirquelot, a cause for celebration among the base personnel. At an outpost as dreary as Sed-Clee, holidays were
taken seriously.
Cannisters of sleep gas had been installed by security
personnel around the aliens* chamber, which precaution
was intended to prevent any alien rampage. Ryo planned to
turn the security measure to his friends’ advantage.
Many months had passed since Loo and Bonnie’s escape.
Relaxed security combined with the holiday allowed Ryo to
slip from room to room without question. No one saw him
readjust the cannister control valves, even though several

timeparts of nerve-racking activity were required to

com-

Now, when

the cannisters were activated,
they would spew their soporific contents not into the monplete the job.

sters’

quarters but into the surrounding areas.

Only one corridor was to be left ungassed because it led
to an emergency escape ramp that ascended to the surface.

Ryo worried some about the aliens* tolerance, but the humans assured him even Deep Cold would not prevent their
making the short run to the next exitway.
Using ventilation towers, Ryo had triangulated the

posi-

148
tion of the hangar holding the monsters* shuttlecraft, then
he selected the closest exit port visible. Once inside again,
their precise location
his unpracticed eye,

would determine their next moves. To
the exit port seemed quite near to the

shuttle hangar.

He would
minimum,

wait until the guard had been reduced to its
which would probably coincide with the height

of celebration.

The monsters would

feign sound sleep inside

chamber. Then, appropriately masked, Ryo would circle the surrounding rooms, opening the gas cannisters
everywhere except in the chosen corridor.
If standard procedure held, two guards would be stationed in that corridor, and Ryo would somehow have to
neutralize them. It should be easy, for they would not be
expecting trouble. But it was still the part of the plan that
worried him most.
Once he’d bypassed the instruments that monitored the
monsters* body heat, oxygen consumption, and so forth,
the escapees would race to the ramp, shut down the warning unit that would indicate it was in use, exit, and run
across the frozen landscape to the exit above the hangar.
There they would descend, overwhelm whatever guards
might be present, and power up their shuttle. The hangar
doors would be programmed to open and several minutes
after entering the hangar they would lift clear.
At least, that was how the escape was envisioned. Ryo
and his friends studied it repeatedly, refining movements,
trying to shorten the necessary time. Whether the plan
would work or not remained to be seen. There could be no
their

trial

run.

was a particularly dark and cold night. Ryo hurriedly
retreated from the observation post, though his presence
It

did not surprise the indifferent guard, who attended to his
fiction chips and ignored the consultant. Ryo’s peculiar af-

was well known throughout X Section, confirmed by those who’d researched his past.
Omoick, the larger moon, was new and black. Omuick,
the smaller, was only half full. That should aid concealment as they made the dangerous run from one exit to the
fection for the surface

next.

149

He made his way back toward
ally

the study sector, occasion-

greeting cheery celebrants.

drunk, but

all

A

were involved

Not

all

of them were

in season-end celebration

and

may

not facilitate intellectual advancement, he mused, but one which both races shared.
No one questioned Ryo’s presence as he ambled from
room to room checking instrumentation. Most of the study
chambers were empty.
few were temporarily occupied.
He waited in those until their inhabitants departed, then
quickly activated the altered cannister controls. The sleep
gas was odorless and colorless. If you knew it was present
you had seconds in which to flee. If not, you quietly suclittle else.

quality that

A

cumbed.

He

did not have to use the small filter mask he carried
in his vest except once when he thought to check a room
originally empty.
young researcher was preparing a report on the conjectured premating nocturnal habits of the monsters. She
was having a difficult time because the aliens were not
cooperating much in that area. Ryo watched from the corridor as she started to enter her observation room, halted,
swayed for an instant, then toppled onto her right side.
Retreating, he closed a corridor barrier, shoved several
wads of expanding plastic against it to insure a tight seal.
He repeated this with doorways on the opposite side of the
corridor. Then he hurried inward, steeling himself.
Only a single guard was mounted where he’d expected
two, but this advantage was mitigated when the guard
turned and recognized him.
“Good evening, Consultant.”
“Good evening.” Ryo fought to recall the guard’s name.
Time was ticking away. “How are they behaving, Eush?”
“Quiet, as always.” The guard held his energy rifle
loosely as he looked past Ryo. Was some half-gassed scientist staggering down the corridor toward them, waving

A

frantic

The

alarm gestures at the guard?
corridor

was deserted save for the two of them. The

guard was gazing longingly, not specifically. “Sounds
everyone else is having a fine time.”

“An energetic

celebration,”

“I wish I could join them.”

Ryo agreed

tensely.

like

150

“Why don’t you? I’ve nothing to do this evening. This far
from clan and friends I don’t feel much like celebrating.
I’m qualified to assume watch for you.”
^
But
“That’s very gracious of you.” The guard wavered.
it

would be

my star for deserting my post.

I couldn’t possi-

even on the permission of one so highly regarded
generous ofas yourself. I thank you, however, for your

bly, not

fer.”

A

shame.” He stepped past the guard.
and the barJust ahead lay the monsters* holding chamber
it, twelve monrier with its multiple-sensor locks. Behind

“As you wish.

sters feigned sleep.

They

retained their personal chronome-

markings and splits differed from
normal time, they had been able to coordinate them suffiby now.
ciently with Ryo’s for them to be stirring uneasily
“Those two lovely females waiting back there, for examme this far
ple,” Ryo said smoothly, “have accompanied
them
and are anxious for celebratory companionship. See

ters.

Though

their time

her comwhispering, the one with the turquoise chiton and
panion of the gilded ovipositors?”
#
“Where?” The guard stepped cautiously to one side and
see up the darkened corridor. “Perhaps they

hard to
might join us here? Nothing was said about
tried

my

not cele-

brating at my own post.
“Hello,” he called out. “My name is Eushminyowot,
because of
friends of the consultant!” He said nothing more
against the
the weighted cloth that Ryo brought down hard
back of his skull. The guard fell as silently as those who’d
the
inhaled the sleep gas. His chiton whacked sharply on

hard floor.
he
“Rest and celebrate In your dreams,” Ryo said. Then
hurried the last steps down the passageway and ran the
combination of the sensor locks. For a few seconds nothing

happened and he wondered frantically if someone had
changed the combination without notifying him. Then the
door slid slowly into the wall. Standing behind it were a
dozen anxious aliens.
For just an instant the sight of their horribly flexible
masks looming over him in the dim light sent a stab of fear
through Ryo. Then the inherited fears faded as Loo and
Elvira stepped out into the corridor, bending low to clear

151

A

the ceiling.

couple of the monsters exchanged words
when they saw the motionless body of the guard.
“Quickly now, we’ve no time to waste,” Ryo said urgently.

“Lead the way. We’ll be right behind you.” The captain
was tall even for a human, Ryo noted.
As they emerged silently into the corridor, Ryo noticed
the aliens had armed themselves with pieces of furniture.
He said nothing about this because there was no time for
arguing.

Ryo

staggered slightly as they passed one of the doorways he’d hurriedly sealed. Sleep gas was seeping from behind it despite his work. His head cleared as they rushed
past. The monsters did not seem to notice it at all.
much
stronger dose was required to affect them.

A

Another couple of turns, up two levels, and they were at
the emergency exit. They met no one. Blessed be the celebrants, Ryo thought gratefully, for they shall remain pure
in spirit and devoid of knowledge.
It took him a minute to bypass the warning unit. He
could only hope that no backup alarm sounded a warning
on the central security console as the first was disconnected.

The hatch
it

flipped

up and

landed on accumulated

clith.

There was a

flump as
Then the party was on the

out.

soft

eerie treeless surface that roofed the base. In the distance

the treeline

away

was

visible, its ghostly

in the half-light.

Only a

ranks marching silently

single

emergence. Clith crystals sparkled like

Omuick.
Ryo marked

their position

shadow marked his
gems in the light of

and pointed the way. The

monsters said nothing as they started for the correct exit
marker. The hangar lay a modest distance away.
They were perhaps halfway there when the obvious suddenly intruded on Ryo. They had prepared for so many
things; speed of progress, the sleep gas, the holiday night,
the phases of the moons he’d forgotten only one thing.
His cold-weather gear!
He slowed, the numbness already beginning to overcome
him. “You go on,” he told Bonnie and Loo as they hung
back with him. “You know where the hangar entrance is

—

152

now and

I’ve told

you how to program the cover.

I’ll

wait

here.”

.

“Permanently? Not a chance, Consultant,” Loo said.
“We need you, Ryo,” Bonnie added.
The two massive creatures bent and lifted him between
them; they ran with an extraordinary jouncing motion, and
he thought for certain he would be sick. His body felt like
a vibrating spring by the end of the short run.
They set him down next to the hangar exit. Despite the
increasing numbness in his hands he managed to set the
second bypass.
If the alarm had been raised it had not yet reached
above ground. No high-intensity lights swept the frozen
surface in search of them. The hatch cover clicked and
flipped open. With the monsters flattened against the
ground and watching him, he started down.
The smaller hangar was dimly lit. Ryo paused at the bottom of the ramp and let his dangerously chilled body soak
up the warmth. When he was comfortable again he moved
forward and peered cautiously around the opening at the
end of the ramp. Nothing moved inside the hangar, but he
thought he could discern voices far away. They must be on
the far side of the hangar, he thought That meant they
could not see anything at this end.
Ahead of him stretched ranks of planetary defense craft.
The hangar was a miniature of the vast cavern located in
the

main

To

base.

Armed

shuttlecraft

were

visible farther

beyond the first of the aircraft, was
a bulky, awkward shape that had to be the monsters’ shut-

away.

his right, just

tle.

Hurrying back up the ramp, he confronted a

circle

of

anxious alien faces.
“There are guards about, but so far away I can only hear
them. Your shuttle is close by. From what little I could see

seems intact.”
“Be our luck,” grumbled one of the monsters, “we’ll get
down safely, get aboard and be all set to blow, and find out

it

they’ve defueled the engines.”

“Relax,” Loo advised him. “You said they broke the
chemical makeup of the solid fuel components a month
ago. They know the stuffs inert until ignition. They’ve no
reason to disassemble anything.”

153
“I’m not talking about reason,” the pessimistic monster
continued, “I’m talking about luck. We’re going to need
both to get out of this.”
“Let’s

move,” Bonnie said sharply. She started down the

ramp.

Ryo caught up and passed

her, halted once more at the
bottom. There was still no one in sight, but he fretted because the idle voices seemed slightly louder. “I will go
first,” he announced. He noticed how tightly the monsters
were gripping their makeshift weapons. One carried Eush’s
energy rifle. “And please, no violence.”

“Did you
engineer

tell

named

that to the guard in the corridor,” said the

Alexis, “before

you clobbered him?”

was a careful blow, intended only to incapacitate,
not to kill.” His tone was sharp, but the engineer was not
“It

offended.

Ryo

stepped into the open and walked around the single
aircraft. Up close, the monsters’ shuttle was clearly larger
than a comparable Thranx craft, but not unduly so. It fit
with room to spare beneath the vaulting ceiling of the
hangar.

At

he could find nothing amiss. It was near the end
of his check that he discovered a large metal plate dangling
from the vessel’s stem. Returning to the rampway, he related what he’d seen.
“Sounds like they’ve been studying the coordinated feed
and firing controls,” said Javier the engineer. She was a
diminutive female not much taller than Ryo.
“We’ll just have to fix whatever’s been tampered with,”
Elvira added huskily. “Hopefully it’s not serious. We’ve
come this far.” She eyed the hangar opening hungrily.
“We’re not going back to that cage.”
Murmurs of assent rose around her.
“I concur. We must take our chances now,” Ryo agreed.

He

first

led

them

silently

onto the

floor.

The boarding ramp was down. Most of the monsters
started up but a few technicians, led by Javier, hurried toward the stem where they began working inside the open
hatch.

nervously stood guard nearby. The voices came
nearer still, then began to fade again. After what seemed
like an eternity' a loud metallic click sounded from behind

Ryo

154
him. The monsters had finished their work and were closat
ing up the hatch. Loo and Bonnie waited to greet them
the base of the entry ramp.
“All set,” Javier whispered softly. “It looked like they’d
She
just been testing. Nothing seemed out of place.*
shrugged, another gesture

Ryo had come

to recognize.

The

monsters were incorrect in stating they communicated only
with their voices. “We’ll have to try it anyhow. We dont
have the time to run a detailed inspection.”
“Right.

Get aboard.”

three monsters climbed the ramp. Loo turned uncomfortably to Ryo. “We don’t know how to thank you.
You know that. There’s really nothing appropriate any of

The

us could say.”
“You haven’t even reached your ship yet and you’re a
long way from jumping to Spade Plus. It’s premature to
think of thanking me.”
“No, even if this is as far as we get we owe you more
than can be put in the words of either language. We’ll be

Are you certain you
won’t be harmed? You told me it would take them a while
to determine for certain that it was you who reset the sleepstanding by for the overheads to open.

gas cannisters, but that guard recognized you.”
‘It doesn’t matter anyway,” Ryo replied. “I’m coming
with you. The overhead doors have already been programmed. I did that when I first checked your ship for

He

a nearby computer terminal.
“There’s no lock or guard on them. No one would expose

damage.”

indicated

himself to the air here without orders.”

Loo and Bonnie were momentarily

speechless.

“Why should I not go with you?” He fought hard to contain his excitement and his nervousness. “My entire life
something has pushed me onward, to seek extremes, to
learn the unknown. It pushed me into extending friendship
to the both of

you and then

to

your companions.

It

has

commiting an act of Eint-denial. Why should
I not carry it to its next extreme as something inside is

pushed

me to

forcing

me to

“I don’t

do?”

know.” Loo looked uncertainly at Bonnie. “I

don’t have the authority. I

.

.

.”

“Talk to your captain, Elvirasanchez.

It will

take only a

155

moment. We have no formal
that you owe me this.”
“I’m

A

still

not sure

piercing

contract, but

might be said

it

—

whistle

punctured the

resulting

silence.

and multiple-lensed eyes turned. Three guards stood
between an air-defense ship and a shuttle. They were gesturing frantically while whistling and clicking at the top of

Single-

their range.

winked on inside the monsters’ shuttlecraft,
blinked several times. A slow whine started from its stern.
Somewhere a horn hooted violently and confused whistles
rose from all around the hangar.
No time remained for argument. Loo made a gesture
Lights

Ryo

did not recognize, then shouted,

“Come

on! We’ll

argue about it later!”
Even as they hurried up the boarding ramp, it was starting to retract. Inside, everything was confused and out of
place to Ryo’s eyes. Monsters moved rapidly around him,
through corridors far too high and narrow. Everything
seemed backward, distorted, an imager’s nightmare vision
of what a real ship should look like.
He stayed close to Loo and Bonnie, afraid of losing himself in that distorted interior. Loo threw himself into one of
the tiny saddles and began exchanging complex words with
another monster seated nearby. Despite months of study
the phrases’ meaning eluded Ryo.
“They’ve just seen us,” the other monster told Loo after
concluding the barrage of technical talk. “What about the
hangar doors?”
/
“No time!” came the word from over the internal communicator. Ryo recognized the captain’s tone.
Alien words flew around the chamber. “What’s the bug
doing here?
Wants to come with us . . What, but
.
why? . . . Wants to . . . worry about it later ... No
One way,
time
How do we get out of here?
.
hang on!
.
Open and closed! . . .” And other exclama.
tions Ryo had neither the wherewithal nor the time to
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

translate.

Thunder rattled the shuttle and Ryo found himself
thrown to the deck. The sudden movement was not taken
out of disregard for his safety; several monsters were likewise dumped on their abdomens.

156

moSomething under Ryo’s feet went rlnooom and for a
fought to
ment every light in the chamber went out. He
been hit. In
regain his balance. It sounded like the ship had
fact, the opposite was true.
The guard in the fringe tower had reacted to the basewhat the
wide alarm, but no one had bothered to tell him
drill.
alarm was about. He thought it likely to be another
dispelled by
This illusion was violently and unexpectedly
that erupted
the geyser of metal and plastic fragments
ship hung
from the far side of the base. Without warning, a
It was bigin the center of the falling shower of splinters.
showed only two
ger than any shuttle he’d ever seen and
wings. A bright glow emanated from one end.
Then the roar reached him and that at least was familrising skyward at an
iar. The ship jumped as if kicked,'
he by the
extreme angle. So stunned and enthralled was
Sometimes it
that he forgot to activate his own alarm.
sight

is

not planning but inspired confusion that

escape.

is

the best aid to
.

.

The light of half a moon shining down on it, the SeekJ
cold, cloudy night
er s shuttle rapidly accelerated into the
air of

Hivehom.

There was nothing aboard

like the ac-

on the
shuttles that had lifted him from Willow-wane and dropped him down to
Hivehom. Human saddles were short and angled in on
celeration saddles he’d lain in

themselves.

He

could not possibly straddle one.

The monsters were hastily strapping themselves into
their own units except for one who staggered forward. Forgotten, Ryo chose a place on the deck where two walls
joined and spread himself as flat as he could. With foothands he grasped the support pylons of two monsters’ saddles.

He

worried overmuch.

No

radical

maneuvers were per-

formed and the steady acceleration was not difficult to
bear. Soon the shuttle was coasting in free space.
That did present some problems. The monsters* shuttle*
craft was not large enough to retain artificial gravity, so
Ryo went floating past several of the securely strapped-in
crew. Loo unbuckled his upper torso and reached up to
grab one of Ryo’s flailing hind legs, then pulled him down
to where he could obtain a grip on the back of the monster’s saddle with all four hands. From there he was able to

manage reasonably well.
The voices of the pilots reached them

via the

communi-

Again Ryo recognized that of the captain.
“I don’t see a thing,” she said. She paused, then, “There’s
nothing up here. Not a damn thing, not even a shuttle.”
“What about the SeekerT an unseen questioner asked.
“Coming up on her.” A longer pause, broken by a third
cators.

voice.

“She looks untouched.

I don’t think they’ve tried taking

her apart.”
“Why should they?” Elvira responded. “For all they
knew it could be booby-trapped.”
“I don’t know,” the second voice began. “They don’t
strike

me

as a suspicious people.

Though

I don’t see

how

they could be anything else after years of sparring with the
A Ann.”
brief silence. “God, she’s beautiful. I never

A

thought I’d call her that.”
“I never thought you’d call anything that if it wasn’t
female,” Elvira responded. This was followed by human
laughter.

157

158

must begin thinking of them as “humans” and not as
monsters, he told himself firmly. Diplomacy must be done.
“Hey, I wonder if any of them are on board?”
“I don’t know,” the third voice commented. “We’ll find
out soon enough. In any case, we’ve got our weapons system back now. I’m sure as hell not going peacefully back to
that hellhole. If they try and stop us there’ll be bug juice
over half the stellar objects between here and Centaurus
I

space.”

Ryo
ment

comdid not know Ryo was on

stiffened mentally, forced himself to shrug the

off.

The speaker

doubtless

board. Nevertheless the viciousness in the human’s statement unsettled him. He began to wonder if he might not
have overreached himself. Perhaps these creatures were as
duplicitous as the AAnn. Morally he was still confident
he’d done the right thing. However, there were a
cerns that overrode even morality.

few con-

There was a dull thump. Hanging as he was, Ryo could
not obtain a decent view through one of the indecently
rounded ports, but humans were unstrapping themselves.
Using guidelines, they pulled themselves toward the rear
airlock. With his four hands Ryo was able to maneuver on
the guidelines even better than his companions. Bonnie
complimented him on his agility.
“I’ve only been in space twice before,” he told her as
they pulled themselves down the narrow, circular docking
tube toward increasing gravity and the alien mother ship,
“but I’ve always been dexterous.”
“I’ve often wished for an extra pair of hands,” Loo remarked from ahead of them, “but I think I’d settle for a
few more brains and a lot more luck.”
“There is no such thing as luck, according to the philosophers,” Ryo replied. “They insist it is an outmoded mythological concept.”

“We’ll debate that one later,” Bonnie said, interrupting
them. “We’re still not out of it.”
“

‘Out of it’?” Ryo murmured. “I misunderstand.”
“Safely away. I don’t think your presence on board
would be enough to prevent your government’s attacking us
if

they decide on that course of action, do you?”
“Most certainly not. The contrary might be true.”

Then he was

in the alien ship.

The humans were

vanish-

159

mg

to different posts like so

called

from a

board.

Not a guard

distance,

many

Someone
nobody on

milla-bugs.

“Detection reports

in sight.”

“Why

should there be?” another, more distant voice
yelled. “Who’s going to try and steal it? Besides, they
haven’t been able to figure out how to run it yet.”

The

checks Bonnie had spoken of took even less
time than Ryo had expected. Then all of a sudden he was
standing in the corridor all by himself. Loo and Bonnie had
rushed to their stations. In die haste to complete final repairs the crew of the Seeker had forgotten there was an
final

alien in their

midst

with Ryo. He strolled around the peculiar
vessel unchallenged, touching nothing because nothing

That was

fine

was familiar. The corridors were generally identical; high,
narrow rectangles instead of the comforting low triangles
or arches. It was most disconcerting, as if his whole world
of perceptions had suddenly been squeezed from both sides.
Some of the chambers he inspected were evidently living
quarters. Their contents

remained a mystery to him. All

except a single item of furniture that, save for being higher
and longer, closely resembled a proper lounge. He wondered if they were intended for sleeping or some as yet

unknown

function.

Since no one was around to stop him he tested one
overly soft with a slightly irritating mushy movement to its
insides, but otherwise quite suitable for resting. He had to
haul himself onto it. Once there and as soon as he got used
to the rolling sensation, he succeeded in making himself
comfortable for the first time since they’d boarded.

“What do you

think. Captain?”

The

cocontroller

was

studying the activated screens that showed the green-white
mass of Hivehom and the space surrounding it. Several
moons appeared as graphic representations, as did moving
points of light too large to be dust and too near to be satellites.

No,
therefs one moving.” She checked a readout, announced
with satisfaction, “Moving away from us. Standard commercial traffic. It squares with what the bug told us. This
“Ships,” Sanchez noted tersely.

is

a busy world.”

“Have

to be. Orbital.

160
“His name is Ryo,” Bonnie announced from the other
side of the cabin.
“All right it squares with what Ryo told us. This is
their capital world. Traffic’s to be expected. I don’t think
we could mask ourselves with it, though. Ship signature is
too different.”
“I’m sure they’re marking us right now,” said Taourit,
the cocontroller. “They’ve kept us well away from the
other ships. Probably a restricted area.”
Sanchez nodded, spoke toward her pickup. “Engineer-

—

ing? Status?”

The speaker

replied. “Engineering checks okay.”

“Thanks, Alexis. We’re set, then.”
Bonnie leaned a little closer to one screen. “Lights coming up,” she declared. “Small mass, moving fast. Too small
for a ship. Military shuttle maybe.”

“That was fast,” Taourit murmured. “Somebody down
there’s good at deduction.”
“And so we bid farewell to the vacation world of Hivehorn,” Sanchez muttered. “Our stay was pleasant but overlong, I think. Let’s get out of here.”

A slight vibration ran through

room and

the Seeker
began to move. It was still too close to the world below for
the Supralight drive to be engaged. In normal space the tiny
shuttle coming up behind would be just as fast. For a while
it

the

seemed to be gaining.

Eventually the captain issued additional commands. Far
out in front of the ship a deep-purple glow appeared, the
visual manifestation of the immensely Concentrated artificial gravity field generated by the ship’s projectors.
The Seeker leaped outward. As it did so it pushed the
growing field, which pulled the ship, which pushed the
field. Acceleration was rapid. There was a moment of nausea and utter disorientation. The field and the ship within
passed the speed of light and entered the abstract universe

known

as Space Plus. Stars

went wavy and streaked around

the ship.

Everyone was about to relax when Bonnie’s screens displayed three new marks, behind and to one side of the
Seeker s course through Space Plus.
The Seeker's, computer went to work. Bonnie studied the
resultant readout, but did not try to conceal a sigh of relief.
"

161

—

“Not a chance of intercept not unless they’re a lot faster
than we are. Of course, they could track us all the way
back to Centaurus, but I don’t think they’ll risk that.”
Still, one of the pursuing vessels continued to follow as
its companions dropped from the screens.

“Maybe they

think they’re faster than we are.”
Bonnie shook her head. “If anything, the reverse
true
unless they’ve tried to fool us into thinking that.”

—

is

“Anderson, you’re a detection specialist, not a psychologist,” Taourit observed.
“We all have our hobbies.”
The computer interrupted to announce the result of stud-

begun when they’d reentered the ship. It declared that the
air was breathable, gravity was operational, and in general
all was right within the enclosed metal globe that was the
ies

Seeker,

The

on Bonnie’s console continued to hold
position as if its crew was determined to follow all the way
across the galaxy, if need be. Twice it dropped from the
screen, only to crawl slowly back into view. Once it made
up some distance on its quarry.
“What do you make of that?” Sanchez asked the coconsingle light

troller.

Taourit studied the monitors and readouts, punched a
query into the computer, and received fresh information.
“They’re fiddling with their drive. Probably pushing it to
the limit.” He looked over at her. “It would be detrimental
to future relations if this bunch were to blow themselves up
trying to catch us.”
“We can’t be held responsible for that,” the captain replied calmly.

and they
manently

“We made no

—

toward them

kept us prisoners would have kept us perwe hadn’t escaped, according to this Ryo indi-

still

if

hostile gestures

vidual.”

“Yes. According to it,” agreed Taourit.
“It’s a him,” Bonnie reminded them.
They both turned to glance at her, then resumed their
conversation. “According to him, and exactly who is ‘him’?
Could he be a cleverly planted spy?” the cocontroller wondered.
“I don’t think so,” Sanchez said.

not engineered by them.”

“Our escape

clearly

was

felt they’d
sure?” Taourit asked. “Maybe they
us as they
learned as much about the ship and about
because everycould.” He gestured around the room. “Just
have taken the
thing’s in place doesn’t mean they mightn’t
bet they
Seeker apart and put it back together again. I’d
ones they call
could. Did you notice those upper hands, the
the best hutruhands? They can do detail work finer than

“You

man

artisan.
#

our escape/
“So why couldn’t they also have engineered
due to
Not one of their people was harmed. That could be
there s any
or complete lack of it. I don’t think
surprise
diagnostics would
surveillance equipment on board. Our
back over
have found it by now and it could hardly report
got a better reinterstellar distances, anyway. But they’ve
cording instrument on board in this Ryo.”.
How could he get his information back

—

.

“Farfetched.
“I don’t

know, Captain. But then,

there’s quite a lot

we

farfetched but not
don’t know about these bugs. Sure, it’s
impossible.”
“No, not impossible,” she admitted.
the
“Maybe they were right,” Bonnie put in from across
control room.

“Right about what?” Taourit asked.
them
“About our racial paranoia. Our history supports

about as much as your current conversation.”
be considered, San“It’s only a possibility that ought to
discussion with
chez argued. But she did not resume the
detector s words
the cocontroller. The implications of the

were unpleasant.
They were twelve hours out and a good distance irom
had
Hivehom, and Alexis Antonovich was exhausted. He
the
been glued to his drive monitors since they’d retaken
repairs
Seeker. The ship was performing beautifully. The
in
continued to hold and there wasn’t a hint of oscillation
wrapped in
the field. She shot through Space Plus snugly

Now
her convoying envelope of mathematical distortion.
the engineer just wanted to rest.
He stopped in front of the door to his compartment,
touched the switch that slid it aside. Bleary-eyed, he moved
basin. After cleaning his face

he

felt

much

to the

wash

better.

A glance in the mirror showed a scraggly growth of

163
beard that had accumulated on the bug world. Depilatory
cream was one of many items they hadn’t had time to
bring

down from

Something

the orbiting Seeker.

else

was

reflected in the mirror:

a pair of

bulbous, gleaming, multicolored eyes stared at his reflection. Whirling, he was confronted by the sight of a fivefoot-long arthropod lying on its left side on his bed. It held
his pillow in one blue-green armored hand.
“Self-inspection,”

it

commented

in whispery but quite

understandable Terranglo. “That’s interesting.” It gestured
with the pillow. “Perhaps you can explain the function of
this soft device to me?”
“It’s called a pillow,” Alexis responded automatically to
the polite question. “We rest our heads on it while we
sleep.”

“But why would you need something else to rest your
head upon,” the Thranx inquired, examining the pillow
closely, “when this lounge is already too soft?”
“That’s because
” Alexis broke off the reply, suddenly

—

conscious of what was happening. He moved quickly to the
wall communicator, activated it, and talked without taking
his gaze from the creature on his bed.
“Captain, Alexis here. I just went off duty. Tm in my
cabin. I think perhaps there are some matters we have to
clarify.”

Despite Taourit’s suspicions, Ryo was given the run of
the ship. He was full of questions that he knew sometimes
irritated his human hosts, who were concerned only with

own

Though he was still learning about
facial expression, a radical new concept to a being with an
inflexible exoskeleton, he was convinced some of them
looked at him in a less than friendly manner. That distheir

safe return.

turbed him, but he told himself firmly that

it

was only

natural.

request for access to the Seeker *s computer
bank was turned down. Only when the last, persistent
Thranx ship finally faded from the screens did the captain

His

first

Ryo
coding. The

could find nothing harmful without special
general files were more entertaining than dangerous and Ryo’s desire to learn more about his hosts
seemed devoid of ulterior motive.

relent.

164

He was

also able to study the

the twelve surviving

members of

crew

at their stations.

Of

the Seeker's crew, at least

—

four were openly, even enthusiastically friendly Loo and
Bonnie, the engineer named Alexis, and the ship’s environmental monitor. Another six, including Captain Elvirasanchez, were politely neutral. Only two remained overtly
hostile, despite Sanchez’s orders for them to act courteous
in Ryo’s presence.

Their hostility troubled him. After several unsuccessful
attempts to win them over one even became physically ill
in his presence
he decided not to press the matter and
simply avoided them whenever possible.
study of human history revealed an antiarthropod bias
exceeding the hereditary Thranx fear of mammals and
other soft-bodies. In addition to groundless but very persistent phobias, actual events such as plague and the massive

—

—

A

destruction of food supplies lent support to such a bias.

Small arthropods such as insects sometimes ate Thranx
food, but not to the degree they had devastated human supplies throughout history. It was not surprising, then, that in
unguarded moments even Loo and Bonnie looked at him
with unconscious expressions of fear and disgust. It was
hard for them to overcome a lifetime’s conditioning.
As it was for him. Their warm, smelly bodies pressed
constantly around him and he had to struggle to suppress

own instinctive reactions.
At least that was not a reciprocal problem. Even the two
who actively disliked him confessed that his natural odor
his

resembled a cross between lemon and lilacs, whatever they
were. More than once he caught a crew member inhaling
with obvious pleasure in his presence. Their sense of smell
was located in twin openings located just above their
mouths, which struck Ryo as a particularly impractical arrangement.

How

odd

would

he thought amusedly, if understanding should be reached between our species not on the
basis of mutual interests or intellectual discourse, but because one of us smells good to the other.
it

be,

He spent the days in Space Plus devouring everything the
computer would feed him.

Its controls

were unnecessarily

165
bulky and easy to manipulate. His knowledge of monster
of human language and customs increased.
The engineer Alexis had shown Ryo how to use the terminal in his burrow. Then he moved in with a companion
so his living quarters could be given over to the Thranx.
Since each burrow had individual climate controls Ryo was
able to alter temperature and humidity to suit his own temperament. As the humans found the hot, sticky climate in
the room distinctly uncomfortable, he had a good deal of
privacy in which to pursue his studies.
Few visited him except for Loo and Bonnie and, after a
while, the captain. Sanchez did not warm to Ryo as they
had, but her conversation was always absorbing. Ryo knew
she was in a difficult official position because, as she saw it,
the Thranx were the

race mankind had encountered and the circumstances under which contact had
been made were not covered by official procedure.
“No,” he corrected her. “We’re the second intelligent
race you’ve encountered.” Ryo then gave her a complete
first intelligent

rundown on the AAnn, admitting from the first that if
would be biased. The Seeker s remaining science staff was
*

brought in and they listened raptly to the lecture.
The atmosphere on the Seeker was never completely relaxed. No one knew if her repairs would hold to the end of
the journey. If the drive were to

fail,

their sublight engines

them back to Centaurus in a couple of
hundred years or so. Her arrival would be of interest, but
could

still

get

not to the desiccated corpses crewing her.
But the repairs continued to hold and the drive contin-

ued to function. The air grew foul and thin for several
days, but that was as close as internal elements came to a
serious breakdown.
Activity intensified on the day designated for emergence
into normal space. The countdown commenced with no
more than the usual tension, the familiar wrenching sensation was felt, several of the crew lost the contents of their
stomachs, and then it was done.
Ryo moved hurriedly to the main port in the ship’s control room. A planet drifted below and, above it, a distant
and to him very dim sun. Though no astronomer, he
thought the world beneath must be far too cold and harsh
to support

life.

Surely

it

was not

their intended destination.

I

166
“You’re right,” the cocontroller informed him, without
taking his eyes from his instrumentation. “There are eight
planets in this system, of which the third and fifth have

been colonized.”

who

first

He smiled.

“Mistakenly, too.

The

arrived here thought they’d reached

colonists

an

entirely

different star.”

“If this

is

not our destination, then

why

are

we

stopping

here?”
“Standard precautions regulating returning exploration
craft,” Taourit told him. He pointed to the port. “See that
bright spot just ahead? That’s where we’re going.”
The orbital station circling Centaurus* seventh planet
was an enormous wheeled complex, mankind’s farthest outpost. It impressed Ryo. The world it circled was cold and
dead.

A large and, Ryo thought, too well-armed cluster of humans met him and his companions when they emerged
from the station airlock. They were polite, but he could
read emotions other than welcome in some of the faces.
The official who made the short speech and greeted him
in a mildly patronizing manner was courteous enough,
however. Ryo was conducted to a spacious burrow on the
skin of the station.
sweeping port offered a view of the
stars and the icy globe rotating below.
The temperature and humidity had been set to his specifications, and plants had been provided to give the burrow
a homelike atmosphere. Someone had gone to a great deal
of effort to insure his comfort.
After the expected argument he was allowed a computer
terminal, one slightly more complicated than the one he’d
used on the Seeker The engineer who instructed him in its
use watched with more than a little envy as Ryo utilized
sixteen digits and four hands -to input requests far more
rapidly than any human could have managed.
Days of conversation followed. As long as the station
authorities allowed him access to information, Ryo was reasonably happy. The percentages of humans who openly
liked him, were uncertain, or unremittingly inimical remained about the same as on board the Seeker But his
visitors were mostly scientists and researchers, he reminded
himself. He doubted he would be as well accepted among

A

.

.

the general populace.

167
Occasionally he was visited by members of the Seeker's
crew. They were undergoing debriefing elsewhere on the
station

and did not

more being with

try to conceal their pleasure at

their

own

once

kind.

Ryo’s guests included one group of three that spent an
inordinate amount of time with him. There was one large
elderly male and a smaller elderly female who both sported
white fur. The third member of this team was a considerably younger male.

At

the

moment Ryo was

that the station shop

had

stretched out

flat

hastily cobbled together for him.

The

alien fabric

and

thorax, the head brace decently curved.

was gently gripping

hands over his front and

on a saddle

let his legs

against his

droop

He

abdomen

crossed his

lazily

over the

sides of the saddle. In addition to the three scientists,

was

Loo

present, not to act as interpreter, since Ryo’s mastery

of the

human language was now

extensive, but simply to

be a familiar go-between should the need

arise.

After several hours of discussion concerning Thranx cultural habits, Ryo had a question of his own.
“You know, I have an interesting proposal I would like
to make. I’ve given it a good deal of thought.” He studied
his visitors as they waited for him to continue.
On the right was the elder male named Rijseen. Ryo
had decided he was the equivalent of an Eint, for he was
often deferred to by other inquirers. Next to him sat the
elder female Kibwezi, whose skin was nearly as dark as the
space surrounding the station. Nearby was the youngest of
the three, the diminutive male called Bhadravati.
Since they’d first come to question him many changes
had been made in Ryo’s burrow, at his request. The ceiling
human of more than
had been lowered nearly a meter.
average height was therefore compelled to stoop when
walking. All the right angles had been removed through the
addition of sprayed polyfoam. The lighting had been reduced. The heat and humidity remained at Willow-wane
normal.
By way of partial compensation a changing room had

A

between the station corridor and the burrow
proper. There visitors could discard whatever clothing they
wished so they might speak with their alien guest in com-

been

installed

parative comfort.

168

i

A the

he was sitting practically naked,
face. His companions
sweat was pouring from Rijseen’s
climate of Ryo s
seemed more at home in the tropical
Despite the fact that

qU

r

but he led his
^e phenomenon of sweat fascinated Ryo,
mtended to ask.

to the question he
there are regions
studies I have learned that

thoughts away from

•

it

“During my
which you make
on several of the worlds you have settled
ot
includes your home world
little or no use of. This

“You

the
details like that,
aren’t supposed to know
as if
man interrupted sharply. Then he blinked

younger
wasn’t supposed to. Th
he’d mentioned something he
t pass Ryo,
woman threw him a look of reproach. It didn
meaning of such
who’d become adept at recognizing the
of amusement.
flexings. He let out a short whistle
techno“When a society becomes sufficiently advanced
conceal something from
logically it becomes very hard to
While
to ask the right questions.

someone who knows how

our information
are considerably different in shape,
Do not be surmachines generally obey the same laws.
restraints. I do so
prised that I have circumvented certain

we

out of curiosity, not malice.
Malay penin
“On your Earth there are areas such as the
continent called Afnca, and
sula, the Congo region of the
are to this day thinly
in particular the Amazon basin that

you have
inhabited and inefficiently utilized, though
extensive efforts to exploit them.
Kibwezi
“They’re likely to remain that way,”

made

com-

left the
not necessary. For example, you have
found
Amazon basin largely untouched because it was
the region
some time ago that extensive development of
would upset
would result in catastrophic deforestation. This
your
production of oxygen and possibly unbalance

“That

is

the

atmosphere.
r
u
of such
use
making
at
experienced
only
not
“We are
The humidity and
areas, we prefer to live beneath them.
can tunnel
temperature would be like home to me. We
the result of
through and live in almost any kind of ground,
Although it
thousands of years of sophisticated excavating.
seasons, my people could live
is a little cool during certain

169
quite contentedly in such a place, which can be only forever inhospitable to your kind.” He hurried on.
“Lest you think me making a subtle suggestion of invasion, I

must

also tell

you

that there are

comparable regions

on oiir own worlds that you would find quite pleasant,
though I would not live in them for all the credit in the
universe. Some of them are greater in proportion to their
planets’ surface areas than this Amazon basin is to your
Earth’s.

“For example, the extreme polar regions of our capital
world of Hivehom are lethally cold to us, yet according to
my studies no worse than much of your northern hemisphere continents.” He gestured at Loo. “Those who were
held there can attest to its climate during our coldest season.

“There is also an extensive plateau that rises two thousand meters above its surrounding country. Many of the
trees you call softwoods thrive up there. Rainfall is moderate by your standards and temperatures too cool for
Thranx comfort. There are no mineral resources but the
soil is suitable for the kinds of farming I have studied.”
little pride crept into his tone. “Of that I can promise you.
“I would guess that the climate there approximates what
is average around your Mediterranean Sea. So you see, we
could greatly benefit each other by trading off such territories. Development of these regions could proceed easily,
since they are located not on new worlds but on highly
developed ones. All would benefit.”
“We are hardly empowered ” Rijseen began apologeti-

A

—

cally.

The female took over

“You must

understand,
Ryo, that we are simply scientists, observers. We are here
to study and learn and to teach.
do not set policy,
for him.

We

though

we may make recommendations.

am

not a bureaucrat, but I think I can say with confidence that your proposal is more than simply premature.
There has not been even preliminary formal contact initiated between our species. Yet you sit there and calmly propose not a mere alliance or expression of friendship, but an
“I

and colonists.”
more graphically,” the younger

actual exchange of territory

“Let

man

me

said,

try

and put

“and excuse

it

me

if I

use terminology that seems

170
idea of perhaps a million of your own kind,
a million giant, armor-plated, glow-eyed bugs, actually settling down on Earth, is one that would be very hard for its
indelicate.

The

general population to accept.”
“No more so,” Ryo responded, having anticipated the
objection, “than it would be for the people of the Hive of
Chitteranx, who dwell directly below the plateau I told you
of, to gaze every day up its cliffs knowing that hundreds of

thousands of giant,

fleshy, flexible aliens

were building ma-

chines and lives up there.”
“Then you are as subject to the racial paranoia your
psychtechs accused us of as we may be,” said Kibwezi.
are discussing now deeply ingrained cul“Not at all.

We

loathe my appearance, my people may loathe yours, but unlike you, we
have not fought among ourdo not loathe each other’s.
selves for thousands of years. Your history, which I have
studied, is full of devastating internal conflicts of appalltural fears

and ancestral emotions.

You may

We

ingly recent date.”

“We’re getting away from your proposal,” Rijseen put
in. “I

don’t see

Ryo

—

how

risked censure

by

interrupting, though,

he reminded

himself, that did not carry the disapproval here that

it

would have among his own people. “Think of the knowledge to be gained by both sides, the advances that would
surely be made, not to mention the necessity of striking a

AAnn.”
vital as you seem

military alliance against the

“That

may

not be as

to believe,”

Bhad-

was an AAnn vessel that attacked the Seeker but we have no way of confirming that.
You could be trying to smooth over a mistake by your own

ravati noted.

“You

insist it

,

government.”

“The AAnn exist. They attacked your ship and killed
your people and are every bit as dangerous as I’ve told
you.”

“You’ve told us that these AAnn once attacked your own
home town,” Kibwezi said softly. “That they killed your
friends and relatives.”
“That is also truth.”
“Then your own personal not to mention racial bias
against the AAnn would naturally induce you to seek an
alliance against them. Even if they did attack the Seeker , it

—

—

171

may have been

in error.

They might,

for example, have

a new design of your own. Why should we ally
ourselves with you against them when we might be friends
with them as well as with the Thranx?”
“A neat trick,” Ryo replied, controlling his temper.
“There is one difficulty. The AAnn believe they are a chosen species, designated to rule the entire galaxy. Other, inferior races are to be exterminated or enslaved. They are
very patient and careful to conceal such feelings in the presence of diplomats. This patience makes them all the more
dangerous.”
“So you say,” Bhadravati responded.
Ryo’s composure slipped just a little. “What reason
would I have to lie to you?”
“I just enumerated,” began the woman, but Ryo hardly
heard her now.
He had innocently thought his carefully prepared proposal would be accepted instantly and approved. Its logic
was unassailable. Instead, it had been casually brushed
aside as unworkable and premature. Another aspect of human behavior to be filed for later dissection.
“They might indeed offer you apologies and alliance,”
he told them. “Deceit is their refined weapon, deception
their most prized characteristic. These attributes are supported by an advanced technology and militaristic society.”
“So you say,” the younger man repeated with infuriating

thought

it

self-assurance.

“We

digress again,” Rijseen pointed

reestablish the atmosphere of cordiality

out He tried to
with which they’d

begun the questioning.
“As you’ve heard, we are only researchers. We can only
pass your proposal along as we do all information to
others better positioned to act on it”
“You will do that for me?” Ryo asked.

—

“Of

We

—

are collectors of information, not interpreters. Now tell us again,” he said eagerly, “about the
higher implications of the filian ceremony.”
Ryo sighed inwardly, determined to raise the issue again
and again at future meetings until he received some kind of
course.

positive response.

A

hfch

i\lll

quarter-month later Ryo had an informal visit from Bonnie and Loo. Like
the rest of the Seeker's crew, they were
still

sequestered at the station, subject

to medical as well as mental study.

They were answering

many questions as was Ryo.
Neither human was as uncomfortable

nearly as

as Ryo’s question-

They were more accustomed to the climate of his burrow. The low ceiling and rounded comers did not trouble
them at all. They had endured such surroundings for
months on Hivehom.
ers.

Conversation consisted largely of pleasantries and reminiscences. Eventually the matter that had troubled Ryo for
some days could be ignored no longer. He escorted them to
the wall where his private terminal had been installed.
Since the meeting with Rijseen and his two companions
he’d found that tighter blocks had been placed on certain
channels of inquiry. Nothing had been said about it and the
computer had been programmed to be evasive rather than
specific, but he recognized the establishment of channel
locks.

He’d discovered the other almost on a whim, in a moment of boredom. It presented a challenge and he attacked
it

more

for the entertainment

desire or need to

know

its

it

offered than out of any

contents.

They had turned out

to be something other than entertaining, however.

“I

was working here

he explained to
into the saddle, “trying to research your conseveral days ago,”

them, sliding
tacts with other life.”
“I thought you were an agricultural specialist,” Bonnie
said, staring over his shoulder as the screen ran information.

“So I am, but the question of other intelligences has intrigued me since larvahood. If it were not for that I doubt
we three would ever have met.”
st
That would have been a loss,” Loo said with a smile.
“Yes.” Ryo worked the keyboard with two hands. In addition to the central screen the two peripherals on its right
promptly winked to life. Patterns flashed across the glass.
“It was while hunting for evidence of such contacts that I
stumbled into a block. I’m used to that now. Normally I
file their location and ignore them. That is the polite thing
173

174
to do, since your superiors evidently feel there

is

certain

material I should not have access to.”

Both humans looked a

uncomfortable despite Ryo’s
admission that such blocks did not bother him.
“We have no control over such matters,” Bonnie said
little

finally.

am aware

of that. I was not accusing you. This block,
however, tempted me to try to circumvent it, since it concealed information of particular relevance to me. I have
come to believe the block was placed not specifically
against me but to prevent general access by the majority of
the staff at this station.
“In my years as member of my Company’s local council
“I

have had ample opportunity to make use of informationretrieval technology. Though your system differs from
ours, I have applied myself both on the Seeker and while
here, and have succeeded in learning a great deal. Also,
Thranx are naturally proficient at logic and aesthetic inferI

ence.

managed

had
been placed on this particular line of questioning. I was in
fact surprised that a stronger block had not been placed on
it. Sometimes in their eagerness to conceal vital informa“Briefly then, I

tion bureaucrats

to bypass the block that

may overlook the trivial.”

He

returned to the console and his fingers moved across
the keys. The flow of information on the three screens
slowed, stabilized. The words maxecret alien contact

—

and thranx appeared. Demand was made for a second input, which Ryo supplied.
The words vanished, were replaced by a computergenerated diagram of Ryo’s body. On the peripheral
screens information began to unroll, accompanied by
smaller diagrams and appropriate commentary.
“That’s your

file!”

Loo

blurted in surprise.

“Indeed,” Ryo replied. Behind him the two humans
leaned closer. Evidently neither had seen the information

now appearing on the screens.
Ryo let it unspool at its own

pace for a while,
then touched a control. The text and graphics became a
multicolored blur on the screens. A beep sounded from
somewhere inside the console and the information slowed
to a near crawl.
leisurely

175
“This

he said

is

the section I would like

drily. “I

found

it

most

you

to

pay attention

to,”

interesting.”

Bonnie’s eyes traveled through the paragraphs, slowed at
and it is therefore concluded, that
.
.
a particular line.
additional questioning beyond the prescribed date can generate only minimal new information. Urgent requests continue outstanding from Xenophysiology and other bureaus
for further material on internal construction and in particular cerebral makeup and capability of the specimen in
question.”

Behind Ryo, Bonnie flinched at the last phrase. The
formation continued to roll up the screen.

in-

military branches in particular are interested in all
aspects of the aforementioned with view toward future
methodology for confusing such functions as vision

“The

and

feel. Particular

inquiry

is

desired into the physiology of

the faz sense, which is not duplicated in humans and which
presents unique military difficulties of its own.
“It has therefore been decided by a vote of twelve to ten
by the senior planners of Project Thranx that, since the
specimen in question appears to occupy only a minimal

hierarchy and that since his whereabouts are in any case unknown to them, postmortem internal studies should commence on the date indicated.
“Psych Staff sees no problem in creating suitable excuse
status

among

his

own

to explain the specimen’s demise should the need arise.
This also supported by a vote of 12—10 by the senior planners.

“Note is made of the closeness of the decision and the
vehemence of those voting in opposition. Revote reconfirms the decision to proceed with the aforementioned. Euthanasia will be performed the evening prior to the announced date and dissection and study will commence
following. Sig.Per.Proc. See tables medical, thranx

proj.”
Fresh information continued to appear. Neither Bonnie
nor Loo paid any attention to it. Their single lenses seemed
slightly glazed. While he recognized the phenomenon, Ryo
could not interpret it sufficiently to correlate it with his

companions’ feelings.
“Did I not tell you

it

was most

interesting?”

he

finally

said into the silence. “Apparently your superiors are so

176
busy keeping knowledge of
the station personnel,
ciently

my

presence here unknown to
they neglected to guard it suffi-

from me.”

Loo muttered. “They want to cut you
up to see what makes you tick.”
“They have no grounds, no reason
Bonnie began,
“It’s

monstrous,”

.

.

so angry she could hardly speak.
Ryo’s reply was couched in philosophical tones. “There

no more knowledge they feel they can gain from my
aliveness, and much from my death. I have already made
is

my

peace with

eternity. I

am

prepared to accept the inevi-

table.”

not inevitable,” Loo objected.
“Is it not?” Ryo turned the saddle and stared

“It’s

up

at him.

His ommatidia sparkled in the light from the console.
“Among my people such a situation calls for resignation.
I can sympathize with the desires of your superiors. They
wish only to further their knowledge.”
“There are some things more important than furthering
knowledge,” Bonnie countered.
“I would disagree with you, Bonnie.”
“Don’t,” she snapped. “You may be willing to go calmly
to your death, but I’ll be damned if I’m willing to let you
do it.” Precipitation oozed from the comers of her eyes,
another human phenomenon Ryo found fascinating. It was
astonishing that any creature could generate precipitation
in so

many

different

ways and for so many

different rea-

sons.

“What could you do?” Ryo murmured. “The

decision

has been made.”

“Only on a local level,” Loo noted. “The order could be
countermanded by higher scientific bodies on Earth. Fm
sure that’s why they’ve set the date so soon, so they can
commence their little vivisection party before any response
could be returned. Oh, they know what they’re about, all
right. They’re very clever.” He seemed to slump in on himself.

“We

can bloody well go to the council and offer our own
objections,” Bonnie said.
“Yes, and you know how much weight they’ll give to
that.”

Ill

“They have
follow-up

to listen to us,” she objected. “Contact

our profession.”
Loo was nodding. “They’ll tell us
job. That our work is finished. We’ll

and

is

we

did a marvelous

be promoted and
given huge bonuses.” The irony in his tone was clear even
to Ryo.
all

“We’ve got to try.” Loo’s relentless reasoning had reduced her initial angry determination to a hopeful whisper.
“I cannot say that I do not wish you luck,” Ryo admitted, adding a gesture of mild amusement. “You did find
the information interesting, as I thought you would. Don’t
worry about me. I am content.
“I have learned that intelligence exists in yet another
corner of this stellar forest we call our galaxy. That is sufficient revelation to die for. I shall return my component
elements to Nature, with dissolution already begun.” The
attempt at humor evidently failed; neither human responded as he’d hoped.

and pulpy was caressing his neck. The
eerily silent. At the same time his antennae
the presence of a malignant, musky odor close

Something
burrow was
twitched at

soft

by.

He awoke

with a

start,

terribly frightened,

wondering

where Fal was and if the monster that was gazing down at
him had already devoured her.
“Be quiet,” urged the monster in a quiet, familiar voice.
“I don’t think we’ve set off any alarms yet. There may not
be any to set off. After all, there’s nowhere for you to
escape to, is there?”
Slowly his sleepy mind cleared, recognized the fragmented shape of Bonnie standing over him. He lifted his
head and looked past her. Several other human silhouettes
stood in his burrow. Others were outlined by the light of
the distant corridor, visible through the open entryway.
“What’s wrong?” he muttered. “What’s the trouble?” He
was still too sleep-drenched to think in Terranglo.
Bonnie’s Low Thranx answered him. “Some of us retain
fragments of civilization.” Her tone was bitter. “We owe
allegiance to standards not incorporated in official manuals.”

178

what you are saying.” He slid
off the lounge and fumbled for His neck pouch and vest.
“What I am saying is that a good friend is not a candi“I believe I understand

date for the butcher block.”

not at all like that,” Ryo protested. “As a question
of scientific expansion of knowledge
“As a question of scientific expansion of knowledge,”
she interrupted in Terranglo, “it sucks. Have you got all

—

“It’s

your things?”

He

on

neck pouch. “I think so.”
“Then let’s go.” She started for the doorway. He followed automatically, still drowsy and increasingly bewilclosed the last snap

his

dered.

“Where are we going? This is not a planet. You cannot
hide me on this station for more than a short time.”
“We have no intention of trying to hide you on the station.”

They were out

in the corridor.

tion to compensate for the bright

Ryo dimmed his percephuman lighting. Loo was

waiting for them, and Elvirasanchez. With them were the
cocontroller Taourit, the engineer Alexis, and someone Ryo
didn’t recognize as a
all.

member

of the Seeker's crew. Six in

Greetings were exchanged quietly and in haste.

committed to this,” Sanchez informed him
solemnly. “You risked your life for something you believed
in, believed in enough to risk condemnation from your entire people. Well, there are a few of us who are capable of
“We’re

all

equally strong beliefs.”

“The shortsighted will always be among us,” Ryo replied
philosophically. ‘Those who try to reach out with their
minds are more often restrained from behind than from
ahead.”
“I

know.” The captain gestured around

the only ones

her.

“These are

who

agreed.”
“Will the others not betray you?”

Sanchez smiled. “They’re convinced we’re all talk and
no action.” She looked past him. “I think you know Dr.
Bhadravati.”
Ryo turned, was surprised to find the young scientist
who had questioned him so many times. He had considered
him the least friendly of the three and confessed his aston-

ishment at seeing him now.

179
“I’m not here because

I

think this

is

reasoningly or le-

young human said, “but
morally I don’t see how I can do anything else. I believe
that you are one of God’s creatures, that you have a soul,
and that what they intend doing to you is wrong both in the
eyes of man and of God. I don’t know if the term is one
you’ve learned, but prior to my matriculation as a xenologist I was a theology student. I draw support for these actions tonight from the Bible, the Rig-Veda, and the teachings of Buddha. What I do here now is part of my journey
gally the right thing to do,” the

down

the noble Eightfold Path.”

do not understand all of what you say,” Ryo replied,
“but I welcome the result of your reasoning. I believe you
would consider me a Theravadist.”
“I

—

“That is impossible to reconcile with belief in
Sanchez stepped between them, spoke to Bhadravati.
“You can try converting him later. Our searches turned up
no monitors, but sooner or later someone’s going to make a
personal check of our guest’s condition.”

They hurried down the corridor. The station was big and
the Seeker was docked a considerable distance away. It was
general sleeptime for the humans.
I

have done

this before,

on a more familiar world, Ryo

seems I am destined forever to be escaping to someplace or from somewhere.
They were ru nnin g down a narrow serviceway where the
light was subdued and Ryo was grateful for the respite

mused suddenly.

from the usual

It

glare.

“That’s far enough!”

The humans running ahead

of

Ryo came

to a halt.

He

peered around Sanchez. Blocking the corridor was a single
human male. Ryo recognized the object he was holding as
a weapon. After a moment Ryo recognized the figure. It
was one of the Seeker's crew. One of the two who’d
sneaked hostile glances in Ryo’s direction when he thought

was looking.
“Hello, Weldon,” Sanchez said easily. “I had a hunch
you might have suspected. You always were a sharp one.”
“Shove it, Captain.” Sweat was pouring down his cheeks
and his thinning hair was in disarray. “It wasn’t hard to
figure that you were planning something. So I listened.”
He smiled, but there was no humor in it. “I listen well.”
no one

else

180
“Okay, so you

listen well.

What

are you going to do, turn

us in?”

what you do. I don’t have anything against
you. Captain. Against any of you. You’ve been under a
strain. We all have. It’s clouded your vision, but not mine.
Not Renstaad’s, either, but she isn’t up to this. Someone’s
got to do it.”
“Do what?” Sanchez.
“What needs to be done. My God, don’t you people realize what’s happened here? What these filthy creatures portend? We always knew it might come, but not with such
“I don’t care

subtlety, not with

such deviousness.”
“What might come, Weldon?”

“The

of course. All these centuries they’ve
been watching us, waiting. Now they’ve duped us into
bringing one of ’em back with us. He’s fhe advance scout.
invasion,

Somehow

even managed to hypnotize you all into taking him back. Back with the vital information they need.
Centaurus will be the first. After that, they’ll probably go
straight for Earth itself.”
“Weldon, you just said yourself we’ve all been under a
strain.

he’s

Ryo

—

is

“Don’t call it that!” he screamed. “Don’t give it a name.
Things don’t have names!”
“He’s a friend. We’re the ones threatening him, not the
other way around.” She took a step toward him and the
muzzle of the gun moved ever so slightly to one side.
“Don’t try it, Captain. I said I’ve got nothing against
you, and I don’t, but by Heaven I’ll shoot every one of you
down to save the rest of us if you force me to.” His gaze,
wild and fanatic, turned to the one who’d been standing
behind her.
“It will only take a second.” His finger started to tighten
on the trigger. “Messier than a spray, but just as effec-

—

tive

“Don’t do
hands.

“We

it,

Weldon!” Loo stepped sideways, waving

can!

—

his

The gun made a slight hissing sound. Something struck
Loo in the chest and knocked him backward. His arms,
already disconnecting from his brain, flopped loosely in the
air.

Bonnie screamed. Taourit pulled something from

his

181

tol

to face him, brought his pisthe little gun struck him in the

Alexis was pulling at her.
“Come on. It’s too late.”

He

jacket pocket.

Weldon turned

around as the dart from
forehead. His eyes glazed instantly and his body went as
rigid as if he’d been frozen. He made a loud thump when
his head hit the floor.
Bonnie was kneeling next to Loo. She was not crying.
put a hand over the man’s
chest. There was a very large hole in it. “It’s too late,
Bonnie.” The others were looking down at them.
Ryo touched his antennae to the back of Bonnie’s neck.
She jerked at the airy caress, looked back at the sharp
mandibles, the great faceted eyes.
“I am sorrowed, friend Bonnie.

He was my

friend too.

The minute of lastlife is gone and cannot be recaptured.”
For a moment sanity left her gaze. Then reason and
reality flooded

stood,

back

in.

disdaining Alexis’

“We’re wasting time here.” She
offer

of assistance. “Let’s not

waste everything.”

They started up the serviceway, stepping over the still
rigid body of the man named Weldon. No one stood guard
over the airlock leading to the Seeker. People did not steal
Supralight-drive ships. It was almost comically easy. No
one was in a humorous mood, however.
The hatches were unsealed. For a second time the crew
of the Seeker prepared to flee with their ship. Only this
time they were running not from another people but from
their own. How Wuu would love this situation, Ryo mused,
thinking fondly of the old poet and wishing he were pres-

ent to offer advice and companionship.
I had two equally fine human companions, he reminded
himself. Only now one of them is dead, because of me.
It was true there were no alarms to set off, no traps to
trigger. But when the Seeker* s maneuvering engines were

engaged and the umbilicals connecting it to the station
power system were jettisoned, portions of the orbiting city’s
instrumentation came alive rapidly.
Ryo stood in the control room, watching his friends.
Bonnie threw herself into her work, becoming an emotionless appendage of her station. Dr. Bhadravati paced and
fidgeted as if he did not know what to do with his manipu-

182
lating digits.

that

moment

Not being a member of the crew, he was

as useless as Ryo. Unlike Ryo, however, he

do something.
From the first, there was nothing ordinary about the

was dying

at

to

in-

sounded over the console speakers. “You there,
aboard DSR Seeker, acknowledge! You have disengaged
and your engines are functioning. DSR Seeker is not auquiries that

thorized to disengage.
edge,

DSR

Who

is

aboard, please? Acknowl-

Seeker7”

Captain Elvira Manuela de loa de Sanchez. I
acknowledge for DSR Seeker. Received and acknowledge
orders to check out sublight engines and life-support prior
to boost to C-III for overhaul prior to next EX flight. All
okay here. Sorry about any confusion.” She clicked off.
“That ought to keep them busy for a while.”
Indeed, by the time the speakers squawked again the station was just a disk against the reflective side of Centaurus
VII. The voice that came this time was deeper and more
emphatic than that of the station’s duty communicator.
“
Seeker this is Colonel G.R. Davis, Centaurus Station
commander. You are ordered to return to base forthwith.
We have checked with both station command computer
and EX Control on C-V. The Seeker is not due for overhaul for another six weeks.”
“I know,” Sanchez replied calmly. “We thought we’d
start her out early and bring her in slow so we could give
her systems a thorough run-through in case there are any
on-the-verge problems. I’m anxious to be rid of her.”
“You will be rid of her permanently and all other possible commands if you don’t return her to dock immediately.” Voices could be heard arguing in the background.
Another voice came over the speaker. Ryo recognized
this one as belonging to the Eint elder human.
“
Seeker this is Dr. Rijseen, in charge of the direct contact branch of the special xenology project here at the station. We have discovered that the alien is absent from his
quarters.
thorough search has been made of the station.
While it may be that he is hiding somewhere, we have every reason to believe that he is on the Seeker and not as a
stowaway. We will continue to operate on that assumption
unless we can be persuaded otherwise.”
The young xenologist moved forward. Sanchez gave him
“This

is

—

,

A

,

183
a

stare,

then nodded slowly. Bhadravati spoke toward the

pickup.

“Ryozenzuzex
“Jahan,

is

aboard, Maarten.”

you? I wondered where the hell you got
to when the alarms went off. What’s going on?”
“Well, you know, it’s a funny thing,” the young researcher began. Ryo could see that he was very nervous
and uncertain. No hint of this surfaced in his voice, but it
was evident in his posture and movements, to which Ryo
was more sensitive than most humans. “But the bug, as
many refer to him, once saved the lives of every crew
is

member on

that

this ship.”

What has it to do with the crew’s
unauthorized action?” The elder spoke with feigned ignorance that would have been admirable to an AAnn, Ryo
“All that’s well known.

thought.

Taourit looked over at the captain. “There’s a ship detaching from the station.”
“Supraiight?”
The cocontroller shook his head. “Too small. Intersystem
capability only.”

She nodded once,

listened as Bhadravati replied to Rij-

seen’s question.

not right to dissect an intelligent being, no matter
that he might be understanding about it. That’s the remarkable thing about this, you know. Ryo sympathizes with the
staffs majority viewpoint. He knows about your intentions,
“It’s

you

see.”

“You

didn’t

have to

tell

him

that,” Davis* voice said.

Bhadravati laughed. “You’re quite right, Colonel. We
didn’t. He already knew. Found his file in the station
bank.”
“That’s impossible!”

The

colonel sounded upset.

“You didn’t put a strong enough block on it. He was
rummaging through and came across it himself, did the
necessary bypass all by his lonesome. The Thranx are superb logicians and excellent with computers. That’s in his
records too.”
The channel was silent for a while. When Davis responded it was in a gentler, more reasoning tone. “Bhadravati, there is

that this

Ryo

more

at stake here than

you know.

I

admit

individual seems friendly enough, but

you

184
cannot positively deny the possibility that his ‘escape* from
his home world might simply have been a ploy to get him
to a human system.”
“If it’s a ploy. Colonel,” Sanchez said into the pickup,
“it’s working damn well. Better than yours.”
“Captain Sanchez, you and everyone operating alongside
you will be completely pardoned if you will just return the
Seeker to dock. Otherwise you will be classed as criminals,

and treated as such.”
“Ship is beginning to move outward, straight for us,”
Taourit whispered.
She nodded again, her attention on the pickup. “Don’t
threaten me. Colonel. I react real nervously to threats.”
“Where do you think you’re taking that ship?” Davis demanded. “Centaurus V? Three? Earth, maybe? The word
will precede you. The services will be looking for the
Seeker at every established station and every shuttleport on
all

the civilized worlds.”

“Not
suredly.

ing on

all

the civilized worlds,” Sanchez informed

him

as-

“We

this,

considered every alternative before embarkColonel. If we’re compelled to, we’ll take Ryo

home.”

“Then what?” Davis’ voice was more curious than
threatening. “Once you return him to his world, where do
you expect you can return to?”
“We don’t expect to,” was the quiet reply.
Dead silence came from the speaker. It was matched by
the atmosphere in the control room. Since the colonel apparently could not think of a suitable response, it was Rijseen who finally resumed the conversation.

“Very

We will

drop the plans for the dissection. The vote was close enough to allow that. Guarantees
will be drawn up so that no one can override. Not even the
well, then.

military.”

*

Davis* voice, in the background:

“You

don’t have that

authority. Dr. Rijseen.”

you will check your records,” the distant voice of the
staff head advised him, “you will find that I am in complete control of this project, sir. That authority extends to
“If

anything below a direct military threat to the civilized
worlds. Human civilized worlds,” he added, with just a

185

amusement. “I do not regard one

tinge of

isolated

and

avowedly friendly alien as constituting such a threat.”
“How do we know you’ll do what you say?” asked Sanchez.

“Ask Dr. Bhadravati.”
“Obviously, Dr. Rijseen and I have disagreed on a number of matters. Or I wouldn’t be here at this moment.”
Bhadravati flashed a bright smile. “I believe he is trustworthy. I have never known him to break his word. I believe it

once cost him a substantial
ing honors.

word

is

He

is

and accompanyone of the few scientists I know whose
scientific prize

as sound as his studies.”

Bonnie spoke toward her own console pickup. “I believe
you, sir. If Dr. Bhadravati trusts you, then I’m willing to
trust you. But can you vouch for your associates? And can

you guarantee the cooperation of Colonel what’s-hisname?”
Muffled sounds issued from the speaker. Then, “I will
go along with whatever Dr. Rijseen and the science staff
advise.

My sole concern is

for the safety of the civ—-of the

human-inhabited worlds, and for government property, of
which you are presently in unlawful possession. If that is
returned undamaged, then I am perfectly willing to stay
out of this.” His voice dropped to an irritated rumble. “I
would far rather stay out of this. Would you people please
make up your minds?”
“I believe you, Colonel,” Bonnie continued. “There’s just
one problem. We’re not dealing solely with scientific decisions anymore.” She glanced at Sanchez, who returned a
comforting smile.
Bonnie took a deep breath. Her voice trembled slightly.
you’ll
“In Service Corridor Two-Four Dee you’ll find
find . . .” She hesitated, forced herself to go on. “You’ll
find the bodies of Loo Hua-sung and Seeker maintenance
consultant Richard Weldon.”
Rijseen’s voice did not change as he asked, “Bodies?
Both dead?”
”
.

“Yes,

.

.

sir

“Weren’t you and engineer Hua-sung engaged to be married at one time?”
“There was we talked about it, yes.”

—

186

Ryo was

he understood the relationship that had existed between his two closest human
friends.

staring at her. Finally

They were, not

quite premated, but living in simi-

a great many things.
“Weldon suspected our intentions,” Bonnie rushed on.
“He managed to follow one of us, maybe more. I don’t
know.”
“I wonder why he didn’t sound the alarm, if he knew,”
lar status. It explained

said Colonel Davis.

“He had other plans,” Bonnie told him. “Plans of
own. You know how restricted access was to Ryo. Of
Seeker's crew, generally only Loo and I were allowed to
him once he’d been established in his own burrow

his

the
see

— his

quarters.

“When Weldon became
bided his time.

suspicious of our actions, he

He was

waiting for us in the service corridor. He didn’t have the slightest interest in stopping us. All
he wanted was to kill Ryo. Loo Loo stepped between

—

them.”
“Cocontroller Taourit here,” said the man on Sanchez’s
right. “I’m the one who shot Weldon. For the record.” He
said it proudly.
“I don’t understand,” Davis was muttering. “Two men
dead. Why did this Weldon want to kill the alien?”
“Because to Weldon, Ryo was an ugly, stinking, hardshelled, smelly slimy bug. That’s why, Colonel. That’s the
attitude we’re going to have to contend with and that’s why
we have to be allowed to establish formal contact with
Ryo’s race before word of their existence is leaked to the
general populace.
“By the way, you ought to put a seal on environmental
specialist Mila Renstaad. She felt the same way as Weldon
and could cause trouble.”
“I’ll handle that,” Davis said curtly.
“If we don’t make successful, friendly contact,” she went
on, “then any chance our two peoples have for understanding each other will be drowned by the initial outpouring of
visceral, ancestral loathing for creatures of

Ryo’s appear-

ance.” She broke off suddenly, as if amazed at the length
and passion of her unintended polemic.
“That’s all I have to say about

it,

sir.

I’ve already lost

187

—a very good

a

friend.

As you

said,

two men are dead.

That’s only a portent of what could come.”

“No

disrespect intended. Colonel Davis,” Sanchez said,

“but you can only speak for your immediate
same is true for you, Dr. Rijseen.”

staff.

The

“I will enter the revised staff recommendation in the

computer,” Rijseen said, not offended. “You can check it,
through your on-board system. All points about keeping this
quiet are well taken and will be properly acted upon.
“As to whether this incident will be followed by your
suggested establishment of formal contact with the Thranx,
that remains to be discussed. On that I really do not have
the authority to make promises. Such a decision requires
the blessings of at least three of the five acting members of
the ruling board of the Terran Society for the Advancement of Science and Exploration, plus permission from the
appropriate governmental agencies and elected authorities.
The political ramifications are explosive.”
“Then if you cannot promise, you can at least promise to

Sanchez said.
“I will do my best. Of course, if you do not return there
can be no discussion. What do you say?”
“It’s not for me to make the decision.” She looked back

try,”

at the large arthropod

who was

carefully preening his left

antenna.

“Ryo, I don’t know you as well as I’d like to. Not as well
as Bonnie does, or Loo did. This is your choice to make. If

you insist, we’ll move out to five planetary diameters and
head for your home. I know what awaits you there, but it’s
up to you to decide.” She didn’t smile. She rarely did. “I
wouldn’t blame you after all this for wanting to return to
your

own kind.”

not sure what to do. I am an agricultural
expert, not one prepared to determine the course of future
“I really

am

between two species.”
“Like it or not,” Bonnie said, “you’ve been put in that

relations

position.”

“Put your

trust in

God,” Bhadravati urged him.

“Yours or mine?”
“There’s only one God, by whatever name you
the scientist said.

call

him,”

188

“Theology student, yes? I can see that you and I are
going to have many long conversations, Dr. Bhadravati.
There is a friend of mine at least, I left him as a friend
whom I think you would enjoy talking to more than me, but
he is not with us right now. I hope someday you have the
privilege of meeting him.”
“So do I. Like everything else, though, that’s up to you.”
So while the humans waited and watched their instruments, Ryo thought. Of Fal waiting on Willow-wane. Or
was she? Of his comfortable and unpressured position with
the Inmot, which had once seemed so dull and pointless
and which now seemed unbearably inviting. Of his sisters
and their families.
What would Ilvenzuteck advise me to do? he wondered.
What would the hivemother say? He wished desperately he
could consult with both those wise matriarchs. But there
was no one to consult; not a clanmother, not a poet, not a
larva. He stood alone in an alien ship, surrounded by five
monsters who meant him well and who would do his bid-

—

ding.

was not to be exploited. And what of the human Loo who had died protecting him? Which would be
the best way to insure that no additional deaths would result? Which way, which way, to allay the mindless hate
That

trust

that festered

among

the less intelligent

members of both

species?

Sanchez was right. He badly wanted to return home. But
to what? To prison and reconditioning? His own kind had
left him with no promises. Here at least he had gained
something of a commitment. As to whether that commitment would be honored, well ... If he returned home,
five

humans whom

he’d

come

to like very

return here to suffer. If he remained to
fight for contact,

As

so

many

much would

work and

cajole

and

only he could lose.

things did,

it

came down

to simple mathe-

matics.

Captain Sanchez’s hand was poised over the control console, he noticed.
screen showed the small ship that was
coming toward them from the station.
He executed a multiple gesture indicative of fifth-degree
sardonicism, with fourth-degree resignation and just a flavoring of irony. No one, including Bonnie, was sufficiently

A

189
well versed yet in Thranx to interpret
they would be.

it.

Perhaps someday

“Let us return. If all of you are willing to trust this Dr.
Rijseen, then so am I.”
“I’ll be sure to tell him that,” Bhadravati said. “I’ll make
it a point to tell him to his face.”
“You can tell him yourself, Ryo.” Sanchez’s fingers

danced on the

The Seeker
Systemwise

and

spirits

controls.

pirouetted gracefully

on

its

latitudinal axis.

was facing inward once again. The thoughts
of its inhabitants were soaring in a different
it

direction entirely.

“You
an

don’t

change the destiny of

entire people that quickly. It takes

time.”

The man in the azure jumpsuit was waving his hands as
he spoke. Ryo thought he could be very fluent in Low
Thranx. The human was short and corpulent. His hair was
completely white. It descended in waves down his collar.
His pink forehead gleamed in the

light,

almost shiny

enough to pass for stained chiton. If I were to press on it,
Ryo reminded himself, my finger would not slide off as is
normal but would move inward until encountering bone. He
shuddered slightly and doubted he would ever grow used to
the idea of wearing one’s body outside one’s skeleton.
Though he possessed only half the requisite number of
looked very much like
a Thranx. He was a part of the hierarchy of the human
government, a Secretary of something. His position was not
as high as they’d hoped for, but Sanchez and Bonnie had
assured Ryo that it was substanial enough. His arrival on
Centaurus V, though at night and in comparative secret,
had caused something of a stir on that world.
Several others had come with him or ahead of him, traveling the long way from distant Earth to C-V and then out
to the system border station slowly orbiting G-VII. From
there they had been escorted by shuttle to the wardroom
of the Seeker. Sanchez and her associates, despite repeated
assurances of noninterference from Davis and Dr. Rijseen,
had chosen to remain on board and in free space. It helped,
the captain explained, their peace of mind.
Rijseen was also present. So were Sanchez and Bonnie.
The others were monitoring ship functions—and other
items of interest. Outside the observation port that dominated the wardroom lay the cold dark mass of Centaurus
limbs, in his metallic attire the

man

and two much
that Sanchez and Taourit had assured

VII, the faint disk of the station

smaller spots of light

Ryo were warships.
They did not seem

itself,

worry the Seeker s captain, who
was confident the ship could engage its Supralight drive
before either of those motionless warcraft could do her any
damage. The warcraft were present mostly to make an impression, though whether on Ryo, his human friends, or the
visiting dignitaries was hard to say. They could not engage
to

"

191

192

own

their

drives in their present position without destroy-

ing the C-VII station and

thousand inhabitants.
Debate proceeded in the wardroom of the Seeker in an
atmosphere of cordial uncertainty.
“Of course, I have no authority to commit my people to
any kind of formal treaty,” Ryo was saying. “I admit that
as a representative of my species I stand here unappointed
and unanointed. But from all I have observed, all I have
experienced, I believe an alliance between our peoples not
merely to be desirable but vital.”
One of the human officials spoke up. He was ordinarily
silent and said very little. Nor did he seem gifted with unusual intelligence. Yet his comments were always relevant

and

its five

to the point.

“I can understand your use of the term desirable.

But

been informed that your command of our language is quite good, and from what I’ve seen so far I
wouldn’t dispute that. But are you sure of your use of the
word?”
“Yes. Vital.” Ryo added a gesture of maximum emphasis
that was lost on his attentive listeners. “Vital for our sur‘vital’? I’ve

vival because of the increasing depredations of the

and because our culture badly needs a kick
vital to you for your mental stability.”

in

AAnn

its gestalt,

Several of the officials stirred uneasily, but the whitehaired man in their midst only laughed. “I’ve studied the
claims you’ve made for your psychtechs. Alliances are not

made by psychologists.”
“Maybe that wouldn’t be such

a bad change,” Sanchez

suggested softly.

The man
ryiez

.

.

glared at her. “I understand Mr.

Ryoz

.”

“Just Ryo,” the

Thranx

said.

your reasoning.” He bent to examine papers on the table in front of him, spoke while reading. “It is
your contention that a close alliance between and association of our peoples would be beneficial to the mental health
“I understand

of the

human

species.”

have reasons to believe that to be so,” admitted Ryo.
“So you think you’re better than we?”
“Not better, just different. As I just stated, I believe
there are many things you have to offer in return, though
“I

193
doubtless

many

would dispute

officials

of the government of

Hivehom

that.”

“You mentioned a

‘kick’ of

some

kind,” put in another

official.

“Our

culture

is

immensely successful.

We

have enjoyed

interspecies peace for thousands of years. This stability has

bred technological success. It has also led to sterility in
other areas. Many of your art forms, for example, I find
delightful. Your music, your forms of recreation
.
.
there is great energy there, reflective of your racial hysteria. These are outlets for your cerebral furies. We could
be another. It would benefit us both.”
“Then you want to channel us?” the fat man said dan.

gerously.

“No, no!” Ryo struggled to convey his exasperation as
best he could in human terms, without the use of gestures.
It was a constant struggle to talk only with air and not with
your limbs and body. “I don’t want to channel you, don’t
want to see you directed. There is nothing of dominance in
this. I don’t want us to do anything for you, or to you. Only
with you.”

“With us.” The official considered. “A fine sentiment,
but by your own admission it will be difficult to convince
your own people of that.”
“They will be frightened of you at first, as they were of
the crew of this ship. As I was. We must overcome old
emotions, all of us. Shape must not interfere with reason.
Nor must your psychotic tendencies.”
“We do not have psychotic tendencies.” The official was
uncomfortable.

‘Talk to your own consultants,” Sanchez advised him.
“Study human history. We should not be afraid of admitting that

we

we are.”
your own state

are what

“Consider
of mind right this minute,”
Rijseen added. “Then look at this alien across from you.

He

is

far

from home and among what are

of surpassing ugliness. See

how calm he

to
is,

him

creatures

how

relaxed

and at ease.”
That wasn’t entirely true, Ryo thought, but he wasn’t
about to step on the scientist’s hypothesis.
“Would a human placed in the same situation react this
way? We know he wouldn’t. We know it because Captain

194
trained for
Sanchez and her people did not, and they were
and acted
such confrontation. They kicked and screamed
am convinced
well, like humans. From my studies I
like
of racial or indithat Ryo’s mental stability is the result not
understanding
vidual weakness or fatalism, but of a better

—

of himself.”
“I can see that he’s convinced you, at

.

least,

.

the omcial

said.

most persuasive,
“Facts,” Bhadravati said softly, “can be
cir

The

official

rose

and walked toward the large

port.

He

world below. The
stood and stared silently at the vast dead
because of a great misstar Centaurus (that was not Alpha
Ryo could see his
take) was a dim, distant point of light.
secret ritual.
fingers twisting and entwining in some
“very difficult. For
“It’s difficult,” the man murmured,
supposedly reexample, we have only your word for the
lentless hostility of these AAnn.”
„
soon enough,
“They’ll give you ample proof themselves

......

Ryo

noted.
“Our records

show that the ship that attacked us is ditSanchez told him.
ferent from any Thranx vessel we saw,”
is true, they will
“If half of what Ryo says about them
present a real danger.”
Ryo tried to divine the man’s mood by looking at him,
continued
but failed utterly. He tried to believe that the
weakening,
silence was a sign that the man’s indecision was
uncertainties he was coming around to the
that despite his
side of reason.

by a
turned, his fingers still working, silhouetted
how
dead world. “I mean no offense damn, I don t know
will not
to put this. There are problems here that logic

He

—

solve. It’s simply that

—

were of a different ancestry,” Ryo told him,
big,
“everything would be simpler. If I did not look like a
“That

if I

icky, crawly insect.”

Secretary looked distinctly uncomfortable as Ryo
phobia
continued. “I have had ample time to study the

The

most humans have regarding
world.

We

my

tiny relatives

are not properly insects,

by your

on your

classification

system.”

“The general

public,” the Secretary replied, “is not inter-

195
ested in scientific niceties. You look like something out of
many of their worst nightmares.”

“And what about

you, Mr. Secretary?” Ryo slid off his
saddle and approached. “How do I look to you?” He
reached up with both tru- and foothands and grasped the
lower edge of the man’s shirt.

“Does my touch make your skin crawl? An intriguing
phenomenon, by the way. Do I make you want to vomit?
Does my smell make you ill?” He let loose of the material.
The Secretary hadn’t moved.
“As a matter of fact,” he replied calmly, “your smell, of
which I was apprised prior to my arrival, is quite as lovely
as reported. However, our media systems are not sufficiently advanced to convey odiferous stimuli. Only sight
and sound. I’m afraid that when it comes to the question of
contact, sight will predominate in determining responses.”

Ryo had

turned and retaken his saddle. “So you are not

optimistic.”

“You have

already had an unfortunate encounter with
one fanatic, I understand?”
“Yes. It cost the life of a very dear human friend of
mine. I believe the incident proves not the adverse reactions

A

my people might provoke,

has sacrificed his

life

human
but the opposite.
for mine, grotesque quasi-insect

though I am.”

“A

singular, isolated

example involving a

man who was

a trained explorer. The same reaction cannot be expected
from the average human.”
“Or for that matter, the average Thranx,” Ryo admitted.
“Somehow a solution must be found.”

The

was not encouraging.
“We would have to demonstrate beyond a doubt that our
two species could live side by side in harmony and under“I can’t see one.”

Secretary

standing despite thousands of years of mutual conditioning
to the contrary.

a chance to open
tentative communications via Deep Space transmissions.
Even then I’ll have to combat the bigots and paranoids in
my own department. But if we exercise caution, with luck
and some social maturation we might during the next couple of hundred years

“The

best I can realistically offer

is

—

“Apologies

for

interruption,

sir.”

Ryo

cut

him

off

196

“The AAnn will not wait a couple of hundred
years. They will extend their mischief-making to include
your people. They know just how far they can push, how
deeply they can wound. They will try to bleed you to death.
When you are weak enough, they will attack. Each day
they grow more powerful, more confident. For the sake of
both our species we must strike an alliance now. That cannot be done through cautious, long-range transmissions.”
A successful politician knows when to be tactful and
when to be truthful. The Secretary was very successful.
sharply.

We

cannot alter our
shape any more than you can alter yours. I can see no
quick way to prove species compatibility.”
“I have given much thought to the problem,” Ryo replied. “I had hoped not to have to make the proposal I will
now lay before you all. It is a bit well, theatrical. My
friend Wuuzelansem would approve the form if not the
content. It is all I can think of, however. It will settle the
question of compatibility permanently, I should think.
“Unfortunately, the facts

exist.

—

becomes known, it will be condemned
with many expressions of outrage and horror by both our
peoples. I fully expect all of you,” and he gestured around
the room, “to react in similar fashion as I explain. I entreat
you to let me finish, and to consider what I say calmly and
reasoningly. I ask you to put instinctive passions aside
“If the operation

while considering the larger issues we are dealing with
here. With success will come admiration and vindication.
Failure would mean dishonor and much worse for all involved.”
“I don’t like choices that offer only extremes. I prefer to

remain in the middle,” the Secretary murmured.
“There is no middle here, sir. Are you not risk-takers?
Do you humans not like to dance with the laws of chance?”
“We’ve been known to do so now and then,” one of the
other government officials commented drily.
“Then I shall detail my thoughts. I request only that you
do not reject until I have finished.” At least, he thought, I
have gained their full attention. Having acquired considerable wisdom during the past years, however, he was not
sanguine about the chances for acceptance.
“Now then,” he began briskly, “if I have studied your

197
customs efficiently I believe I am not wrong in saying that
you look unfavorably upon kidnaping and infanticide . .

The world

hove into view on the screen was so achingly familiar that Ryo found himself shaking.
-“Are you all right, Ryo?” Bonnie stared back at him
that

from her seat.
“I am. It’s only
reaction.”

to

fill

As he

that I hadn’t expected so powerful

stared the misty white-green globe swelled

the entire screen.

was planned.

moved

a

They were diving

at

it

very

fast,

as

“I thought myself sufficiently detached, re-

to a point

where such mundane

me. That
numbed.”
affect

is

clearly not the

instincts

case.

would not

I feel rather

She watched him sympathetically. “We
are subject to the same emotions. We call it homesickness.”
She lifted her gaze to the small screen. They were in Ryo’s
quarters on board the heavily screened Seeker She wiped
the ever-present sweat from her forehead. She’d been sitting with him for over an hour now and her clothing was
soaked. “It’s a beautiful world, your Willow-wane. Your
home.”
“Yes. Most of the settlement is on the opposite hemi“I understand.”

.

sphere;”

“Don’t worry, Elvira knows what to do. She’ll hold this
dive and veer back to Space Plus range at the first sign of
a probe. Though if what you say is true, that’s unlikely to
happen.”
“I think

we

will

be

all right.

The

additional screening

equipment your people installed should give us the electronic appearance of a tiny meteor temporarily drawn into
low orbit. Inside five pd’s of Hivehom or Warm Nursery
we would soon be detected, but there are many dead zones
above Willow-wane. I believe the Seeker will be able to orbit undetected long enough to allow us to ferry our material
to the surface.”

The door admit chimed and Ryo

called, “Enter, please.”

and a gust of cold air from the corridor beyond
momentarily chilled him. Bonnie moved her arms grateIt slid aside

fully in the brief breeze.

A

small

human walked

into the

room. Ryo studied

it

198
with his usual fascination. Humans knew no larval stage,
did not experience the terror and wonder and glory of metamorphosis. Like many mammals, they were bom into the
shape they would have for their whole life.
They did not have the benefit of an extended learning
period in which to rest and absorb knowledge. Instead they
were thrust immediately into a highly competitive adult environment. Though no psychtech, Ryo believed this unhappy arrangement had much to do with the species’ paranoia and belligerence.

—

The larva no, he corrected himself, the male child
was named Matthew. He stopped next to Bonnie, lifted his
hand

instinctively.

She took

it

in her own.

where we’re going, Ms. Thorpe?” Ryo noted that
though he held his other hand in his mouth he was not
“Is that

using his mandibles to clean the fingers. The habit, he’d
been told, had a psychological rather than practical purpose.

“Yes, that’s where we’re going, Matthew. Isn’t it pretty?”
She bent over to put her face at his level. Both regarded
the viewscreen.
“It looks kinda like home,” he said.
“Most inhabitable planets look alike.”

“What’s

‘inhabitibitible’

mean?”

“Inhabitable, ” she corrected him.

“It

means we can

usually live there.”
“It looks like

a lime sundae.

How long will we be there?”

“Not so very long.”
Matthew thought a moment, squinted at the screen.
“When will I see Mommy and Daddy again?”
Bonnie hesitated, then smiled maternally. “After school
is finished. They know you’re away, you know.”
“Yeah, sure.”

“Do you like
“Oh,

yeah!”

this school so far?”

Sudden

excitement

suffused

his

face.

“There’s lots of neat things to do and tapes to study and

a lot better than my old
school. And it’s on a starship, too.” He screwed his face
into a thoughtful frown. “Too many girls, though.”
neat food and friends!

I like it

Bonnie smiled.
“But it’s lots of fun. I never thought school could be so

199

much

go outside, though. ’Course, I know I
can’t do that in space, and I don’t have a envirosuit.”
“We’ll be landing real soon now,” she informed him,
“and you’ll be able to play outside. You’ll have new lessons
fun. I’d like to

to learn.”

“Oh,
“I

that’s okay. I don’t

know you

mind

studying. I like school.”

do, Matthew.” She reached out, rumpled

brown curls. “That’s one reason why you were chosen
come on the ship for this special term.”

his

to

“Yeah.

It’s

sure fun.”

He

studied the lime sundae a

while longer. Then his attention shifted to the figure
sprawled on its right side on the high bed. He still held
onto Bonnie’s hand but his other fingers were no longer in
his mouth. That was a baby habit, he knew, and he wasn’t
a baby anymore. He was determined to stop it.
“Hi, Ryo.”
“Hello, Matthew.”

“Will you wordwhistle for me again?”
“Anytime,” and he made the Thranx word for happy.
Matthew’s brows drew together. His face twisted and his
mandibles pursed tight. At first nothing happened when he
blew through them. The second time a soft whistling
emerged. He smiled. “How’s that?”
“Very good, but it needs to be higher at the end. That’s
the whistleword for happy.”
“I know that. You think I’m stupid or somethin’?” He
tried again. The sound floated through the room, louder
this time.

“That’s better.

Much

better.

Want

to try the

word

for

sun-up-moming?”
“Naw, not now.” He looked up at Bonnie, then back to
the figure on the bed. It was a funny bed, he thought, but
then Ryo was funny-shaped, so he supposed it matched up
okay.

“Want

to play horsey?”

Ryo

the lounge. Horsey was a younghuman game, in which one partner assumed the part of a
domesticated animal. It was all part of a much greater and

“Sure.”

far

slid off

more dangerous game.

He

immediately lowered himself to the floor so the boy
could climb aboard. It embarrassed him whenever one of
the children asked to play the horse.

It doesn’t

I

V

who

or what you are,

Ryo mused. Wherever home
something about

inhaled deeply, his

its

is,

there

is

smell that distin-

from any other world.
thorax expanding with a rush

guishes

He

matter

it

as

he gazed around the little clearing. Off to his left, muldringia vine grew thick and close until the unscreened sunlight
turned them pale and weak at the clearing’s edge. Tall
grass wore a corona of bright little yellow flowers. Snuff
bugs whizzed through the morning air. His antennae waved
through the pollen recently dispersed by an overripe bombush. The heady aroma threatened to upset his balance on
the ramp.
“My home.” He turned to the open lock and those standing there. “Is it not wonderful?”
Liquid was already materializing on Bonnie’s exposed
skin. Bhadravati and several other friends crowded around
her, testing the air.
“Very lush,” Bhadravati agreed. “But to us, very hot

and

terribly

humid.”

“A

mild second-season day,” Ryo noted. “I doubt the
humidity is much more than 80 percent. With luck it will
top a comfortable 90 by midday eve.”
“With luck,” Elvira Sanchez muttered gloomily as she
leaned through the lock and gazed across the treetops. Her
concern was for what might appear from the clouds.
“If we had been detected on approach,” a voice said
from inside the ship, “search craft would be overflying this
area by now.”
“I know. I’m just a natural worrier,” the captain called
over a shoulder. Hands on hips, she turned to look past
Ryo. “A good place to lose weight, anyway.”
Ryo made a gesture of puzzlement. “Why would you
want to lose weight and how?”
“Cosmetic reasons,” she replied. “When we move around
in very hot weather, our bodies sweat water and we can

—

lose weight.”

“Extraordinary.” Ryo shook his head to indicate amazement, a gesture he had picked up from the human physical
vocabulary. “Being constrained by our exoskeletons we are
considerably less flexible in such matters.”

201

202

“A world

without obesity,” Bonnie murmured. “That
would be enough to induce some humans to visit here.”
“But not enough of them.” Bhadravati squinted into the
heat.

“Hence our

Highly

illegal visit.”

The

had provided covert assistance and laundered funds, but had made it quite clear that
if the project was discovered he would denounce it as vociferously as anyone else in the government. Only tremendous
pressure from members of the scientific community, incited by Rijseen and Bhadravati, had enabled the expedition to literally get off the ground at all.
Clattering and shouts sounded from below the ramp,
where humans and their machines were wrestling with the
illegal.

Secretary

contents of the shuttle’s hold.

“We

should have the first portion of the shelter set up
by the time you return,” Bonnie told Ryo. “Of course, if
you’re not back within the prescribed time period
“I know. You’ll disappear, leaving me with quite a lot of
explaining to do. Assuming I am given time to explain.”
“I thought you said your people were highly civilized
about such matters.”
“Fear of the unknown, while exaggerated among Homo
sapiens, is not completely unknown among the Thranx,” he
responded. “It is such attitudes we are battling to over-

—

come.”
“I hope you’re back in time.” She reached out to touch
one ©f his antennae. “Don’t get yourself blown apart.
You’re important. It’s not the Thranx we’re friends with,
yet. It’s

you.”

most strenuously to preserve myself,”
he assured her as he started down the ramp. Bonnie and
the others followed to the bottom. There they turned to aid
in the unloading and setting up.
Peering up at the shuttle he could see numerous faces
“I will endeavor

pressed against the glass of the tiny ports. Some of the
faces were smaller and less well defined than others. Soon,
Matthew, he thought at the faces. Soon you’ll be able to

come out and

play.

Soon

I

hope to have a new game for

you and your friends.
Moving through the jungle on foot was slow and awkward, even though he remembered the area reasonably
well. That was one of the principal reasons it had been

203
selected.

And he had made

his

way through

far wilder

more hostile flora. Oh, so long ago!
Days passed. Anxiously he kept watch on

and

the frond-

shrouded sky for signs of search craft. After a half-month
had passed he was finally convinced the shuttle had set

down

unnoticed.

Before
standing

much more time passed, Ryo found himself
among the first row of tettoq trees. Across the

orchard to his left should be the machine shop where broken field equipment was repaired. He’d emerged from the
jungle slightly to the south of the Inmot holdings, but he
still recognized the landscape. The jungle had not been
pushed back that far since his hurried departure so long
ago.
It

was very hard

jungle’s edge.

He

remain concealed in the trees
wanted more than anything to
to

at the
skitter

shouting and yelling down the nearest entryway, but that
was not to be, not this night and not for some time, if ever
again.

He

waited until sleeptime was well along and the stars
were high up behind the cloud cover before leaving the
shelter of the jungle. Somehow, as he made his cautious

way through

the carefully cultivated vegetation, he ex-

pected things to be more different then they were. In actuality he hadn’t been away that long. Mentally, he’d been
absent for years.

There were no patrols to avoid, since there was nothing
to patrol against. Twice he encountered premates or curious youngsters out for a nocturnal stroll. No one recognized him. That was fortunate, because only total darkness
would have been sufficient to hide his movements completely.
It

would be simpler

if

they were humans, he thought as

he increased his pace after successfully slipping past the
most recent pair. Humans were practically blind in weak
light. They really are an amazing species, he mused. Consider what they have accomplished with poor vision, poor
hearing, a weak sense of smell, no faz ability at all, and
half the sensible number of limbs. Not to mention the burden of wearing their skeletons inside out. Quite remarkable.

204

He knew that a great deal was riding on
time stroll. He hurried on a little faster.

his little night-

The machine shop had not been moved.

No

one was

guarding the tools or heavy equipment parked outside.
Theft was not unknown in the larger hives, but bulky material was quite safe in a community the size of Paszex because there was no place to steal it to.

Such

not extend to leaving the ignition controls
activated, however. Foolishness was present among the irreverent in Paszex in proportion to the population. Ryo had
a busy half-hour jimmying the controls of one harvester so
it could be started with ease.
The machine was used to transport bulk loads from
fields to processing chutes. With the familiarity of long
trust did

practice he started the engine.

The

harvester slid smoothly

forward on triple rows of balloon wheels.
There was an awkward moment when he parked the
harvester outside the particular entryway he intended to
use, for some night stroller might think to question the presence of the big machine so far from any agricultural station. No one appeared, however.
After altering the internal temperature of the harvester’s
cargo bay to suit his intentions he slid from the control cab
and entered the hive. Nothing unfamiliar assaulted his senses. Yet he didn’t feel quite as at home as he’d thought he
would. Nothing was different, nothing had been changed.
He’d spent most of his life in the very corridors he was
now walking. Yet there was a difference, and he feared it
was permanent.
Most of the citizenry were asleep, but some were still
hard at work. The regular maintenance crews, for example,
were preparing the corridors for the next workday. He had
to exercise a

He

little

care.

turned at a familiar comer,
then into his destination. Workers were busier here than
just about anywhere else in Paszex. That was no surprise.
He knew it would be so, but he could not avoid it.

descended several

“Good
“Good
“It’s

evening,

sir,”

levels,

the monitor said.

evening.”

very

late, sir.”

know, but I had difficulty sleeping and thought I
would admire our new cagin.” Thranx did not have nieces
“I

205

and nephews.

The

A

new
was

relationship

birth

was

relative to all in his clan.

sufficiently general that

Ryo

believed

he could gain admittance merely by claiming it. Every clan
had a new cagin or two in the Nursery.
The monitor did not question him. “Very well, but be
quiet.

“I

They

know.

are

all

I will

sleeping soundly.”

be.”

He

entered the Nursery proper. The long rows of curved
study saddles lay in two orderly rows against the glazed

formed individual cubicles. About threefourths of the saddles were occupied by larvae in various

walls. Partitions

stages of maturation.

How many years

ago had he lain in one such saddle? he
thought. Immobile, thirsting for knowledge and food, whiling away the days in idle study with his Nurserymates
while anticipating metamorphosis.
Now he was in the Nursery again, with a different purpose. A glance from the doorway showed only three Nurses
present. Even that seemed cause for concern. They moved
busily about their tasks.
None of them disturbed him or thought to question his
presence as he made his way casually down the central
aisle. The saddle designs had not been altered in his lifetime. All were portable, each equipped with a tiny motor
enabling it to be easily moved should an occupant require a
shift to surgery or another department.
He pretended to gaze admiringly at an infant near the
end of the aisle. The emergency exit should be nearby.
These were not simple holdovers from ancient times when
every Thranx Nursery possessed them, but served as important escape routes in case of

fire.

The exit should lead to a ramp at the outskirts of the
hive. One who used such a passageway for nonemergency
purpose was subject to substantial penalties, but then, so
was a kidnaper. The confluence of crimes and antisocial
behavior in general among human and Thranx is one of
our less obvious similarities, he mused.
The larvae he chose were neither newborns nor those on
the verge of metamorphosis. All were approximately at
midlarval stage.
His patience was rewarded

of the

Nurses working up the

of the

when not one but two
aisle made their way out

206
they did not return he quietly started work.
Two, three, five of the saddles were linked by couplers. All
could now be steered by a single Nurse. Or anyone
else.
glance up the aisle showed that the last attendant

Nursery.

When

A

had disappeared. The cubicle partitions concealed him reasonably well and would do so until he had to move his little
train out into the open for the short dash to the emergency
exitway. He would be quite satisfied if he could slip them
through without being noticed. He did not have time to
worry about how long he would have until they were
missed.

He was

linking the sixth and final saddle to the others

a shockingly familiar scent reached his antennae.
jerked backward in reaction. The scent was followed
by a querulous and equally familiar voice.

when
They

“Ryo?” He turned. It was Fal.
She wore her uniform vest and neck pouch and was staring at him. How much she’d observed he didn’t know, not
that it mattered now. She raised all four hands and gestured at the little line of finked saddles. Their motors whispered, their occupants slept on, oblivious.

“Where did you come from and what do you think
you’re doing?”
Ryo discovered that he was breathing in quick, short
gasps. His gaze went past her to the Nursery entrance. The
other two Nurses still hadn’t returned but he daren’t count

on

their absence

much

longer.

he told her. “You must help
me get these children out of the Nursery and up to the
surface. Everything depends on speed now.”
She took a step away from him. “I don’t understand you.
“I haven’t time to explain,”

You

told

me you were

involved in

some kind of govern-

Then that same agency told us you’d turned
criminal.” She made a gesture of considerable confusion
and uncertainty. “I don’t know who or what to believe any-

ment

project.

more.”
“Everything you were told
said, unfailingly honest.

“To

is

he
was working on a

true, in its fashion,”

a point. I

government project and I am now something of a lawbreaker. Probably <vorse than that, according to some. In
the opinion of others, I am doubtless regarded as a grand
hero. Actually, I’m neither. I’m just me, doing what I think

207

You

can make your own decision, Fal. But I
don’t have time to explain things. Not now.”
He touched a control and the line of saddles moved toward the emergency corridor. She hurried around to block
necessary.

the lead saddle.

you’ve been, Ryo, or why you
haven’t been in touch with me or what you’ve been doing. I
don’t much care. I do care to see you again. It’s good, I
“I

don’t

know where

what you did. We have many things to
talk about. In the meantime and for whatever personal reathink, in spite of

sons of yours, these larvae are going nowhere. This is the
Nursery. This is where they belong and this is where they
remain. Unless you can explain what you’re doing, which I
sincerely doubt.”
“I doubt it myself,” he told her, stepping close. “It’s
more complicated than you can imagine. I love you, Fal.
You are a wonderful, intelligent, insightful, enjoyable female and my opinion of you will never change regardless of
what you come to think of me and I hope you will excuse
this,” and he brought down two fists with what he fervently hoped was carefully gauged strength between her
antennae.
She did not even have time to gasp. Her arms went out
in a gesture of shock and she collapsed to the floor. He
bent quickly over her.
glance up the aisle showed a still
empty Nursery. His luck continued.

A

Her thorax pulsed

slowly but steadily as he lifted her

onto an empty saddle and linked it to the other six. She
would be unconscious for a long time while her body
healed the cerebral bruise.

The kidnaping would confront

Hive Council with a
great mystery. It would be natural for them to concentrate
on Fal’s background in the hunt for motives. With luck
they might never make the connection between a cluster of
missing larvae and a long-absent mental defective named
Ryozenzuzex. If the humans had done their part and thoroughly camouflaged their shuttle and the new structures,
they might have a great deal of time before the alarm was
raised and anyone thought to do some studious deduction.
With less luck and preparation he might be very dead in
a day or two, along with the six innocent larvae, Fal, and
the

208

human friends. He preferred not to think about that.
In any case, now was not the time.
He met no one in the emergency corridor. No one challenged him when he emerged on the surface with his unall his

likely cargo in tow.

Getting the seven saddles and their occupants into the
harvester was difficult work even with the aid of the machine’s autoloading apparatus. Still he was not interrupted.
When the last saddle had been positioned and locked in
place inside the climate-controlled hold he mounted the cab
and gunned the engine. The harvester rumbled off down
the nearest access path.

He was

on the designated roads, even
though it cost him some time. The last thing he wanted was
to leave a clear track behind him. Soon he was in among
the jungle trees, however, and he had to program the harcareful to stay

vesting equipment to carefully replace the vegetation the

machine bashed through. In a few hours the sun would be
up and a preliminary search of Paszex and its immediate
environs would be under way.
Confusion would be his most effective shield. They
would inspect the immediate belt of jungle surrounding the
hive fields, but since there was no reason for the missing
Nurse to take her charges farther afield he didn’t think a
deep hunt would commence for several days. By that time
he would be well beyond any sensible search pattern.
He’d entered the missing harvester into the machineshop program as off-line, on its way to Zirenba for extensive overhaul. Months would pass before anyone thought to
check on its status.
Fal presented a more substantial problem. He did not
think she would remain calm at the sight of his horrific
human companions. If she awoke it might be best to keep
her sedated. He would worry about that later. If the project
failed her opinion of him would not matter. If by some
chance it succeeded well, he would worry about their relationship at that time only.
When the sun rose, so would his young charges. Ryo had
spent time in the Nursery only as an occupant. Very
shortly he would have to deal with six confused, unhappy,

—

and hungry youngsters. He

didn’t

know

exactly

going to cope with that, although the past

how he was
month had

209

him something of handling youngsters and their
If he could manage infants of another species,

taught
needs.

he could deal with those of his own kind.
He managed to do so. The presence of the “sleeping”
Nurse, whom they all recognized, helped to calm them.
When she didn’t wake up there might be new problems, but
Ryo was grateful for the respite.
The harvester continued to perform admirably, sloshing
surely

its

way through the
own tracks. To

rain forest while automatically covering

he tried to choose paths that
were particularly watery, but he was positive he must be
leaving a trail behind him wide enough for a dozen Serviits

assist

it

tors to scan.

His only confrontation, however, came not from an angry cluster of Servitors or any of the jungle’s omnipresent
carnivores, but from several armed humans who materialized magically from among the trees and surrounded the
harvester. It was interesting to note that they had shed the
majority of their clothing.
Greetings were exchanged and weapons lowered.
couple of the humans gazed dumbly back into the jungle along
the path restored by the harvester. They could not believe

A

Ryo had brought

off the

most

difficult

part of the experi-

ment.
“You’re sure no one’s following you?” a beefy male
asked. His body fur was black and full of tight curls.
“It proceeded with admirable smoothness,” Ryo said. He
was glad no one challenged him. He was not ready to explain about Fal. That incident was still painful to recall.

They

him

escorted

emerged from the

trees

to

the

Ryo had

the exquisitely hidden shuttle.
grass, bushes,

and yellow

It

glade.

As

the

harvester

to struggle before locating

seemed

to

have sprouted

flowers.

marked the sites of the portable buildings the
expedition had brought with them. There would be the secOther

hills

tion for housing his six
their

human

immobile charges, there one for

counterparts.

Most

of the adults

would

bi-

vouac aboard the shuttle.
Since shuttle and structures were nearly invisible from
the ground, Ryo had no doubt that from the air the illusion
would be complete. In addition to confusing any visual
search, the

humans

also possessed sophisticated instruments

210

and restricting sound. They
would have privacy and time. That was more than he’d
hoped for.
A violent squalling in the form of a rising and falling
whistle sounded from the rear of the harvester. Ryo
brought it to a halt. Several other humans had joined the
intercepting forest guards and were peering into the cargo
for harmlessly dispersing heat

hold.

Ryo

nearly broke a leg as he rushed to get there. In the
excitement of the moment the humans had not considered
the effect their appearance might have

on

his intelligent

and impressionable passengers.
He had not intended that the children confront

their

nightmares so soon.

Matthew remembered the

He

wasn’t sure
that he had been.

why
The

first

times.

he’d been chosen, but he was glad
world they were visiting was a neat

place, full of brightly colored bugs
interesting creepy-crawlies to

poke

and

flying things,

sticks at

and

through the

clear surfaces of shallow ponds.

He

much

time to do that, since they kept
him and the others playing with the funny-shaped kids.
They were nice, so he didn’t min d not being allowed outdidn’t

have

much.
Bonnie and the big bug, Ryo, had told him that his new
friends were children just like him, only of Ryo’s people.
But they didn’t look anything like little Ryos at all. In fact,
when Matthew first saw them his initial reaction and that
of his friends had been one of pity. They had no arms or
legs. How could anyone play without arms or legs?
They had huge wormlike bodies. That was kind of icky
at first, but they also had pale colors running just under
their skins that were awful pretty. It was funny to see these
colors change from green to blue, from red to yellow and
back again. Matthew wished he could change color like
side so

that.

They smelled
the

hem

real nice, too. Like a field of cut grass, or

of his mother’s

drfess,

or the laundry

when

it

was

new. The grown-ups were afraid at first that he and his
friends would be frightened of the larvae, as they called
them. That was silly. How could anyone be afraid of some-

211

one who smelled so nice and didn’t have arms to hit you
with or legs to kick you with? The larvae, like his best
friend Moul, were a lot more afraid of Matthew and the
other human children than the human children were of
them.

'On the

ship he’d learned to recognize a lot of the funny

whistlewords and click-talk. That was good, because the
Thranx kids didn’t know any real speech at all. Matthew
was the best of the bunch and he was proud when the other
kids asked him to translate. As the weeks went by, however, both groups learned from their counterparts. Because
the larvae had flexible mandibles, it turned out they could
talk human even better than Ryo.
This seemed to surprise the grown-ups as much as it
pleased them. Matthew shook his head. Some grown-ups
were just plain dumb. After all, a stick is a stick whether
you call it a stick or a whistleword.
It

felt

surprised

him

to learn that

sorry for him. Sure,

Moul

Moul and
didn’t

the other larvae

have arms and

legs,

but he didn’t run into things, either, or stick himself with
thorns. That embarrassed Matthew and made him a little
bit angry. Sometimes he thought of hitting Moul to show

him what hands were good
But no matter what he

Moul nor

for.

said or

how he

said

it,

neither

companions ever seemed to get mad. Pouty
sometimes, but never mad. You couldn’t go around hitting
someone like that. And when Moul explained things to
him, Matthew lost a lot of his own mads, too. It was funny
the things grown-ups got excited about.
Matthew had lots of friends back in school on Earth. A
couple of them had also qualified for the trip. One was a
bigger boy named Werner, and Matthew couldn’t understand how he'd made it. He’d beaten Matthew up a couple
his

of times.

Moul was

sorry to hear that

when Matthew

told

him

about it.
“I betcha Werner wouldn’t try and beat you up,” he told
Moul one day as they were sitting in what the grown-ups
called the Interaction Room. “You’re too big.”
“For now,” Moul agreed, “but as he matures he’ll outgrow me, and after metamorphosis I’ll be slightly smaller
than I am now.”

212
“Getting smaller as you
become a grown-up. But getting a whole new body; that
sounds neat. I wish I could metamorphose.” He added another magnetic span to the building he and Moul were designing. It was a curved one this time. Moul might not
have any hands, but his suggestions were swell.
“Anyway,” Moul wondered aloud, “if Werner is bigger
“That’s weird,”

Matthew

said.

and stronger than you, then why does he feel the need to
beat you up? If he’s bigger he ought to be smarter and

how

counterproductive such antisocial activity is.”
“Yeah, well,” Matthew muttered, “just once I’d like to
pop him back a good one.” He brought one fist into an
open palm to produce a smacking sound.
“But why would you want to do that?” the studious

realize

Moul

asked.

“To

get even with him.”

Sometimes even Moul could say

the dumbest things.

“For what?”
“For beating me up.” Matthew put his hands on his hips
and then made the Thranx sign for mild exasperation.
“Boy, you’re awfully smart most of the time, Moul; but
now and then you’re awful stupid, too.”
“I’m sorry,” the larva replied. “I’m just ignorant of your
ways. It all seems so silly to me. Wouldn’t it be better for
the two of you to be friends?”
“Well, sure

it

would,

I

guess,”

Matthew

reluctantly ad-

a bully. He likes to beat people up.”
“Larvae who are smarter than he?”
“Well,” the boy thought a moment, “yeah, I think so.”
“That’s what a ‘bully’ is
someone who beats up some-

mitted, “but

Werner

is

—

one physically weaker than himself?”

Matthew hadn’t given
the subject much consideration. To him, a bully was someone who beat Matthew Bonner up. The definition need extend no further than that.
“Then he doesn’t seem very big to me at all. It sounds to
“That’s right, I guess.” Actually

me

he has a very small mind.”
“Yeah, I guess he must. Yes, that’s it.” Matthew smiled
hugely. “A small mind. A small mind.” He burst into delighted laughter at having discovered a gratifying corollary.
At the same time he picked up another span.
“No, not a curved one this time,” Moul advised him. “A
like

213
double-straight. It will give

more support

to the tower

there.”

Matthew studied the growing monument only
Moul was rarely wrong. “I think you’re right.” He
span in place, watched as

briefly.

set the

annealed to the nearby side
panels. The structure was over a meter high and still growing. The two youngsters had been working on it off and on

The

for several days.

He

it

adults

most interesting.
moved to emplace it.

found

selected a ridge ellipsoid,

it

“Also on the top, don’t you think?” Moul asked.
This time Matthew objected, holding it over the windowpanes two-thirds of the way up the left-hand tower. “Don’t
you think it would look better here?”

“Look

Moul considered. He envied his friend’s
colors more than he envied him his limbs.

better.”

ability to see in

“Yes. Yes,

I

think

you are

right,

Mattheeew. That

is

a most

intriguing composition.”

“We

can use two of them.” The boy chose a second,
matching ellipsoid. “One here and one up top, where you
suggested.”

“An

excellent

Mattheeew. Then I really
working on the other side again or

suggestion,

think we’d better start

we’ll overbalance the towers.”

“Yeah, that’s right.” Then he frowned and set the two
units back in their box.
“Is something wrong?”
“I’m bored,” Matthew announced, sighing deeply. “I wish
they’d let us go outside by ourselves. I get tired of having
grown-ups around.”
“I don’t,” said Moul. “In any case, you know I couldn’t
go out with you.”
“Why not? Oh yeah, your skin would burn.”
“During the day it would,” the larva admitted mournfully. “Anyway, I think the adults don’t want us to go out-

much.”
“They sure

side

don’t. I

wonder why.”

“I’m not sure,” Moul said thoughtfully. “I respect adults,
of course, but sometimes it seems to me they are capable of
mistakes as obvious as our own.”
“Yeah, they’re not as smart as they think. I bet I could
get you outside at night.” His voice fell to a conspiratorial

214

“We

whisper.

could fool ’em. Your skin wouldn’t burn at

night.”

“No,

it

wouldn’t,”

Moul

agreed. “I can’t get around

by

myself very well, though.”
“Aw, we’d figure something out. I’d help you.”
“And I’d help you. I can see almost as well at night as I
can during the day,” the larva told him. “I was informed
that you cannot.”
“You can see in the dark?” Matthew’s eyes went wide.
“Quite well. Not as well as my ancestors, but well
enough.”
“Wow.” Matthew could not conceal his awe. “I sure
wish I could. Sometimes back home I wake up at night and
can’t find the light panels in the floor

and bump around in

the dark trying to find the bathroom.”

“Bathroom?” Moul echoed, and the conversation shifted
easily from the aesthetics of architecture and plans for nocturnal excursions to another tack altogether.

Weeks

The

were delighted at the children’s progress, much of which originated with the experimental subjects themselves.
“Want to play Cowboys and Indians?” Matthew asked
his friend. It was raining hard outside the Interaction
Room. There could be no thought of venturing outside,
even by oneself.
“I don’t know,” Moul said curiously. “What’s ‘Cowboys
and Indians?’ ”
“Well, once upon a time on Earth there was a noble,
intelligent, handsome, and just generally sort of neat people
called Indians.” Matthew enjoyed being the one to explain
for a change. He didn’t for a moment doubt that Moul was
smarter than he was, but somehow the usual resentment he
felt toward smarter kids didn’t apply to the larva. After all,
Moul had received a lot more education and was perhaps a
Terran year older than he.
“Anyway, their lands were invaded one day by a bunch
of people called the Cowboys. The Cowboys were real
nasty. They burned and slaughtered and stole and lied and
all kinds of bad things until finally there were only a few
Indians left. Eventually, though, the Indians got even because times changed and the life force that kept the Cowboys going faded away from their economy and they all
passed.

adults

215
died out. But the Indians kept their traditions and beliefs
and lived happily ever after in the end.”

a very nice story,” murmured
Moul doubtfully, “despite the happy ending. I’m not sure I
want to play
but if you really want to
“Yeah, sure.” Matthew climbed to his feet.
Moul rippled back from the human. “It sounds awfully
violent, Matthew. I don’t like violent games.”
“It won’t be bad,” the boy assured him. “Now, I’m going
to be the Indians and you can be the Cowboys.”
Moul considered. “I think I’d prefer to be the Indians.”
“No. I suggested the game,” Matthew was a mite belligerent, “and I’m going to be the Indians.”
“All right. You can be the Indians.”
Matthew frowned at him. “What do you mean, I can be
“That doesn’t sound
.

.

like

.

.

.

the Indians? Just like that?”
“Well, of course. Why not?”

“But you said you wanted to be the Indians.”

Moul
them more than
“I do,”

admitted, “but you obviously want to be
I do.

Therefore,

it is

only sensible to

let

you be the Indians.”
Matthew mulled over this development, which tumbled
around in his brain like a rough gem in a polishing unit.
“No,” he finally decided, “y° u can be the Indians.”
“No, no. I understand thoroughly your desire, Mattheeew. You can be the Indians. I’ll be the Cowboys.”
“I’ve got an idea,” the boy said suddenly. “Why don’t we
both of us be the Indians?”
“Then who’ll be the Cowboys?”
Matthew turned and called across the room.
Ahling, Chuck, Yerl!”
They entered into involved negotiations, but

“Hey
it

Janie,

developed

no one really wanted to be the Cowboys. They all
wanted to be Indians.
In the observation booth behind the one-way, Dr. Jahan
that

Bhadravati turned to his companions, who at that moment
included Bonnie, Captain Sanchez of the Seeker , and a
leading representative of Earth’s government. Handshakes
were exchanged all around, but the children in the room
beyond would have found the adults’ enthusiasm at a display of the commonplace very puzzling.

'

'

-

.

.

"

'
•

•

•

s
•

•

-

'
-

,
_

*
.

"
-

'
•

'

'

> V(

•
'

fa

1

-

•1

:

...

.

>V.

•

'

J '<

:

i

‘
.

’

*j

A

.

>

1

Bonnie was

chatting

with

Ryo

as

they strolled from the shuttle toward
the laboratory complex when the first

<1

thunder reached the camp from
overhead. It arose in the north and grew steadily louder
until a pair of quadruple-winged ships roared by, rattling
the trees fringing the glade and scaring hell out of the
rising

arboreals.

The two walkers pressed themselves back beneath a canopy of chamelocloth. So did the other humans who’d
been out in the comparative cool of early morning.
After a decent wait Bonnie leaned out to squint toward
“
the southwest. Think they saw us?”
“I don’t know,” said one of the shuttle’s crew from beneath the overhanging limbs of a nearby tree. He too was
staring worriedly southward. “They were awfully low and
moving damn fast.” He emerged from concealment. “I’d
better get to

my

station, just in case.”

Bonnie was about to join him when she felt restraining
pressure on her arm.
“I do not think we were observed,” Ryo told her. “You
see, I am almost positive they were not looking for us.”
“Then what were they doing out here, at that altitude?”
She noticed his oddly rigid posture. “Is something else
wrong?”
“Very wrong.” Memories rose up, threatened to submerge all other thoughts. Fear and anger mixed inside him.
“Those weren’t Thranx ships. Those were AAnn warshuttles. I know, because I’ve seen them before.”
“We’ve got to help.” Sanchez glared around at the hastily assembled conference. They were in the shuttle’s cargo
hold, which had been converted to a conference chamber,

among

other things.

not our business to get involved in local squabbles,”
the military attache reminded them perfunctorily. “We’re
here uninvited. Our presence constitutes a dangerous provocation to the Thranx government. There is also the Pro“It’s

ject to

consider.

We

could not

assist the

local colonists

without revealing our presence, and that in turn would
surely spell an end to our highly promising experiments

gazed coolly down toward Ryo.
“Personal feelings must not be allowed to divert us from

here.”

He

217

218
our principal reason for being here. We have no formal
relations with the Thranx. The same is true for the AAnn.
I have no basis for initiating hostilities against a neutral
and uncontacted alien race.”
“You’ll pardon me if I disagree with that.” Sanchez gave

him a wan smile. “I’ve established to my satisfaction that it
was the AAnn who, deliberately and unprovoked, attacked
the Seeker. I had many killed and several wounded. I’d call
that ample provocation for, at the minimum, an instructive
reprisal.”

“The attack on your

ship could

derstanding,” the attache argued.

have arisen from misun-

He

didn’t enjoy the posi-

he was forced to take, but he defended it admirably.
“We could be jeopardizing any future relationships with

tion

the

AAnn race.”

“Your pardon,
of the

room

sir.”

One

of the xenologists at the far end

AAnn
diagrammed by mv

raised a timorous hand. “If these

conpro-

form to the psychosocial pattern
gramming, then we stand the best chance of making a
peace with them by showing a willingness to fight.”
“That’s crazy,” the attache snapped.
“An apt AAnn adjective,” said Ryo, whose knowledge of

Terranglo speech had progressed to an appreciation of

allit-

eration.

“Their profile fits, however,” the quiet specialist said
with some conviction.
The attache, outgunned, withdrew into silence.
“You must, of course, make your own decision based on
the knowledge you have and your own customs,” Ryo said
gently. “I am under no such restraints. I must take my
harvester and render whatever assistance I can, regardless
of personal risk. Besides, there is little you could accom-

For one thing, you have no satisfactory ground transportation. For another, you do not have
“I’m afraid that we do, Ryo,” Sanchez informed him.
The Thranx made an instinctive gesture of fourth-degree

—

plish.

astonishment.

know

was designed to be a wholly peaceful mission,” she continued, “and it should remain so with regard
to human-Thranx relations. But considering our former imprisonment, surely you can understand that we wouldn’t set
down on a Thranx planet unarmed.”
“I

this

219

“No.” Ryo

tried to conceal his considerable upset. “I

do

not understand that.”
The captain shrugged. “I’m sorry. Regardless, it remains
that we have weapons.” She gazed around the room. “I
propose that we use them to demonstrate our mental constitution to the

Informally,
the attache.

AAnn, and

to aid our

newfound

friends.

would seem.” She focused her attention on
“Of course, I cannot give the order to release

it

weaponry for use here.”

The

drummed

on the arm of his
chair. “I still haven’t heard a strong enough reason. It’s
insane to take up arms against one race on behalf of another that we have no relations with.”
“The whole experiment sounded insane when Ryo first
proposed it,” Bonnie reminded him. “There’s something
else you haven’t thought of. None of you.” Her gaze included Sanchez. “What of the larvae we’ve borrowed from
the Paszex Nursery? Their parents and clanmates are all
back there. If they’re killed we’ll have relations of a differattache

ent sort to deal with, far

his fingers

more complicated

relations.

“Also, by assisting the locals we have a chance to insinuate ourselves into their good graces. That would greatly
aid the Project.” She looked hard at the attache. “Not

hinder or finish it, as you claim. I feel it’s time to take the
next step, according to the Project programming. We can’t
stay hidden here forever.”
“A most succinct summation.” Bhadravati smiled pleasantly at the attache. “I should very much like to have a
gun, please. In the interest of furthering the Project.” This
sentiment was echoed strongly by most of the others in the

chamber.
Ryo’s feelings were confused. It was marvelous finally to
have committed the humans against the AAnn. He would
rather have accomplished it under different circumstances,
in a different place, but the web of existence had dictated
it be in Paszex. He would cope.
At the same time, the presence of weapons on board the
shuttle was a discomfiting revelation. Not one had see fit
to come forward to tell him about it. Perhaps, he mused,
because my reaction was anticipated.
In spite of the successes and accomplishments of the past
months, had Wuu in the final analysis been right all along?

220

Were

had befriended really incurably warlike and violent? Or was the presence of arms here
merely an understandable human reaction and precaution?
Dissection of philosophies would have to wait. All that
mattered now was getting to Paszex as rapidly as possible.
The harvester could rush there faster than the humans’
shuttle, which had been made a part of the landscape.
Of course, the AAnn ships might not be heading for
Paszex. That would spare him a lot of trouble.
Perhaps three dozen armed humans were ready and it
was impossible to fit them all inside the harvester. The excess sat on top, clung to the sides. Ryo thoughtfully set the
interior thermostat at near freezing, which his passengers
found delightfully refreshing.
How long ago had he rumbled through the jungle in a
survey crawler on a similar mission, to try and disrupt an
AAnn attack on his home? Surely, if the AAnn were intent
on Paszex again they would remember and post guards
around their shuttles. But they would be expecting only a
possible charge by agricultural machinery, not a heavily
armed force of aliens.
The military attache was present with his several associates. As trained soldiers, they easily and immediately assumed command. Ryo noticed how alert they appeared,
how intense in posture and speech. That worried him as
much as the presence of weapons had.
He’d observed humans in a warlike state months ago,
when Bonnie and the lamented Loo had escaped from their
military prison on northern Hivehom. That he could understand. Then they’d been motivated by fear. He wasn’t sure
what was motivating the humans now.
With the humans on top and sides hanging on tightly,
Ryo gently put the versatile harvester on lift. There was no
point in trying to hug the earth now, and they didn’t have
days in which to slog through the jungle. On full hover he
these strange bipeds he

set the craft for Paszex.

They set down into the trees at a sufficient distance to
keep them off AAnn detection equipment. It took as long
to negotiate the final short stretch of jungle separating
them from the hive fields as it had to hover all the way

from the glade.
The invaders had

set

down

in a different orchard.

As

in

221

smoke was rising from ruined venFor some perverse reason the AAnn

the previous nightmare,

and intakes.
seemed to have selected Paszex as a test hive for their inimical soirees. Ryo had no idea how many small, isolated
hives on Willow-wane and other colony worlds had suffered similar repeated attacks, but it was obvious that an
alliance with the humans was more necessary than his own
government was willing to admit.
Distant explosions sounded from the direction of the
hive. “We will approach stealthily at first,” Ryo was telling
the military attache, “and try to slip close to- them. I found
that if you threaten their shuttles’ engines they will
But the attache was already making loud mouth noises
which even the knowledgeable Ryo could not interpret.
Then the humans fell like lice from the sides and rear of
the harvester, and were running remarkably mobile zigzag
patterns through the field of shoulder-high weoneon and
tilators

—

asfi.

doubtful that their numbers would have overawed
the well-trained AAnn soldiery. On the other hand, the
sight of several dozen alien creatures waving alien devices
as they charged from supposedly empty jungle shrieking at
the tops of their lungs and generally comporting themselves
like dangerous mental defectives would be enough to unsetIt’s

tle

the most self-possessed warrior of any race.

The AAnn guards fired wildly and often blindly while
the humans picked their shots with surprising accuracy.
Bonnie, Captain Sanchez, Dr. Bhadravati, and

all

those

whom Ryo

had come to think of as peaceful, gentle scholars were blasting away with an enthusiasm that made Ryo
feel very sad for them. He was no longer frightened of the
possibilities they presented. Fear had become pity.
They need us, these poor bipeds, he told himself. He
watched as an energy bolt seared the wingtip of one shuttlecraft. They need us far more than we need them. They
are the ones who should be crying for alliance.
The earth erupted and he ducked below the harvester’s
roof for protection.
shot had struck something more than

A

volatile within the

body of the

farther

AAnn

ship. It disin-

tegrated in a storm of flaming plastic and flying metal
shards.
side,

The explosion knocked

the other shuttle over on

crumpling landing gear and one of the four wings.

its

222

humans had been shot, but the damage
had been done. The startled AAnn who had not perished
Several of the

grouped themselves into a surrender formation, threw
down their weapons, and linked arms in a gesture of defiant submission. They glared through slit pupils at the peculiar beings surrounding them.
Ryo watched and wondered what the commander of the
AAnn base ship orbiting somewhere above must be thinking.

He

know

did not

if

the

AAnn

suffered

from panic.

AAnn

were staggering from the intact shuttlecraft.
Those returning hastily from the underground corridors of
Paszex took note of the submission ceremony their fellows
were performing and joined in.
It was not until evening that it dawned on the invaders
how greatly they outnumbered their captors. By then it was
too late to organize any resistance. Besides, they had performed the submission ceremony. Regardless of their anger, they had committed themselves. So they contented
Other

themselves with

much

internal grumbling, intense study of

the alien victors, and disparaging
ficers,

comments about

who’d mistaken strangeness for

By then

their of-

superiority.

community had
begun to emerge. The local Servitors were joined by ordinary citizens who’d armed themselves with utensils and
manufacturing implements. The captured AAnn regarded
them with unconcealed disdain, their tails twitching listthe inhabitants of the stricken

about under the watchful gaze of
the humans. Meanwhile the hivefolk kept their distance,
their curiosity focused more on their fearful saviors than

lessly as they shuffled

on the

belligerent

AAnn.

Eventually someone noticed Ryo standing among and
conversing with the bipeds. He reluctantly made his way to
the strangely garbed Thranx, striving to get no nearer the

monstrous aliens than was absolutely necessary.
“I am Kerarilzex,” the Elder announced. His antennae
were withered, but not his voice. “I am Six on the Hive
Council of Eight. We would give our thanks to these peculiar visitors”
he’d been about to use the Thranx word for
monster and at the last minute thought better of it “but I
would not know how to do so. It appears you can converse
with them.” Then he made a slow gesture of third-degree
uncertainty coupled with one of rising amazement. “I be-

—

—

223
lieve

—

I believe I

may know

you, youngster.

Can

it

be that

you are of the Z ex?”
“I

am

called Ryozenzuzex, Elder.”

“The young agricultural expert who vanished so long
ago. Truly do I remember you!” He paused, thinking furiously. “Word came to us all the way from Ciccikalk that
you had become something of a dangerous renegade.”
“Something of that, yes. I am a renegade from and danger to the blind, the callous, and the reactionary. No one
else has anything to fear from me.” Now that the AAnn
had been neutralized, other problems in their own fashion
more serious were beginning to resurface.
“Rest deep and warm, Elder. Neither I nor my friends,”
and he indicated the monsters, “are any threat to the hive.
The contrary is true. All will be explained.” I hope, he
add silently. “All that matters is what I have accom-

—

—

plished in

my absence.”

Bonnie had walked over to stand next to him. She was
gazing with interest at the Elder, who found the attention
very upsetting.
“Who are these
to be

.

.

among them?” he

“It’s

tles

.

creatures,

and how have you come

asked.

a long story,” Bonnie said via the appropriate whis-

and

clicks.

The Elder was

flabbergasted. Reflexively, he threw

back

a stream of questions.
“I

don’t understand,” she told

him

patiently.

“You’ll

have to speak more slowly. I’m not very fluent yet.”
Ryo translated the rough places for both of them. The
Elder’s active mind was homing in on another unsettling
thought.

we will
be safe from AAnn depredations from now on. Would you
by any chance know what happened to six children who

“We

thank you for our hive’s salvation.

I think

were taken from the Nursery several months ago? Their
Nurse vanished with them. A heinous crime.”
“And a necessary one, I’m afraid.” Ryo was past caring
what local Elders thought. Having broken so many important laws in a comparatively brief span he had no compunction at mentioning yet another perfidy.
“The Nurse Falmiensazex had nothing to do with the disappearance.” He had to hesitate before he could go on. “She

224
a comasleep. That

lies in

was

my

fault. It

was

also neces-

sary.”

The Elder was watching him shrewdly. “You
essary, yet you show signs of remorse.”

call

it

nec-

— —

“She is was my premate.”
“Ah.” The council member was trying to sort events in
his mind. “And the larvae?”
“All are well, healthy, and maturing.” In areas you can’t
begin to imagine, he added silently.
“There will have to be an adjudication, of course,” mur-

mured the Elder.
“Of course.”
“What are they

“My most

talking about?” Bonnie asked him.

recent crimes. I will have to surrender myself

soon to confinement.”
Bonnie hefted her rifle. “Not if you don’t want to, you
won’t. You’re too valuable, too important to the Project to
languish in some cell while we try and muddle through first
contact without you, Ryo.”

you everything will turn out all right.” He put
first a truhand and then a foothand on her arm. “A society
functions because its citizens choose to abide by its laws.”
“That sounds funny coming from you.”
“So I am selective.” There was no accompanying gesture
of humor. Bonnie wondered if that was for the benefit of
“I assure

the watchful Elder.

“The matter must be

discussed, Bonnie.

It

will

take

time.”

As

turned out, it did not.
An echo of the thunder the}f’d hidden from earlier now
rose out of the south. It grew to deafening proportions as
half a dozen sleek shuttlecraft passed low overhead. They
it

commenced a wide

turn that would bring them circling

back toward Paszex.
Bonnie and the other humans had a bad moment until
they noticed the loud and clearly celebratory reaction of
the hivefolk. “Our ships,” Ryo told her in response to the
unasked question.
“Late again,” muttered the Elder Kerarilzex, “but at
least in force this time. I hope others caught the command
ship before it could flee orbit. Words will be composed,” he
added darkly. “This is the fifth time in the last seventy

225
years. Other hives endure worse. I

ple will stand for

“And well you

it

much

do not believe the peo-

longer.”

shouldn’t,” Bonnie agreed in passable

Low

Thranx.

The Thranx commanding

officer,

of the fifteenth rank,

had stared through his compensating viewer as his modest
armada passed low over the site of Paszex. He made mental
note of the two ruined AAnn warshuttles, the cluster of
AAnn prisoners, the armed hivefolk, and the astonishing
aliens in their midst.

There was no immediate way of ascertaining which side
the horrific bipeds were on. He could not fire on them
since they were mixed in with the hivefolk. It was very
frustrating.

The

military of both species were livid.

The bureaucrats

were most upset. The politicians were confused and angry.
The scientists were disturbed.
Each group had dreamed of holding center stage when
an intelligent, space-traversing race was contacted. Instead,
the moment of glory had been usurped by some secretive
researchers, a mutinous human crew, and an outcast alien
agriculturalist.

There were pains and problems. The parents of the boys
and girls who’d traveled to Willow-wane as part of the Project did their best to

muster a feeling of betrayal. True,

they had agreed to commit their children to Project control
in return for a year of free room, board, and education, but
to some of them the whole business still seemed like kidnaping. None had thought to inquire as to the precise location of the Project school or its distance from their homes.
The idea of lifting a group of impressionable youngsters

and then plunking them down among a bunch of pale
wormlike monsters grated against the public conscience.

No

one, of course, gave a thought to the effect the children

might have had on the impressionable Thranx larvae.
The Thranx populace had an advantage because it had
already been exposed to two semi-intelligent species and the
AAnn. It was their highly developed sense of propriety that
suffered most. Events had not unfolded according to carefully prepared procedures. When procedure was violated
well, the Thranx were very strong on organization and

226
rather less so at improvisation,

and you simply did not im-

contact with an alien race.
There was also the matter of larval abduction. Unlike
the humans, Ryo did not have the permission of parents to
enroll their offspring in the Project school. His action was

provise

first

kidnaping, whatever the motives.
Ryo didn’t care. He agreed with everything the adjudicators said. All that mattered was the Project. Its apparent
success was vindication enough for him. None of the larvae

had been harmed, physically or mentally, by their experience. The Nursery supervisors who attended them could
attest to that.

very hard to rouse public opinion against someone
who politely agrees with everything his prosecutors say
while patiently awaiting martyrdom.
His strongest condemnation came not from government
or public but from Fal. Under proper care she recovered
rapidly from her comasleep, whereupon she laid into him
far more devastatingly than any hivemother. Against her
It’s

of outrages he could offer only one thought in his defense: the fact that he had succeeded.
As to the avowed success of the Project, even the most
list

member of either species could not deny the eviNot only did the Thranx larvae and human children

jingoistic

dence.

tolerate each other, they

had grown nearly inseparable.

Monster played happily alongside monster.
Recordings showing human children gamboling with
their Thranx counterparts rapidly dispelled the initial outcry that had arisen on Earth and her colonies. How can
something be considered a monster when a seven-year-old
girl with pigtails can ride it bareback, or a couple of boys
can tussle with it in a sandpile and all three are obviously
having a wonderful time?
Reaction among the Thranx was, in accord with their
nature, somewhat slower in forming. Grudging acceptance
began to appear when chips revealed that the horribly flexible alien adolescents had no intention of butchering and
barbecuing their larval companions.

A major ticklish problem was partially resolved when the
Radical Agnostic theologians of Earth discovered their exact counterparts among the Aesthetic Philosopher sect of

227

Hivehom. They answered the nervous and awkward question raised by many as to which side the Deity might be on
by proclaiming that he was most likely sitting back and
watching the whole business with considerable amusement.
Twenty years would pass before the first treaties were
drawn and more than that before the boldest among both
.species brought up the specter of Amalgamation. For the
time being, preliminary agreements were sufficient. They
were attested to and duly recorded by wary officials on
both sides whose hands had been forced, not by strength of
arms or superior intellectual power, but by children cavorting in a playroom.
Ryo was formally relieved of his long-neglected agricultural duties and assigned to the permanent contact group.
This was placed outside Paszex, which now assumed an
importance beyond the export of vegetable products and
handicrafts. Many of the latter, incidentally, were traded to
the humans of the Project. Once again the pioneers had
stolen a march on the official planners. Trade had begun.
The airfield was hastily enlarged so it could handle shuttlecraft. First official visitors were exchanged, and as a
few handicrafts and mechanisms traversed the gulf between the stars, it was discovered that the profit motive
was another characteristic human and Thranx shared.
So it was that contact was not forged so much as hastily
cobbled together. But it was a beginning, the most important part of understanding.

Even Fal eventually reconciled with her now famous
premate, though he was still regarded as a traitor among
some of his own kind and an enemy spy in certain unre-

human

Wuuzelansem was
brought from Ciccikalk, still suspicious of humankind but
more flexible than most Thranx. His conversion came rapidly when some of the humans became fluent enough to
paranoid

lentingly

admire

circles.

his poetry.

know how we did without them for so long,” he
once muttered to Ryo after a recital. “Their appreciation of
“I don’t

true art seems as boundless as their enthusiasm.

ernment

may acquire an

more valuable.”
“Which is?”

far

ally,

but

I

The gov-

have acquired something

228

Wuu

returned to the display
chamber to acknowledge the humans’ peculiar form of ap-

“A new

audience!” and

plause.

A

day arrived when several of the
original Project members had to return to their homes. Two
would travel to Centaurus, one to New Riviera, and several

Ten years

passed.

to Earth.

Jahan Bhadravati was one of them. Bonnie was another.
They stood next to the Paszex shuttleport’s human-service
area, still clad in Willow-wane duty uniform, which was to
say practically nothing, and waited for departure call. It
was a lovely midseason day. The temperature was 35° C
and the humidity hovered near 92 percent.
No officials saw them off with speeches. In the intervening decade the coming and going of humans at Paszex
had ceased to be worthy of special notice. There was a farewell party, however. Ryozenzuzex was there, accompanied by a young Thranx adult named Qul and a tall, skinny
human named Wilson Asambi. They were working together
to help develop gentler strains of a hybrid fruit.

Bonnie took a last look around the surface of Willowwane. The distant lines of orchard and jungle, the little
thickets of air-intake stacks, the shuttleway, all were old
friends to be left behind but retained in memory. She
looked much the same as she had when she’d first set foot
on Willow-wane ten years before. The world was a fine
place for keeping fit. There was gray in her hair now, and
contentment in her expression.
“I suppose you’ll continue at your post,” she said to Ryo.
He shrugged, a human gesture that was becoming quite
popular among Thranx, and uttered a confirmatory whistle
of agreement. He reflected on the gesture and its meaning.
We give so much to each other, he thought. Gesture as well
as science, habit

as

smiled inwardly.

Two

fled to

wherever

it

well as art. Especially poetry.

He

Wuuzelansem had
poets retreated to, fighting and

years ago, old

was old

kicking and disparaging the state of the universe all the
way, but not before he’d seen his poetry wildly praised by
the very monsters he’d once sought to avoid contact with.

Ryo missed Wuu. Even
ommatidia

all

the time.

if

they hadn’t seen ommatidia to

229

A

high-pitched whistle sounded from behind. Fal was
waiting near the entryway to Paszex. She still would not

have close contact with humans. Her trauma was understandable, since they’d been responsible for luring her premate away and forcing him to strike her. She would barely

—

tolerate them.

he told himself. Friendship later. If anything, progress on the latter was ahead of schedule.
To his surprise, he noticed that Bonnie was making eye
moisture. Ryo waited to find out whether it was significant
of happiness or distress. Water of delight, water of depression, Wuu had called it in one of his poems.
Toleration

first,

“I’m crying out of both,” she told him. “I’m glad that
things have turned out so well and I’m sad that after all
these years it’s finally time to leave. I just can’t turn down

—

a university position on Earth. Loo Loo would have liked
the way things have turned out.”
“There’s still a lot of work to be done,” Ryo said. “I’ll
retain

my

position as long as I’m able to help.”

Bhadravati shuffled his feet and said nothing. Conversation had never been the scientist’s strong point, Ryo knew.
He felt a great sadness within himself at the coming departure of two of his oldest

human

friends.

“There is no reason to cry, my friend,” Ryo told Bonnie.
“We have nothing but reason for happiness. We shall meet
again someday.”
Bonnie was too much of a realist to believe that. Circumstance and distance, the ancient enemies of acquaintance,

would conspire

to prevent

it.

Nevertheless she replied with a smiling, “I hope so,

Ryo,” as she reached out both hands to touch the
proffered antennae.

The

interspecies gesture

automatic as a handshake.

Ryo

tips of his

was now as

repeated the gesture with

Bhadravati.

“These youngsters here,” he said, indicating Asambi and
Qul, “will be taking on the truly important work now.
Nothing can prevent the deepening of our friendship.” She
was still crying and he made a gesture of gentle thirddegree admonishment.
“Please, friend, let there be no more tears at this parting.
Not water tears from you nor crystal tears from me, would

230
that I

you.

were able to manufacture them.

It’s

a gesture I envy

A small but intriguing physical difference.”

“The only

significant

differences

between us anymore

are physical,” said Bhadravati.
“Only physical,” Ryo agreed, “and that
day. Shape and composition
standing is present.”
“I thought old

Wuu

mean

means

each
nothing when underless

was the poet and not you,” Bonnie

said.

of everything you admire eventually rubs off on
you. I’m sure you’ll be happy to live for a while now with
less weighty matters on your mind.”
“Well, I will have my classes,” she admitted, “and Jahan
his research and his books to compose.” From the way they

“A

little

one another Ryo thought Bonnie might mate after
all. The soft beeping sounded from around them. Other passengers began to move toward the waiting shuttle. Not all
of them were human.

gazed

at

“We

should board.” Bhadravati put a hand on her shoulder. She nodded, didn’t speak, looked back down at Ryo.
Then she reached out and hugged him. Blue-green chiton
slid against soft flesh. It was another gesture Ryo had
learned but which he’d always observed performed by two
humans. It was much too rough to be civilized, but he politely said

nothing.

As

they moved toward the shuttle he made the human
gesture of farewell, waving two hands at them. He followed
with the far more complex and subtle four-handed gesture
of Thranx good-bye. At the base of the ramp Bonnie imitated

it

as best she could with only

two hands. Then they

disappeared into the ship.

He

toward the burrow entryway that led down
into the busy terminal. The impatient Fal had withdrawn
started

into the comforting confines below.

Bonnie and Dr. Bhadravati appeared content, and that
thought made him happy. Everyone deserved contentment.
They’d worked hard and long and deserved their share of
mental peace.
The fruit he’d struggled so hard to plant had taken root.
It had done more than survive. In ten years it prospered
enormously and now showed signs of flowering into something far more than he’d ever dreamed of, more than mere


The relationship between human and Thranx
was becoming more than deep. There were signs, signs and
portents, that someday in the far future it could become

friendship.

truly symbiotic.

And

one Ryo had not considered. One he hadn’t thought much about during the last
there

was another

busy, exciting ten years.

He benefit.
The found something useful realization
to do with came as a shock.
his life after all.



