THE NEXT 100 YEARS
A FORE CAST FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
George Friedman 


An Introduction to the American Age


Imagine that you were alive in the summer of 1900, living in London,
then the capital of the world. Europe ruled the Eastern Hemisphere.
There was hardly a place that, if not ruled directly, was not indirectly
controlled from a European capital. Europe was at peace and enjoying un­
precedented prosperity. Indeed, European interdependence due to trade
and investment was so great that serious people were claiming that war had
become impossible—and if not impossible, would end within weeks of be­
ginning—because global ﬁnancial markets couldn’t withstand the strain.
The future seemed ﬁxed: a peaceful, prosperous Europe would rule the
world.
Imagine yourself now in the summer of 1920. Europe had been torn apart
by an agonizing war. The continent was in tatters. The Austro-Hungarian,
Russian, German, and Ottoman empires were gone and millions had died
in a war that lasted for years. The war ended when an American army of a
million men intervened—an army that came and then just as quickly left.
Communism dominated Russia, but it was not clear that it could survive.
Countries that had been on the periphery of European power, like the
United States and Japan, suddenly emerged as great powers. But one thing


was certain—the peace treaty that had been imposed on Germany guaran­
teed that it would not soon reemerge.
Imagine the summer of 1940. Germany had not only reemerged but
conquered France and dominated Europe. Communism had survived and
the Soviet Union now was allied with Nazi Germany. Great Britain alone
stood against Germany, and from the point of view of most reasonable peo­
ple, the war was over. If there was not to be a thousand-year Reich, then cer­
tainly Europe’s fate had been decided for a century. Germany would
dominate Europe and inherit its empire.
Imagine now the summer of 1960. Germany had been crushed in the
war, defeated less than ﬁve years later. Europe was occupied, split down the
middle by the United States and the Soviet Union. The European empires
were collapsing, and the United States and Soviet Union were competing
over who would be their heir. The United States had the Soviet Union
surrounded and, with an overwhelming arsenal of nuclear weapons, could
annihilate it in hours. The United States had emerged as the global super­
power. It dominated all of the world’s oceans, and with its nuclear force
could dictate terms to anyone in the world. Stalemate was the best the Sovi­
ets could hope for—unless the Soviets invaded Germany and conquered
Europe. That was the war everyone was preparing for. And in the back
of everyone’s mind, the Maoist Chinese, seen as fanatical, were the other
danger.
Now imagine the summer of 1980. The United States had been defeated
in a seven-year war—not by the Soviet Union, but by communist North
Vietnam. The nation was seen, and saw itself, as being in retreat. Expelled
from Vietnam, it was then expelled from Iran as well, where the oil ﬁelds,
which it no longer controlled, seemed about to fall into the hands of the So­
viet Union. To contain the Soviet Union, the United States had formed an
alliance with Maoist China—the American president and the Chinese
chairman holding an amiable meeting in Beijing. Only this alliance seemed
able to contain the powerful Soviet Union, which appeared to be surging.
Imagine now the summer of 2000. The Soviet Union had completely
collapsed. China was still communist in name but had become capitalist in
practice. NATO had advanced into Eastern Europe and even into the for­
mer Soviet Union. The world was prosperous and peaceful. Everyone knew

that geopolitical considerations had become secondary to economic consid­
erations, and the only problems were regional ones in basket cases like Haiti
or Kosovo.
Then came September 11, 2001, and the world turned on its head again.
At a certain level, when it comes to the future, the only thing one can be
sure of is that common sense will be wrong. There is no magic twenty-year
cycle; there is no simplistic force governing this pattern. It is simply that the
things that appear to be so permanent and dominant at any given moment
in history can change with stunning rapidity. Eras come and go. In interna­
tional relations, the way the world looks right now is not at all how it will
look in twenty years . . . or even less. The fall of the Soviet Union was hard
to imagine, and that is exactly the point. Conventional political analysis suf­
fers from a profound failure of imagination. It imagines passing clouds to be
permanent and is blind to powerful, long-term shifts taking place in full
view of the world.
If we were at the beginning of the twentieth century, it would be impos­
sible to forecast the particular events I’ve just listed. But there are some
things that could have been—and, in fact, were—forecast. For example, it
was obvious that Germany, having united in 1871, was a major power in an
insecure position (trapped between Russia and France) and wanted to re­
deﬁne the European and global systems. Most of the conﬂicts in the ﬁrst
half of the twentieth century were about Germany’s status in Europe. While
the times and places of wars couldn’t be forecast, the probability that there
would be a war could be and was forecast by many Europeans.
The harder part of this equation would be forecasting that the wars
would be so devastating and that after the ﬁrst and second world wars were
over, Europe would lose its empire. But there were those, particularly after
the invention of dynamite, who predicted that war would now be cata­
strophic. If the forecasting on technology had been combined with the fore­
casting on geopolitics, the shattering of Europe might well have been
predicted. Certainly the rise of the United States and Russia was predicted
in the nineteenth century. Both Alexis de Tocqueville and Friedrich Niet­
zsche forecast the preeminence of these two countries. So, standing at the
beginning of the twentieth century, it would have been possible to forecast
its general outlines, with discipline and some luck.
Standing at the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century, we need to identify
the single pivotal event for this century, the equivalent of German uniﬁca­
tion for the twentieth century. After the debris of the European empire is
cleared away, as well as what’s left of the Soviet Union, one power remains
standing and overwhelmingly powerful. That power is the United States.
Certainly, as is usually the case, the United States currently appears to be
making a mess of things around the world. But it’s important not to be con­
fused by the passing chaos. The United States is economically, militarily,
and politically the most powerful country in the world, and there is no real
challenger to that power. Like the Spanish-American War, a hundred years
from now the war between the United States and the radical Islamists will
be little remembered regardless of the prevailing sentiment of this time.
Ever since the Civil War, the United States has been on an extraordinary
economic surge. It has turned from a marginal developing nation into an
economy bigger than the next four countries combined. Militarily, it has
gone from being an insigniﬁcant force to dominating the globe. Politically,
the United States touches virtually everything, sometimes intentionally and
sometimes simply because of its presence. As you read this book, it will seem
that it is America-centric, written from an American point of view. That
may be true, but the argument I’m making is that the world does, in fact,
pivot around the United States.
This is not only due to American power. It also has to do with a funda­
mental shift in the way the world works. For the past ﬁve hundred years,
Europe was the center of the international system, its empires creating a sin­
gle global system for the ﬁrst time in human history. The main highway to
Europe was the North Atlantic. Whoever controlled the North Atlantic
controlled access to Europe—and Europe’s access to the world. The basic
geography of global politics was locked into place.
Then, in the early 1980s, something remarkable happened. For the ﬁrst
time in history, transpaciﬁc trade equaled transatlantic trade. With Europe
reduced to a collection of secondary powers after World War II, and the
shift in trade patterns, the North Atlantic was no longer the single key to
anything. Now whatever country controlled both the North Atlantic and

the Paciﬁc could control, if it wished, the world’s trading system, and there­
fore the global economy. In the twenty-ﬁrst century, any nation located on
both oceans has a tremendous advantage.
Given the cost of building naval power and the huge cost of deploying it
around the world, the power native to both oceans became the preeminent
actor in the international system for the same reason that Britain dominated
the nineteenth century: it lived on the sea it had to control. In this way,
North America has replaced Europe as the center of gravity in the world,
and whoever dominates North America is virtually assured of being the
dominant global power. For the twenty-ﬁrst century at least, that will be the
United States.
The inherent power of the United States coupled with its geographic po­
sition makes the United States the pivotal actor of the twenty-ﬁrst century.
That certainly doesn’t make it loved. On the contrary, its power makes it
feared. The history of the twenty-ﬁrst century, therefore, particularly the
ﬁrst half, will revolve around two opposing struggles. One will be secondary
powers forming coalitions to try to contain and control the United States.
The second will be the United States acting preemptively to prevent an ef­
fective coalition from forming.
If we view the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century as the dawn of the
American Age (superseding the European Age), we see that it began with a
group of Muslims seeking to re-create the Caliphate—the great Islamic em­
pire that once ran from the Atlantic to the Paciﬁc. Inevitably, they had to
strike at the United States in an attempt to draw the world’s primary power
into war, trying to demonstrate its weakness in order to trigger an Islamic
uprising. The United States responded by invading the Islamic world. But
its goal wasn’t victory. It wasn’t even clear what victory would mean. Its goal
was simply to disrupt the Islamic world and set it against itself, so that an Is­
lamic empire could not emerge.
The United States doesn’t need to win wars. It needs to simply disrupt
things so the other side can’t build up sufﬁcient strength to challenge it. On
one level, the twenty-ﬁrst century will see a series of confrontations involv­
ing lesser powers trying to build coalitions to control American behavior
and the United States’ mounting military operations to disrupt them. The
twenty-ﬁrst century will see even more war than the twentieth century, but


the wars will be much less catastrophic, because of both technological
changes and the nature of the geopolitical challenge.
As we’ve seen, the changes that lead to the next era are always shockingly
unexpected, and the ﬁrst twenty years of this new century will be no excep­
tion. The U.S.–Islamist war is already ending and the next conﬂict is in
sight. Russia is re-creating its old sphere of inﬂuence, and that sphere of in­
ﬂuence will inevitably challenge the United States. The Russians will be
moving westward on the great northern European plain. As Russia recon­
structs its power, it will encounter the U.S.-dominated NATO in the three
Baltic countries—Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania—as well as in Poland.
There will be other points of friction in the early twenty-ﬁrst century, but
this new cold war will supply the ﬂash points after the U.S.–Islamist war
dies down.
The Russians can’t avoid trying to reassert power, and the United States
can’t avoid trying to resist. But in the end Russia can’t win. Its deep internal
problems, massively declining population, and poor infrastructure ulti­
mately make Russia’s long-term survival prospects bleak. And the second
cold war, less frightening and much less global than the ﬁrst, will end as the
ﬁrst did, with the collapse of Russia.
There are many who predict that China is the next challenger to the
United States, not Russia. I don’t agree with that view for three reasons.
First, when you look at a map of China closely, you see that it is really a very
isolated country physically. With Siberia in the north, the Himalayas and
jungles to the south, and most of China’s population in the eastern part of
the country, the Chinese aren’t going to easily expand. Second, China has
not been a major naval power for centuries, and building a navy requires a
long time not only to build ships but to create well-trained and experi­
enced sailors.
Third, there is a deeper reason for not worrying about China. China is
inherently unstable. Whenever it opens its borders to the outside world, the
coastal region becomes prosperous, but the vast majority of Chinese in the
interior remain impoverished. This leads to tension, conﬂict, and instability.
It also leads to economic decisions made for political reasons, resulting in
inefﬁciency and corruption. This is not the ﬁrst time that China has opened
itself to foreign trade, and it will not be the last time that it becomes unstable


as a result. Nor will it be the last time that a ﬁgure like Mao emerges to
close the country off from the outside, equalize the wealth— or poverty—
and begin the cycle anew. There are some who believe that the trends of the
last thirty years will continue indeﬁnitely. I believe the Chinese cycle will
move to its next and inevitable phase in the coming decade. Far from being
a challenger, China is a country the United States will be trying to bolster
and hold together as a counterweight to the Russians. Current Chinese eco­
nomic dynamism does not translate into long-term success.
In the middle of the century, other powers will emerge, countries that
aren’t thought of as great powers today, but that I expect will become more
powerful and assertive over the next few decades. Three stand out in partic­
ular. The ﬁrst is Japan. It’s the second-largest economy in the world and the
most vulnerable, being highly dependent on the importation of raw materi­
als, since it has almost none of its own. With a history of militarism, Japan
will not remain the marginal paciﬁstic power it has been. It cannot. Its own
deep population problems and abhorrence of large-scale immigration will
force it to look for new workers in other countries. Japan’s vulnerabilities,
which I’ve written about in the past and which the Japanese have managed
better than I’ve expected up until this point, in the end will force a shift in
policy.
Then there is Turkey, currently the seventeenth-largest economy in the
world. Historically, when a major Islamic empire has emerged, it has been
dominated by the Turks. The Ottomans collapsed at the end of World War
I, leaving modern Turkey in its wake. But Turkey is a stable platform in the
midst of chaos. The Balkans, the Caucasus, and the Arab world to the south
are all unstable. As Turkey’s power grows—and its economy and military are
already the most powerful in the region—so will Turkish inﬂuence.
Finally there is Poland. Poland hasn’t been a great power since the six­
teenth century. But it once was—and, I think, will be again. Two factors
make this possible. First will be the decline of Germany. Its economy is large
and still growing, but it has lost the dynamism it has had for two centuries.
In addition, its population is going to fall dramatically in the next ﬁfty
years, further undermining its economic power. Second, as the Russians
press on the Poles from the east, the Germans won’t have an appetite for a
third war with Russia. The United States, however, will back Poland, providing

it with massive economic and technical support. Wars—when your
country isn’t destroyed—stimulate economic growth, and Poland will be­
come the leading power in a coalition of states facing the Russians.
Japan, Turkey, and Poland will each be facing a United States even more
conﬁdent than it was after the second fall of the Soviet Union. That will be
an explosive situation. As we will see during the course of this book, the re­
lationships among these four countries will greatly affect the twenty-ﬁrst
century, leading, ultimately, to the next global war. This war will be fought
differently from any in history—with weapons that are today in the realm
of science ﬁction. But as I will try to outline, this mid-twenty-ﬁrst century
conﬂict will grow out of the dynamic forces born in the early part of the
new century.
Tremendous technical advances will come out of this war, as they did
out of World War II, and one of them will be especially critical. All sides will
be looking for new forms of energy to substitute for hydrocarbons, for many
obvious reasons. Solar power is theoretically the most efﬁcient energy source
on earth, but solar power requires massive arrays of receivers. Those re­
ceivers take up a lot of space on the earth’s surface and have many negative
environmental impacts—not to mention being subject to the disruptive cy­
cles of night and day. During the coming global war, however, concepts de­
veloped prior to the war for space-based electrical generation, beamed to
earth in the form of microwave radiation, will be rapidly translated from
prototype to reality. Getting a free ride on the back of military space launch
capability, the new energy source will be underwritten in much the same
way as the Internet or the railroads were, by government support. And that
will kick off a massive economic boom.
But underlying all of this will be the single most important fact of the
twenty-ﬁrst century: the end of the population explosion. By 2050, ad­
vanced industrial countries will be losing population at a dramatic rate. By
2100, even the most underdeveloped countries will have reached birthrates
that will stabilize their populations. The entire global system has been built
since 1750 on the expectation of continually expanding populations. More
workers, more consumers, more soldiers—this was always the expectation.
In the twenty-ﬁrst century, however, that will cease to be true. The entire
system of production will shift. The shift will force the world into a greater


dependence on technology—particularly robots that will substitute for hu­
man labor, and intensiﬁed genetic research (not so much for the purpose of
extending life but to make people productive longer).
What will be the more immediate result of a shrinking world popula­
tion? Quite simply, in the ﬁrst half of the century, the population bust will
create a major labor shortage in advanced industrial countries. Today, devel­
oped countries see the problem as keeping immigrants out. Later in the ﬁrst
half of the twenty-ﬁrst century, the problem will be persuading them to
come. Countries will go so far as to pay people to move there. This will in­
clude the United States, which will be competing for increasingly scarce im­
migrants and will be doing everything it can to induce Mexicans to come to
the United States—an ironic but inevitable shift.
These changes will lead to the ﬁnal crisis of the twenty-ﬁrst century.
Mexico currently is the ﬁfteenth-largest economy in the world. As the Euro­
peans slip out, the Mexicans, like the Turks, will rise in the rankings until by
the late twenty-ﬁrst century they will be one of the major economic powers
in the world. During the great migration north encouraged by the United
States, the population balance in the old Mexican Cession (that is, the areas
of the United States taken from Mexico in the nineteenth century) will shift
dramatically until much of the region is predominantly Mexican.
The social reality will be viewed by the Mexican government simply as
rectiﬁcation of historical defeats. By 2080 I expect there to be a serious con­
frontation between the United States and an increasingly powerful and as­
sertive Mexico. That confrontation may well have unforeseen consequences
for the United States, and will likely not end by 2100.
Much of what I’ve said here may seem pretty hard to fathom. The idea
that the twenty-ﬁrst century will culminate in a confrontation between
Mexico and the United States is certainly hard to imagine in 2009, as is a
powerful Turkey or Poland. But go back to the beginning of this chapter,
when I described how the world looked at twenty-year intervals during the
twentieth century, and you can see what I’m driving at: common sense is the
one thing that will certainly be wrong.
Obviously, the more granular the description, the less reliable it gets. It is
impossible to forecast precise details of a coming century—apart from the
fact that I’ll be long dead by then and won’t know what mistakes I made.


But it’s my contention that it is indeed possible to see the broad outlines of
what is going to happen, and to try to give it some deﬁnition, however spec­
ulative that deﬁnition might be. That’s what this book is about.

Forecasting a hundred years ahead

Before I delve into any details of global wars, population trends, or techno­
logical shifts, it is important that I address my method—that is, precisely
how I can forecast what I do. I don’t intend to be taken seriously on the de­
tails of the war in 2050 that I forecast. But I do want to be taken seriously
in terms of how wars will be fought then, about the centrality of American
power, about the likelihood of other countries challenging that power, and
about some of the countries I think will—and won’t—challenge that power.
And doing that takes some justiﬁcation. The idea of a U.S.–Mexican con­
frontation and even war will leave most reasonable people dubious, but I
would like to demonstrate why and how these assertions can be made.
One point I’ve already made is that reasonable people are incapable of
anticipating the future. The old New Left slogan “Be Practical, Demand the
Impossible” needs to be changed: “Be Practical, Expect the Impossible.”
This idea is at the heart of my method. From another, more substantial per­
spective, this is called geopolitics.
Geopolitics is not simply a pretentious way of saying “international rela­
tions.” It is a method for thinking about the world and forecasting what will
happen down the road. Economists talk about an invisible hand, in which
the self-interested, short-term activities of people lead to what Adam Smith
called “the wealth of nations.” Geopolitics applies the concept of the invisi­
ble hand to the behavior of nations and other international actors. The pur­
suit of short-term self-interest by nations and by their leaders leads, if not to
the wealth of nations, then at least to predictable behavior and, therefore,
the ability to forecast the shape of the future international system.
Geopolitics and economics both assume that the players are rational, at
least in the sense of knowing their own short-term self-interest. As rational
actors, reality provides them with limited choices. It is assumed that, on the
whole, people and nations will pursue their self-interest, if not ﬂawlessly,


then at least not randomly. Think of a chess game. On the surface, it ap­
pears that each player has twenty potential opening moves. In fact, there are
many fewer because most of these moves are so bad that they quickly lead to
defeat. The better you are at chess, the more clearly you see your options,
and the fewer moves there actually are available. The better the player, the
more predictable the moves. The grandmaster plays with absolute pre­
dictable precision—until that one brilliant, unexpected stroke.
Nations behave the same way. The millions or hundreds of millions of
people who make up a nation are constrained by reality. They generate lead­
ers who would not become leaders if they were irrational. Climbing to the
top of millions of people is not something fools often do. Leaders under­
stand their menu of next moves and execute them, if not ﬂawlessly, then at
least pretty well. An occasional master will come along with a stunningly
unexpected and successful move, but for the most part, the act of gover­
nance is simply executing the necessary and logical next step. When politi­
cians run a country’s foreign policy, they operate the same way. If a leader
dies and is replaced, another emerges and more likely than not continues
what the ﬁrst one was doing.
I am not arguing that political leaders are geniuses, scholars, or even gen­
tlemen and ladies. Simply, political leaders know how to be leaders or they
wouldn’t have emerged as such. It is the delight of all societies to belittle
their political leaders, and leaders surely do make mistakes. But the mistakes
they make, when carefully examined, are rarely stupid. More likely, mistakes
are forced on them by circumstance. We would all like to believe that we—
or our favorite candidate—would never have acted so stupidly. It is rarely
true. Geopolitics therefore does not take the individual leader very seriously,
any more than economics takes the individual businessman too seriously.
Both are players who know how to manage a process but are not free to
break the very rigid rules of their professions.
Politicians are therefore rarely free actors. Their actions are determined
by circumstances, and public policy is a response to reality. Within narrow
margins, political decisions can matter. But the most brilliant leader of Ice­
land will never turn it into a world power, while the stupidest leader of
Rome at its height could not undermine Rome’s fundamental power. Geo­
politics is not about the right and wrong of things, it is not about the virtues


or vices of politicians, and it is not about foreign policy debates. Geopolitics
is about broad impersonal forces that constrain nations and human beings
and compel them to act in certain ways.
The key to understanding economics is accepting that there are always
unintended consequences. Actions people take for their own good reasons
have results they don’t envision or intend. The same is true with geopolitics.
It is doubtful that the village of Rome, when it started its expansion in the
seventh century BC, had a master plan for conquering the Mediterranean
world ﬁve hundred years later. But the ﬁrst action its inhabitants took against
neighboring villages set in motion a process that was both constrained by re­
ality and ﬁlled with unintended consequences. Rome wasn’t planned, and
neither did it just happen.
Geopolitical forecasting, therefore, doesn’t assume that everything is pre­
determined. It does mean that what people think they are doing, what they
hope to achieve, and what the ﬁnal outcome is are not the same things. Na­
tions and politicians pursue their immediate ends, as constrained by reality
as a grandmaster is constrained by the chessboard, the pieces, and the rules.
Sometimes they increase the power of the nation. Sometimes they lead the
nation to catastrophe. It is rare that the ﬁnal outcome will be what they ini­
tially intended to achieve.
Geopolitics assumes two things. First, it assumes that humans organize
themselves into units larger than families, and that by doing this, they must
engage in politics. It also assumes that humans have a natural loyalty to the
things they were born into, the people and the places. Loyalty to a tribe, a
city, or a nation is natural to people. In our time, national identity matters
a great deal. Geopolitics teaches that the relationship between these nations
is a vital dimension of human life, and that means that war is ubiquitous.
Second, geopolitics assumes that the character of a nation is determined
to a great extent by geography, as is the relationship between nations. We
use the term geography broadly. It includes the physical characteristics of a
location, but it goes beyond that to look at the effects of a place on individ­
uals and communities. In antiquity, the difference between Sparta and
Athens was the difference between a landlocked city and a maritime empire.
Athens was wealthy and cosmopolitan, while Sparta was poor, provincial,


and very tough. A Spartan was very different from an Athenian in both cul­
ture and politics.
If you understand those assumptions, then it is possible to think about
large numbers of human beings, linked together through natural human
bonds, constrained by geography, acting in certain ways. The United States
is the United States and therefore must behave in a certain way. The same
goes for Japan or Turkey or Mexico. When you drill down and see the forces
that are shaping nations, you can see that the menu from which they choose
is limited.
The twenty-ﬁrst century will be like all other centuries. There will be wars,
there will be poverty, there will be triumphs and defeats. There will be
tragedy and good luck. People will go to work, make money, have children,
fall in love, and come to hate. That is the one thing that is not cyclical. It is
the permanent human condition. But the twenty-ﬁrst century will be ex­
traordinary in two senses: it will be the beginning of a new age, and it will
see a new global power astride the world. That doesn’t happen very often.
We are now in an America-centric age. To understand this age, we must
understand the United States, not only because it is so powerful but because
its culture will permeate the world and deﬁne it. Just as French culture and
British culture were deﬁnitive during their times of power, so American cul­
ture, as young and barbaric as it is, will deﬁne the way the world thinks and
lives. So studying the twenty-ﬁrst century means studying the United
States.
If there were only one argument I could make about the twenty-ﬁrst
century, it would be that the European Age has ended and that the North
American Age has begun, and that North America will be dominated by the
United States for the next hundred years. The events of the twenty-ﬁrst cen­
tury will pivot around the United States. That doesn’t guarantee that the
United States is necessarily a just or moral regime. It certainly does not
mean that America has yet developed a mature civilization. It does mean
that in many ways the history of the United States will be the history of the
twenty-ﬁrst century.



CHAPTER 1    

The Dawn of the American Age

There is a deep-seated belief in America that the United States is ap­
proaching the eve of its destruction. Read letters to the editor, peruse
the Web, and listen to public discourse. Disastrous wars, uncon­
trolled deﬁcits, high gasoline prices, shootings at universities, corruption in
business and government, and an endless litany of other shortcomings—all
of them quite real—create a sense that the American dream has been shat­
tered and that America is past its prime. If that doesn’t convince you, listen
to Europeans. They will assure you that America’s best day is behind it.
The odd thing is that all of this foreboding was present during the pres­
idency of Richard Nixon, together with many of the same issues. There is
a continual fear that American power and prosperity are illusory, and that
disaster is just around the corner. The sense transcends ideology. Environ­
mentalists and Christian conservatives are both delivering the same mes­
sage. Unless we repent of our ways, we will pay the price—and it may be too
late already.
It’s interesting to note that the nation that believes in its manifest destiny
has not only a sense of impending disaster but a nagging feeling that the
country simply isn’t what it used to be. We have a deep sense of nostalgia for


the 1950s as a “simpler” time. This is quite a strange belief. With the Korean
War and McCarthy at one end, Little Rock in the middle, and Sputnik and
Berlin at the other end, and the very real threat of nuclear war throughout,
the 1950s was actually a time of intense anxiety and foreboding. A widely
read book published in the 1950s was entitled The Age of Anxiety. In the
1950s, they looked back nostalgically at an earlier America, just as we look
back nostalgically at the 1950s.
American culture is the manic combination of exultant hubris and pro­
found gloom. The net result is a sense of conﬁdence constantly undermined
by the fear that we may be drowned by melting ice caps caused by global
warming or smitten dead by a wrathful God for gay marriage, both outcomes
being our personal responsibility. American mood swings make it hard to
develop a real sense of the United States at the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst
century. But the fact is that the United States is stunningly powerful. It may
be that it is heading for a catastrophe, but it is hard to see one when you
look at the basic facts.
Let’s consider some illuminating ﬁgures. Americans constitute about 4
percent of the world’s population but produce about 26 percent of all goods
and services. In 2007 U.S. gross domestic product was about $14 trillion,
compared to the world’s GDP of $54 trillion—about 26 percent of the
world’s economic activity takes place in the United States. The next largest
economy in the world is Japan’s, with a GDP of about $4.4 trillion—about
a third the size of ours. The American economy is so huge that it is larger
than the economies of the next four countries combined: Japan, Germany,
China, and the United Kingdom.
Many people point at the declining auto and steel industries, which a
generation ago were the mainstays of the American economy, as examples of
a current deindustrialization of the United States. Certainly, a lot of indus­
try has moved overseas. That has left the United States with industrial pro­
duction of only $2.8 trillion (in 2006): the largest in the world, more than
twice the size of the next largest industrial power, Japan, and larger than
Japan’s and China’s industries combined.
There is talk of oil shortages, which certainly seem to exist and will un­
doubtedly increase. However, it is important to realize that the United States
produced 8.3 million barrels of oil every day in 2006. Compare that with


9.7 million for Russia and 10.7 million for Saudi Arabia. U.S. oil produc­
tion is 85 percent that of Saudi Arabia. The United States produces more oil
than Iran, Kuwait, or the United Arab Emirates. Imports of oil into the
country are vast, but given its industrial production, that’s understandable.
Comparing natural gas production in 2006, Russia was in ﬁrst place with
22.4 trillion cubic feet and the United States was second with 18.7 trillion
cubic feet. U.S. natural gas production is greater than that of the next ﬁve
producers combined. In other words, although there is great concern that
the United States is wholly dependent on foreign energy, it is actually one of
the world’s largest energy producers.
Given the vast size of the American economy, it is interesting to note
that the United States is still underpopulated by global standards. Measured
in inhabitants per square kilometer, the world’s average population density
is 49. Japan’s is 338, Germany’s is 230, and America’s is only 31. If we ex­
clude Alaska, which is largely uninhabitable, U.S. population density rises
to 34. Compared to Japan or Germany, or the rest of Europe, the United
States is hugely underpopulated. Even when we simply compare population
in proportion to arable land—land that is suitable for agriculture—America
has ﬁve times as much land per person as Asia, almost twice as much as Eu­
rope, and three times as much as the global average. An economy consists of
land, labor, and capital. In the case of the United States, these numbers
show that the nation can still grow—it has plenty of room to increase all
three.
There are many answers to the question of why the U.S. economy is so
powerful, but the simplest answer is military power. The United States com­
pletely dominates a continent that is invulnerable to invasion and occupa­
tion and in which its military overwhelms those of its neighbors. Virtually
every other industrial power in the world has experienced devastating war­
fare in the twentieth century. The United States waged war, but America it­
self never experienced it. Military power and geographical reality created an
economic reality. Other countries have lost time recovering from wars. The
United States has not. It has actually grown because of them.
Consider this simple fact that I’ll be returning to many times. The
United States Navy controls all of the oceans of the world. Whether it’s a
junk in the South China Sea, a dhow off the African coast, a tanker in the


Persian Gulf, or a cabin cruiser in the Caribbean, every ship in the world
moves under the eyes of American satellites in space and its movement is
guaranteed—or denied—at will by the U.S. Navy. The combined naval
force of the rest of the world doesn’t come close to equaling that of the U.S.
Navy.
This has never happened before in human history, even with Britain.
There have been regionally dominant navies, but never one that was glob­
ally and overwhelmingly dominant. This has meant that the United States
could invade other countries—but never be invaded. It has meant that in
the ﬁnal analysis the United States controls international trade. It has be­
come the foundation of American security and American wealth. Control of
the seas emerged after World War II, solidiﬁed during the ﬁnal phase of the
European Age, and is now the ﬂip side of American economic power, the
basis of its military power.
Whatever passing problems exist for the United States, the most impor­
tant factor in world affairs is the tremendous imbalance of economic, mili­
tary, and political power. Any attempt to forecast the twenty-ﬁrst century
that does not begin with the recognition of the extraordinary nature of
American power is out of touch with reality. But I am making a broader,
more unexpected claim, too: the United States is only at the beginning of its
power. The twenty-ﬁrst century will be the American century.
That assertion rests on a deeper point. For the past ﬁve hundred years,
the global system has rested on the power of Atlantic Europe, the European
countries that bordered on the Atlantic Ocean: Portugal, Spain, France, En­
gland, and to a lesser extent the Netherlands. These countries transformed
the world, creating the ﬁrst global political and economic system in human
history. As we know, European power collapsed during the twentieth cen­
tury, along with the European empires. This created a vacuum that was
ﬁlled by the United States, the dominant power in North America, and the
only great power bordering both the Atlantic and Paciﬁc oceans. North
America has assumed the place that Europe occupied for ﬁve hundred years,
between Columbus’s voyage in 1492 and the fall of the Soviet Union in
1991. It has become the center of gravity of the international system.
Why? In order to understand the twenty-ﬁrst century, it is important to
understand the fundamental structural shifts that took place late in the

twentieth century, setting the stage for a new century that will be radically
different in form and substance, just as the United States is so different from
 Europe. My argument is not only that something extraordinary has hap­
pened but that the United States has had very little choice in it. This isn’t
about policy. It is about the way in which impersonal geopolitical forces
work.

Europe

Until the ﬁfteenth century, humans lived in self-enclosed, sequestered
worlds. Humanity did not know itself as consisting of a single fabric. The
Chinese didn’t know of the Aztecs, and the Mayas didn’t know of the Zulus.
The Europeans may have heard of the Japanese, but they didn’t really know
them—and they certainly didn’t interact with them. The Tower of Babel
had done more than make it impossible for people to speak to each other. It
made civilizations oblivious to each other.
Europeans living on the eastern rim of the Atlantic Ocean shattered the
barriers between these sequestered regions and turned the world into a sin­
gle entity in which all of the parts interacted with each other. What hap­
pened to Australian aborigines was intimately connected to the British
relationship with Ireland and the need to ﬁnd penal colonies for British
prisoners overseas. What happened to Inca kings was tied to the relationship
between Spain and Portugal. The imperialism of Atlantic Europe created a
single world.
Atlantic Europe became the center of gravity of the global system (see
map, page 20). What happened in Europe deﬁned much of what happened
elsewhere in the world. Other nations and regions did everything with one
eye on Europe. From the sixteenth to the twentieth century hardly any part
of the world escaped European inﬂuence and power. Everything, for good
or evil, revolved around it. And the pivot of Europe was the North Atlantic.
Whoever controlled that stretch of water controlled the highway to the
world.
Europe was neither the most civilized nor the most advanced region in
the world. So what made it the center? Europe really was a technical and


intellectual backwater in the ﬁfteenth century as opposed to China or the
Islamic world. Why these small, out-of-the-way countries? And why did
they begin their domination then and not ﬁve hundred years before or ﬁve
hundred years later?
European power was about two things: money and geography. Europe
depended on imports from Asia, particularly India. Pepper, for example,
was not simply a cooking spice but also a meat preservative; its importation
was a critical part of the European economy. Asia was ﬁlled with luxury
goods that Europe needed, and would pay for, and historically Asian im­
ports would come overland along the famous Silk Road and other routes
until reaching the Mediterranean. The rise of Turkey—about which much
more will be heard in the twenty-ﬁrst century—closed these routes and in­
creased the cost of imports.
European traders were desperate to ﬁnd a way around the Turks.
Spaniards and Portuguese—the Iberians—chose the nonmilitary alterna­
tive: they sought another route to India. The Iberians knew of only one
route to India that avoided Turkey, down the length of the African coast and
up into the Indian Ocean. They theorized about another route, assuming
that the world was round, a route that would take them to India by going
west.
This was a unique moment. At other points in history Atlantic Europe
would have only fallen even deeper into backwardness and poverty. But the
economic pain was real and the Turks were very dangerous, so there was
pressure to do something. It was also a crucial psychological moment. The
Spaniards, having just expelled the Muslims from Spain, were at the height
of their barbaric hubris. Finally, the means for carrying out such exploration
was at hand as well. Technology existed that, if properly used, might provide
a solution to the Turkey problem.
The Iberians had a ship, the caravel, that could handle deep-sea voyages.
They had an array of navigational devices, from the compass to the astro­
labe. Finally they had guns, particularly cannons. All of these might have
been borrowed from other cultures, but the Iberians integrated them into
an effective economic and military system. They could now sail to distant
places. When they arrived they were able to ﬁght—and win. People who
heard a cannon ﬁre and saw a building explode tended to be more ﬂexible in


negotiations. When the Iberians reached their destinations, they could kick
in the door and take over. Over the next several centuries, European ships,
guns, and money dominated the world and created the ﬁrst global system,
the European Age.
Here is the irony: Europe dominated the world, but it failed to dominate
itself. For ﬁve hundred years Europe tore itself apart in civil wars, and as a
result there was never a European empire—there was instead a British em­
pire, a Spanish empire, a French empire, a Portuguese empire, and so on.
The European nations exhausted themselves in endless wars with each other
while they invaded, subjugated, and eventually ruled much of the world.
There were many reasons for the inability of the Europeans to unite, but
in the end it came down to a simple feature of geography: the English
Channel. First the Spanish, then the French, and ﬁnally the Germans man­
aged to dominate the European continent, but none of them could cross the
Channel. Because no one could defeat Britain, conqueror after conqueror
failed to hold Europe as a whole. Periods of peace were simply temporary
truces. Europe was exhausted by the advent of World War I, in which over
ten million men died—a good part of a generation. The European economy
was shattered, and European conﬁdence broken. Europe emerged as a de­
mographic, economic, and cultural shadow of its former self. And then
things got even worse.

The final battle of an old age

The United States emerged from World War I as a global power. That power
was clearly in its infancy, however. Geopolitically, the Europeans had an­
other ﬁght in them, and psychologically the Americans were not yet ready
for a permanent place on the global stage. But two things did happen. In
World War I the United States announced its presence with resounding au­
thority. And the United States left a ticking time bomb in Europe that
would guarantee America’s power after the next war. That time bomb was
the Treaty of Versailles, which ended World War I—but left unresolved the
core conﬂicts over which the war had been fought. Versailles guaranteed an­
other round of war.



And the war did resume in 1939, twenty-one years after the last one
ended. Germany again attacked ﬁrst, this time conquering France in six
weeks. The United States stayed out of the war for a time, but made sure
that the war didn’t end in a German victory. Britain stayed in the war, and
the United States kept it there with Lend-Lease. We all remember the Lend
part—where the United States provided Britain with destroyers and other
matériel to ﬁght the Germans—but the Lease part is usually forgotten. The
Lease part was where the British turned over almost all their naval facilities
in the Western Hemisphere to the United States. Between control of those
facilities and the role the U.S. Navy played in patrolling the Atlantic, the
British were forced to hand the Americans the keys to the North Atlantic,
which was, after all, Europe’s highway to the world.
A reasonable estimate of World War II’s cost to the world was about ﬁfty
million dead (military and civilian deaths combined). Europe had torn itself
to shreds in this war, and nations were devastated. In contrast, the United
States lost around half a million military dead and had almost no civilian ca­
sualties. At the end of the war, the American industrial plant was much
stronger than before the war; the United States was the only combatant na­
tion for which that was the case. No American cities were bombed (except­
ing Pearl Harbor), no U.S. territory was occupied (except two small islands
in the Aleutians), and the United States suffered less than 1 percent of the
war’s casualties.
For that price, the United States emerged from World War II not only
controlling the North Atlantic but ruling all of the world’s oceans. It also
occupied Western Europe, shaping the destinies of countries like France, the
Netherlands, Belgium, Italy, and indeed Great Britain itself. The United
States simultaneously conquered and occupied Japan, almost as an after­
thought to the European campaigns.
Thus did the Europeans lose their empire—partly out of exhaustion,
partly from being unable to bear the cost of holding it, and partly because
the United States simply did not want them to continue to hold it. The em­
pire melted away over the next twenty years, with only desultory resistance
by the Europeans. The geopolitical reality (that could ﬁrst be seen in Spain’s
dilemma centuries before) had played itself out to a catastrophic ﬁnish.
Here’s a question: Was the United States’ clear emergence in 1945 as the


decisive global power a brilliant Machiavellian play? The Americans achieved
global preeminence at the cost of 500,000 dead, in a war where ﬁfty million
others perished. Was Franklin Roosevelt brilliantly unscrupulous, or did be­
coming a superpower just happen in the course of his pursuing the “four
freedoms” and the UN Charter? In the end, it doesn’t matter. In geopolitics,
the unintended consequences are the most important ones.
The U.S.–Soviet confrontation—known as the Cold War—was a truly
global conﬂict. It was basically a competition over who would inherit Eu­
rope’s tattered global empire. Although there was vast military strength on
both sides, the United States had an inherent advantage. The Soviet Union
was enormous but essentially landlocked. America was almost as vast but
had easy access to the world’s oceans. While the Soviets could not contain
the Americans, the Americans could certainly contain the Soviets. And that
was the American strategy: to contain and thereby strangle the Soviets.
From the North Cape of Norway to Turkey to the Aleutian Islands, the
United States created a massive belt of allied nations, all bordering on the
Soviet Union—a belt that after 1970 included China itself. At every point
where the Soviets had a port, they found themselves blocked by geography
and the United States Navy.
Geopolitics has two basic competing views of geography and power.
One view, held by an Englishman, Halford John Mackinder, argues that
control of Eurasia means the control of the world. As he put it: “Who rules
East Europe [Russian Europe] commands the Heartland. Who rules the
Heartland commands the World-Island [Eurasia]. Who rules the WorldIsland commands the world.” This thinking dominated British strategy and,
indeed, U.S. strategy in the Cold War, as it fought to contain and strangle Eu­
ropean Russia. Another view is held by an American, Admiral Alfred Thayer
Mahan, considered the greatest American geopolitical thinker. In his book
The Inﬂuence of Sea Power on History, Mahan makes the counterargument to
Mackinder, arguing that control of the sea equals command of the world.
History conﬁrmed that both were right, in a sense. Mackinder was cor­
rect in emphasizing the signiﬁcance of a powerful and united Russia. The
collapse of the Soviet Union elevated the United States to the level of sole
global power. But it was Mahan, the American, who understood two crucial
factors. The collapse of the Soviet Union originated in American sea power
and also opened the door for U.S. naval power to dominate the world. Ad­
ditionally, Mahan was correct when he argued that it is always cheaper to
ship goods by sea than by any other means. As far back as the ﬁfth century
BC, the Athenians were wealthier than the Spartans because Athens had a
port, a maritime ﬂeet, and a navy to protect it. Maritime powers are always
wealthier than nonmaritime neighbors, all other things being equal. With
the advent of globalization in the ﬁfteenth century, this truth became as
near to absolute as one can get in geopolitics.
U.S. control of the sea meant that the United States was able not only to
engage in but to deﬁne global maritime trade. It could make the rules, or at
least block anyone else’s rules, by denying other nations entry to the world’s
trade routes. In general, the United States shaped the international trading
system more subtly, by using access to the vast American market as a lever to
shape the behavior of other nations. It was not surprising, then, that in addition
 to its natural endowments, the United States became enormously
prosperous from its sea power and that the Soviet Union couldn’t possibly
compete, being landlocked.
Second, having control of the seas gave the United States a huge political
advantage as well. America could not be invaded, but it could invade other
countries—whenever and however it chose. From 1945 onward, the United
States could wage wars without fear of having its lines of supply cut. No
outside power could wage war on the continent of North America. In fact,
no other nation could mount amphibious operations without American ac­
quiescence. When the British went to war with Argentina over the Falklands
in 1982, for example, it was possible only because the United States didn’t
prevent it. When the British, French, and Israelis invaded Egypt in 1956
against U.S. wishes, they had to withdraw.
Throughout the Cold War, an alliance with the United States was always
more proﬁtable than an alliance with the Soviet Union. The Soviets could
offer arms, political support, some technology, and a host of other things. But
the Americans could offer access to their international trading system and
the right to sell into the American economy. This dwarfed everything else in
importance. Exclusion from the system meant impoverishment; inclusion
in the system meant wealth. Consider, as an example, the different fates of
North and South Korea, West and East Germany.
It is interesting to note that throughout the Cold War, the United States
was on the defensive psychologically. Korea, McCarthyism, Cuba, Vietnam,
Sputnik, left-wing terrorism in the 1970s and 1980s, and harsh criticism of
Reagan by European allies all created a constant sense of gloom and uncer­
tainty in America. Atmospherics gave the United States the continual sense
that its advantage in the Cold War was slipping away. Yet underneath the
hood, in the objective reality of power relations, the Russians never had a
chance. This disjuncture between the American psyche and geopolitical re­
ality is important to remember for two reasons. First, it reveals the immatu­
rity of American power. Second, it reveals a tremendous strength. Because
the United States was insecure, it generated a level of effort and energy that
was overwhelming. There was nothing casual or conﬁdent in the way the
Americans—from political leaders to engineers to military and intelligence
ofﬁcers—waged the Cold War.


That is one of the primary reasons the United States was surprised when
it won the Cold War. The United States and its alliance had the Soviet
Union surrounded. The Soviets could not afford to challenge the Americans
at sea and had instead to devote their budget to building armies and mis­
siles, and they could not match American economic growth rates or entice
their allies with economic beneﬁts. The Soviet Union fell further and fur­
ther behind. And then it collapsed.
The fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, 499 years after Columbus’s expe­
dition, ended an entire age in history. For the ﬁrst time in half a millen­
nium, power no longer resided in Europe, nor was Europe the focal point of
international competition. After 1991, the sole global power in the world
was the United States, which had become the center of the international
system.

We have examined how the United States came to power in the twentieth
century. There is one additional accompanying fact—a little-studied statis­
tic that I mentioned earlier and that speaks volumes. In 1980, as the U.S.–
Soviet duel was moving to its climax, transpaciﬁc trade rose to equal
transatlantic trade for the ﬁrst time in history. A mere ten years later, as the
Soviet Union was collapsing, transpaciﬁc trade had soared to a level 50 per­
cent greater than transatlantic trade. The entire geometry of international
trade, and therefore of the global system, was undergoing an unparalleled
shift.
How did this affect the rest of the world? Quite simply, the cost of sea
lane control is enormous. Most trading countries can’t bear the cost of con­
trolling sea lanes and therefore depend on nations that do have the resources
to do so. Naval powers therefore acquire enormous political leverage, and
other nations don’t want to challenge them. The cost of controlling an adja­
cent body of water is expensive. The cost of controlling a body of water
thousands of miles away is overwhelming. Historically, there have been only
a handful of nations that have been able to bear that expense—and it’s no
easier or cheaper today. Take a look at the U.S. defense budget and the
amount spent on the navy and on related space systems. The cost of main­
taining carrier battle groups in the Persian Gulf is a greater outlay than the
total defense budgets of most countries. Controlling the Atlantic or the Pa­
ciﬁc without a shoreline on both would be beyond the economic capability
of just about any nation.
North America alone can house a transcontinental nation capable of
projecting power simultaneously into the Atlantic and the Paciﬁc. Therefore
North America is the center of gravity of the international system. At the
dawn of the American age, the United States is far and away the dominant
power in North America. It is a country that simultaneously invaded Eu­
rope and Japan in 1944–45. It took military control of both bodies of water
and retains it to this day. This is why it is in a position to preside over the
new age.
But it is important to recall that Spain once dominated Europe and
presided over the opening century of the European Age. While I expect that
North America will be the center of gravity of the global system for the next
few centuries, I also expect the United States to dominate North America
for at least a century. But as with Spain, the assertion that North America is
the center of gravity does not guarantee that the United States will always
dominate North America. Many things can happen—from civil war to de­
feat in a foreign war to other states emerging on its borders over the cen­
turies.
For the short term, however—and by that I mean the next hundred
years—I will argue that the United States’ power is so extraordinarily over­
whelming, and so deeply rooted in economic, technological, and cultural
realities, that the country will continue to surge through the twenty-ﬁrst
century, buffeted though it will be by wars and crises.
This isn’t incompatible with American self-doubt. Psychologically, the
United States is a bizarre mixture of overconﬁdence and insecurity. Interest­
ingly, this is the precise description of the adolescent mind, and that is ex­
actly the American condition in the twenty-ﬁrst century. The world’s
leading power is having an extended adolescent identity crisis, complete
with incredible new strength and irrational mood swings. Historically, the
United States is an extraordinarily young and therefore immature society. So
at this time we should expect nothing less from America than bravado and
despair. How else should an adolescent feel about itself and its place in the
world?

But if we think of the United States as an adolescent, early in its overall
history, then we also know that, regardless of its self-image, adulthood lies
ahead. Adults tend to be more stable and more powerful than adolescents.
Therefore, it is logical to conclude that America is in the earliest phase of its
power. It is not fully civilized. America, like Europe in the sixteenth century,
is still barbaric (a description, not a moral judgment). Its culture is un­
formed. Its will is powerful. Its emotions drive it in different and contradic­
tory directions.
Cultures live in one of three states. The ﬁrst state is barbarism. Barbar­
ians believe that the customs of their village are the laws of nature and that
anyone who doesn’t live the way they live is beneath contempt and requiring
redemption or destruction. The third state is decadence. Decadents cyni­
cally believe that nothing is better than anything else. If they hold anyone in
contempt, it is those who believe in anything. Nothing is worth ﬁghting for.
Civilization is the second and most rare state. Civilized people are able
to balance two contradictory thoughts in their minds. They believe that
there are truths and that their cultures approximate those truths. At the same
time, they hold open in their mind the possibility that they are in error. The
combination of belief and skepticism is inherently unstable. Cultures pass
through barbarism to civilization and then to decadence, as skepticism un­
dermines self-certainty. Civilized people ﬁght selectively but effectively. Ob­
viously all cultures contain people who are barbaric, civilized, or decadent,
but each culture is dominated at different times by one principle.
Europe was barbaric in the sixteenth century, as the self-certainty of
Christianity fueled the ﬁrst conquests. Europe passed into civilization in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and then collapsed into decadence in
the course of the twentieth century. The United States is just beginning its
cultural and historical journey. Until now it has not been sufﬁciently coher­
ent to have a deﬁnitive culture. As it becomes the center of gravity of the
world, it is developing that culture, which is inevitably barbaric. America is
a place where the right wing despises Muslims for their faith and the left
wing despises them for their treatment of women. Such seemingly differ­
ent perspectives are tied together in the certainty that their own values are
self-evidently best. And as with all barbaric cultures, Americans are ready to
ﬁght for their self-evident truths.


This is not meant as criticism, any more than an adolescent can be criti­
cized for being an adolescent. It is a necessary and inevitable state of devel­
opment. But the United States is a young culture and as such it is clumsy,
direct, at times brutal, and frequently torn by deep internal dissension—its
dissidents being united only in the certainty that their values are best. The
United States is all of these things, but as with Europe in the sixteenth cen­
tury, the United States will, for all of its apparent bumbling, be remarkably
effective.



CHAPTER 2

E A RT H Q U A K E
The U.S. – Jihadist War

The American Age began in December 1991, when the Soviet Union
collapsed, leaving the United States as the only global power in the
world. But the twenty-ﬁrst century truly began on September 11,
2001, ten years later, when planes slammed into the World Trade Center
and the Pentagon. This was the ﬁrst real test of the American Age. It is de­
batable whether the United States has actually won the U.S.–jihadist war—
but it has certainly achieved its strategic goals. And it is also clear that the
war is, as all wars do, moving toward an end of sorts.
People talk about “the long war,” and the idea that the United States and
Muslims will be ﬁghting for a century. As is usually the case, what appears
permanent is only a passing phase. Consider the twenty-year perspective we
have been using. Conﬂict may continue, but the strategic challenge to
American power is coming to an end. Al Qaeda has failed in its goals. The
United States has succeeded, not so much in winning the war as in prevent­
ing the Islamists from winning, and, from a geopolitical perspective, that is
good enough. The twenty-ﬁrst century has begun with an American success
that on the surface looks like not only a defeat but a deep political and
moral embarrassment.


Al Qaeda’s goal in 2001 was not simply to conduct an attack on the
United States. Its goal was to conduct an attack that would demonstrate
America’s weakness and al Qaeda’s strength. Revealing America’s weakness,
al Qaeda believed, would undermine governments in the Islamic world that
relied on their relationship with the United States to stabilize their regimes,
in countries like Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, and Indonesia. Al Qaeda
wanted to overthrow these governments because it knew that it could not
achieve its goals unless it had control of a nation-state other than Afghan­
istan, which was too weak and isolated to serve as more than a temporary
base.
The collapse of the Soviet Union obviously had massive effects on the
international system. One was particularly surprising. A powerful Soviet
Union and a powerful United States had actually stabilized the international
system, creating a balance between superpowers. This was particularly true
along the frontier of the Soviet empire, where both sides were poised for
war. Europe, for example, was frozen into place by the Cold War. The
slightest movement could have led to war, so neither the Soviets nor the
Americans permitted such movement. The most interesting features of
the Cold War, in fact, were all the wars that didn’t happen. There was no in­
vasion of Germany by the Soviets. There was no thrust to the Persian Gulf.
Above all, there was no nuclear holocaust.

It is important to scrutinize the last twenty years. They are the founda­
tion of what’s to come in the next hundred years—and that is why I’ll spend
more time in this chapter talking about the past instead of the future.
Think of the Soviet collapse as a giant tug-of-war in which one side sud­
denly weakened and let go of the rope. The side still holding the rope
won, but lost its balance, and therefore the triumph was mixed with mas­
sive confusion and disruption. The rope, which had been locked into
place by the two sides, came loose and started behaving in unpredictable
ways. This was particularly true along the boundaries of the two blocs.
Some changes were peaceful. Germany reunited and the Baltic states
reemerged, as did Ukraine and Belarus. Czechoslovakia had its velvet di­
vorce, splitting into the Czech Republic and Slovakia. Other changes were


more violent. Romania underwent a tumultuous internal revolution, and
Yugoslavia went completely to pieces.
Indeed, of all the countries along the border of the former Soviet Union,
Yugoslavia was the most artiﬁcial. It was not a nation-state, but a region of
hostile and diverse nations, ethnicities, and religions. Invented by the vic­
tors of World War I, Yugoslavia was like a cage for some of the most vicious
rivalries in Europe. The victors theorized that in order to avert a war in the
Balkans, an entity should be created that made them all part of a single
country. It was an interesting theory. But Yugoslavia was an archaeological
dig of fossilized nations left over from ancient conquests, still clinging to
their distinct identities.
Historically, the Balkans had been a ﬂash point in Europe. This was the
Romans’ road to the Middle East, and the Turks’ road into Europe. World
War I started in the Balkans. Each conqueror left behind a nation or a reli­
gion, and each one of these detested the other. Each warring group had
committed atrocities of monumental proportions against the others, and
every one of these atrocities was remembered as if it had happened yester­
day. This is not a forgive-and-forget region.
Yugoslavia shattered during World War II, with Croats siding with Ger­
many and Serbs with the Allies. It was subsequently pulled together by the


Communist League under Joseph Broz Tito. Yugoslavia was Marxist but
anti-Soviet. It didn’t want to become a Soviet satellite, and actually cooper­
ated with the Americans. Caught in the force ﬁeld between NATO and the
Warsaw Pact, Yugoslavia hung together, however precariously.
In 1991, when the force ﬁeld disintegrated, the pieces that made up Yu­
goslavia blew apart. It was as if a geological fault had caused a massive earth­
quake. The ancient but submerged and frozen nationalities suddenly found
themselves free to maneuver. Names that hadn’t been heard since before
World War I suddenly came to life: Serbia, Croatia, Montenegro, BosniaHerzegovina, Macedonia, Slovenia. Within each of these nations, other eth­
nic minorities from neighboring nations also came alive, usually demanding
secession. All hell broke loose—and this moment would be an important
one in the early framing of the twenty-ﬁrst century.
The Yugoslavian war has been misunderstood as simply a local phenom­
enon, an idiosyncratic event. It was much more than that. It was ﬁrst and
foremost a response to the collapse of the Soviet Union. Passions that had
been kept in check for almost ﬁfty years abruptly reignited. Frozen bound­
aries became ﬂuid. It was a local phenomenon made possible—and in­
evitable—by a global shift.
Moreover, war in Yugoslavia was not a singular phenomenon. This was
just the ﬁrst fault line to give—the northern extension of a line that ran all
the way to the Hindu Kush, the mountains that dominate northern Af­
ghanistan and Pakistan. The Yugoslavian explosion was the prelude to an
even bigger earthquake that began as the Soviet Union collapsed.

The islamic earthquake

The U.S.–Soviet confrontation spanned the periphery of the Soviet Union.
At the end of the Cold War, there were three sections to this border. There
was the European section, running from Norway to the German–Czech
frontier. There was the Asian section, running from the Aleutians through
Japan and into China. And there was the third section, running from north­
ern Afghanistan to Yugoslavia. When the Soviet Union collapsed, this last
section was the most heavily affected. Yugoslavia collapsed ﬁrst, but the


chaos eventually ran the entire length of the sector and engulfed even coun­
tries not adjacent to the front line.
The region from Yugoslavia to Afghanistan and Pakistan had largely
been locked into place during the Cold War. There was isolated movement,
such as when Iran moved from being pro-American to being both anti­
Soviet and anti-American, or when the Russians invaded Afghanistan, or
the Iran–Iraq war. But in a strange way, the region was stabilized by the
Cold War. No matter how many internal conﬂicts there were, they never
grew into full-blown, cross-border crises.
With the Soviets gone, the region destabilized dramatically. This is pri­
marily a Muslim region—one of three major Muslim regions in the world.
There is North Africa, there is the Muslim region in Southeast Asia, and
then there is this vast, multinational, highly divergent region that runs from
Yugoslavia to Afghanistan, and south into the Arabian Peninsula (see map,
page 36). This is certainly not a single region in many senses, but we are treat­
ing it as such because it was the southern front of the Soviet encirclement.
It’s important to remember that the demarcation line of the Cold War
ran straight through this Muslim region. Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan, Turk­
menistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Kazakhstan were all predominantly Muslim re­
publics that were part of the Soviet Union. There were Muslim parts of
the Russian Federation as well, such as Chechnya.


This entire region is historically unstable. Traversing the region are the
great trade and invasion routes used by conquerors from Alexander the
Great to the British. The region has always been a geopolitical flash point,
but the end of the Cold War truly ignited a powder keg. When the Soviet
Union fell, its six Muslim republics suddenly became independent. Arab
countries to the south either lost their patron (Iraq and Syria) or lost their
enemy (the Saudis and other Gulf states). India lost its patron, and Pakistan
suddenly felt liberated from the Indian threat—at least temporarily. The entire system of international relations was thrown up in the air. What little
was solid dissolved.
The Soviets withdrew from the Caucasus and Central Asia in 1992. Like
a tide receding, this revealed nations that hadn’t been free for a century or
more, that had no tradition of self-government and, in some cases, no functioning economy. At the same time, American interest in the region declined. After Operation Desert Storm in 1991, American focus on places
like Afghanistan seemed useless. The Cold War was over. There was no
longer a strategic threat to American interests, and the region was free to
evolve on its own.


A detailed description of how the region, and Afghanistan in particular,
destabilized is not critical here, any more than a blow by blow of what hap­
pened in Yugoslavia would be illuminating. It can be summarized as fol­
lows: From the late seventies until the fall of the Soviet Union, the United
States helped create forces in Afghanistan that could resist the Soviet Union—
and these forces turned on the United States once the Soviet Union col­
lapsed. Trained in the covert arts, knowledgeable about the processes of U.S.
intelligence, these men mounted an operation against the United States that
involved many stages and culminated on September 11, 2001. The United
States responded by surging into the region, ﬁrst in Afghanistan and then in
Iraq, and quickly the entire region came apart.
As had been the case with the Soviet Union after World War II, the
United States used the jihadists for its own ends and then had to cope with
the monster it had created. But that was the lesser problem. The more dan­
gerous dilemma was that the collapse of the Soviet Union disrupted the sys­
tem of relationships that kept the region in some sort of order. With or
without al Qaeda, the Muslim entities within the former Soviet Union and
to its south were going to become unstable, and as in Yugoslavia, that insta­
bility was going to draw in the only global power, the United States, one
way or another. It was a perfect storm. From the Austrian border to the
Hindu Kush, the region shuddered and the United States moved to bring it
under control, with mixed results, to say the least.
There is another aspect of this that is noteworthy, especially in light of
the demographic trends we will discuss in the next chapter. There was tre­
mendous internal unrest in the Muslim world. The resistance of Islamic tra­
ditionalists to shifts in custom, particularly concerning the status of women
and driven by demographic change, was one of the driving forces behind
the region’s instability. The struggle between traditionalists and secularizers
upended the region’s societies, and the United States was held responsible
for the growing calls for secularization. This seems like an obvious and super­
ﬁcial reading of the situation, but as we will see, it has deeper and broader
signiﬁcance than might be apparent at ﬁrst glance. Changes in the family
structure, resistance to those changes, and September 11 were closely linked.
From the broadest geopolitical perspective, September 11 ended the in­
terregnum between the end of the Cold War and the beginning of the next


era: the U.S.–jihadist war. The jihadists could not win, if by winning we
mean the re-creation of the Caliphate, an Islamic empire. Divisions in the
Islamic world were too powerful to overcome, and the United States was too
powerful to simply be defeated. The chaos could never have congealed into
a jihadist victory.
This era is actually less a coherent movement than a regional spasm, the
result of a force ﬁeld being removed. Ethnic and religious divisions in the Is­
lamic world mean that even if the United States is expelled from the region,
no stable political base will emerge. The Islamic world has been divided and
unstable for over a thousand years, and hardly looks to become more united
anytime soon. At the same time, even an American defeat in the region
would not undermine basic American global power. Like the Vietnam War,
it would be merely a transitory event.
At the moment, the U.S.–jihadist conﬂict appears so powerful and of
such overwhelming importance that it is difﬁcult to imagine it simply fad­
ing away. Serious people talk about a century of such conﬂict dominating
the world, but under the twenty-year perspective outlined in the early pages
of this book, the prospect of a world still transﬁxed by a U.S.–jihadist war in
2020 is the least likely outcome. In fact, what is happening in the Islamic
world ultimately will not matter a great deal. If we assume that the upward
trajectory of U.S. power remains intact, then 2020 should ﬁnd the United
States facing very different challenges.


American grand strategy and
the islamic wars

There is one more element of the American dynamic that we must cover:
the grand strategy that drives American foreign policy. The American re­
sponse to 9/11 seemed to make no sense, and on the surface it didn’t. It
looked chaotic and it looked random, but underneath, it was to be ex­
pected. When one steps back and takes stock, the seemingly random actions
of the United States actually make a good deal of sense.
Grand strategy starts where policy making ends. Let’s assume for a mo­
ment that Franklin Roosevelt had not run for a third term in 1940. Would


Japan and Germany have behaved differently? Could the United States have
acquiesced to Japanese domination of the western Paciﬁc? Would the
United States have accepted the defeat of Britain and its ﬂeet at German
hands? The details might have changed, but it is hard to imagine the United
States not getting into the war or the war not ending in an Allied victory. A
thousand details might have changed, but the broadest outlines of this con­
ﬂict as determined by grand strategy would have remained the same.
Could there have been an American strategy during the Cold War other
than containment of the Soviet Union? The United States couldn’t invade
Eastern Europe. The Soviet army was simply too large and too strong. On
the other hand, the United States couldn’t allow the Soviet Union to seize
Western Europe because if the Soviet Union controlled Western Europe’s
industrial plant, it would overwhelm the United States in the long run.
Containment was not an optional policy; it was the only possible American
response to the Soviet Union.
All nations have grand strategies, though this does not mean all nations
can achieve their strategic goals. Lithuania’s goal is to be free of foreign oc­
cupation. But its economy, demography, and geography make it unlikely
that Lithuania will ever achieve its goal more than occasionally and tem­
porarily. The United States, unlike most other countries in the world, has
achieved most of its strategic goals, which I will outline in a moment. Its
economy and society are both geared toward this effort.
A country’s grand strategy is so deeply embedded in that nation’s DNA,
and appears so natural and obvious, that politicians and generals are not al­
ways aware of it. Their logic is so constrained by it that it is an almost un­
conscious reality. But from a geopolitical perspective, both the grand strategy
of a country and the logic driving a country’s leaders become obvious.
Grand strategy is not always about war. It is about all of the processes
that constitute national power. But in the case of the United States, perhaps
more than for other countries, grand strategy is about war, and the interac­
tion between war and economic life. The United States is, historically, a
warlike country.
The United States has been at war for about 10 percent of its existence.
This statistic includes only major wars—the War of 1812, the MexicanAmerican War, the Civil War, World Wars I and II, the Korean War, Viet­nam. 

It does not include minor conﬂicts like the Spanish-American War or
Desert Storm. During the twentieth century, the United States was at war
15 percent of the time. In the second half of the twentieth century, it was at
war 22 percent of the time. And since the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst cen­
tury, in 2001, the United States has been constantly at war. War is central to
the American experience, and its frequency is constantly increasing. It is
built into American culture and deeply rooted in American geopolitics. Its
purpose must be clearly understood.
America was born out of war and has continued to ﬁght to this day at an
ever increasing pace. Norway’s grand strategy might be more about eco­
nomics than warfare, but U.S. strategic goals, and U.S. grand strategy, orig­
inate in fear. The same is true of many nations. Rome did not set out to
conquer the world. It set out to defend itself, and in the course of that effort
it became an empire. The United States would have been quite content at
ﬁrst not to have been attacked and defeated by the British, as it was in the
War of 1812. Each fear, however, once alleviated, creates new vulnerabilities
and new fears. Nations are driven by fear of losing what they have. Consider
the following in terms of this fear.
The United States has ﬁve geopolitical goals that drive its grand strategy.
Note that these goals increase in magnitude, ambition, and difﬁculty as you
go down the list.

I: The complete domination of north america
by the united states army

Had the United States remained a nation of discrete states existing between
the Atlantic coast and the Allegheny mountains, it is extremely unlikely that
it would have survived. It not only had to unite but had to spread into the
vast territory between the Alleghenies and the Rocky Mountains. This gave
the United States not only strategic depth but also some of the richest agri­
cultural land in the world. Even more important, it was land with a superb
system of navigable rivers that allowed the country’s agricultural surplus to
be shipped to world markets, creating a class of businessmen-farmers that is
unique in history.


The Louisiana Purchase of 1803 gave the United States title to this land.
But it was the Battle of New Orleans in 1814, in which Andrew Jackson defeated the British, that gave the nation real control of the region, since New
Orleans was the single choke point of the entire river system. If Yorktown
founded the nation, the Battle of New Orleans founded its economy. And
what secured this in turn was the Battle of San Jacinto, a few hundred miles
west of New Orleans, where the Mexican army was defeated by Texans and
thus could never pose a threat to the Mississippi River basin again. The defeat of the Mexican army was not inevitable. Mexico was in many ways a
more developed and powerful country than the United States. Its defeat
made the U.S. Army the dominant power in North America and secured
the continent for the United States—a vast and rich country that no one
could challenge.



2: The elimination of any threat to the united states by any power in the western hemisphere


With North America secured, the only other immediate threat came from
Latin America. In reality, North and South America are islands, not really
connected: Panama and Central America are impassable by large armies.
South America’s uniﬁcation into a single entity is remote. When you look at
a map of South America, leaving out impassable terrain, you see that there
can be no transcontinental power: the continent is sliced in two (see map,
page 43). So there is no chance of a native threat to the United States emerg­
ing from South America.
The major threats in the hemisphere came from European powers with
naval bases in South and Central America and the Caribbean, as well as land
forces in Mexico. That is what the Monroe Doctrine was about—long be­
fore the United States had the ability to stop the Europeans from having
bases there, it made blocking the Europeans a strategic imperative. The only
time the United States really worries about Latin America is when a foreign
power has bases there.

3: Complete control of the maritime approaches to the united states by the navy in order to preclude any possibility of invasion

In 1812, the British navy sailed up the Chesapeake and burned Washing­
ton. Throughout the nineteenth century, the United States was terriﬁed that
the British, using their overwhelming control of the North Atlantic, would
shut off its access to the ocean, strangling the United States. It was not
always a paranoid fear: the British did consider this on more than one occa­
sion. This general problem was, in other contexts, the origin of the Ameri­
can obsession with Cuba, from the Spanish-American War through the
Cold War.
Having secured the hemisphere in the late nineteenth century, the


United States has an interest in keeping the sea lanes approaching its bor­
ders free of foreign naval power. The United States secured its Paciﬁc ap­
proaches ﬁrst. During the Civil War it acquired Alaska. In 1898 it annexed
Hawaii. Those two actions taken together closed off the threat of any enemy
ﬂeet being able to approach the continent from the west, by eliminating any
anchorage for supplying a ﬂeet. The United States secured the Atlantic by
using World War II to take advantage of British weakness, driving it from
near the U.S. coast, and by the end of World War II had created a ﬂeet of
such enormous power that the British were unable to operate in the Atlantic
without U.S. approval. This made the United States effectively invulnerable
to invasion.

4: Complete domination of the world’s oceans to further secure u.s. physical safet y and guarantee
control over the international trading system

The fact that the United States emerged from World War II not only with
the world’s largest navy but also with naval bases scattered around the world
changed the way the world worked. As I mentioned previously, any seago­
ing vessel—commercial or military, from the Persian Gulf to the South
China Sea to the Caribbean—could be monitored by the United States
Navy, who could choose to watch it, stop it, or sink it. From the end of
World War II onward, the combined weight of all of the world’s existing
ﬂeets was insigniﬁcant compared to American naval power.
This highlights the single most important geopolitical fact in the world:
the United States controls all of the oceans. No other power in history has
been able to do this. And that control is not only the foundation of Amer­
ica’s security but also the foundation of its ability to shape the international
system. No one goes anywhere on the seas if the United States doesn’t ap­
prove. At the end of the day, maintaining its control of the world’s oceans is
the single most important goal for the United States geopolitically.


5: The prevention of any other nation from challenging u.s. global nava l power

Having achieved the unprecedented feat of dominating all of the world’s
oceans, the United States obviously wanted to continue to hold them. The
simplest way to do this was to prevent other nations from building navies,
and this could be done by making certain that no one was motivated to
build navies—or had the resources to do so. One strategy, “the carrot,” is to
make sure that everyone has access to the sea without needing to build a
navy. The other strategy, “the stick,” is to tie down potential enemies in
land-based confrontations so that they are forced to exhaust their military
dollars on troops and tanks, with little left over for navies.
The United States emerged from the Cold War with both an ongoing in­
terest and a ﬁxed strategy. The ongoing interest was preventing any Eurasian
power from becoming sufﬁciently secure to divert resources to navy build­
ing. Since there was no longer a single threat of Eurasian hegemony, the
United States focused on the emergence of secondary, regional hegemons
who might develop enough regional security to allow them to begin prob­
ing out to sea. The United States therefore worked to create a continu­
ally shifting series of alliances designed to tie down any potential regional
hegemon.
The United States had to be prepared for regular and unpredictable inter­
ventions throughout the Eurasian landmass. After the fall of the Soviet
Union, it did engage in a series of operations designed to maintain the re­
gional balance and block the emergence of a regional power. The ﬁrst major
intervention was in Kuwait, where the United States blocked Iraqi ambitions
after the Soviets were dead but not yet buried. The next was in Yugoslavia,
with the goal of blocking the emergence of Serbian hegemony over the
Balkans. The third series of interventions was in the Islamic world, designed
to block al Qaeda’s (or anyone else’s) desire to create a secure Islamic empire.
The interventions in Afghanistan and Iraq were both a part of this effort.
For all the noise and fuss, these were minor affairs. In Iraq, the largest
operation, the United States has used fewer than 200,000 troops and suf­
fered fewer than 5,000 killed. This is about 6 to 8 percent of the casualties
suffered in Vietnam, and about 1 percent of the casualties in World War II.


For a country of over a quarter billion people, an occupation force of this
size is trivial. The tendency of the United States to overdramatize minor in­
terventions derives from its relative immaturity as a nation (and I say this as
a parent of someone who served two tours in Iraq).
The foregoing allows us to understand the American response to the Is­
lamist attacks and much else that has happened. Having systematically
achieved its strategic goals, the United States had the ultimate aim of pre­
venting the emergence of any major power in Eurasia. The paradox, how­
ever, is as follows: the goal of these interventions was never to achieve
something—whatever the political rhetoric might have said—but to pre­
vent something. The United States wanted to prevent stability in areas
where another power might emerge. Its goal was not to stabilize, but to
destabilize. And that explains how the United States responded to the Is­
lamic earthquake—it wanted to prevent a large, powerful Islamic state from
emerging.
Rhetoric aside, the United States has no overriding interest in peace in
Eurasia. The United States also has no interest in winning a war outright. As
with Vietnam or Korea, the purpose of these conﬂicts is simply to block a
power or destabilize the region, not to impose order. In due course, even
outright American defeat is acceptable. However, the principle of using
minimum force, when absolutely necessary, to maintain the Eurasian bal­
ance of power is—and will remain—the driving force of U.S. foreign policy
throughout the twenty-ﬁrst century. There will be numerous Kosovos and
Iraqs in unanticipated places at unexpected times. U.S. actions will appear
irrational, and would be if the primary goal is to stabilize the Balkans or the
Middle East. But since the primary goal will more likely be simply to block
or destabilize Serbia or al Qaeda, the interventions will be quite rational.
They will never appear to really yield anything nearing a “solution,” and
will always be done with insufﬁcient force to be decisive.

After the aftershocks

The international system is now badly out of balance. The United States is
so powerful that it is almost impossible for the rest of the world to control


American behavior. The natural tendency of the international system is to
move to equilibrium. In an unbalanced world, smaller powers are at risk
from larger, unchecked powers. They therefore tend to form coalitions with
other countries to match the larger power in strength. After the United
States was defeated in Vietnam, it joined with China to control the Soviets,
who appeared to be getting too strong.
Creating coalitions to contain the United States in the twenty-ﬁrst cen­
tury will be extremely difﬁcult. Weaker countries ﬁnd it easier to reach an
accommodation with the Americans than to join an anti-U.S. coalition—
building a coalition and holding it together is an onerous task. And if the
coalition falls apart, as coalitions tend to do, the United States can be an un­
forgiving giant.
As a result, we see this contradiction: on the one hand, the United States
is deeply resented and feared; on the other hand, individual nations still try
to ﬁnd a way to get along with the United States. This disequilibrium will
dominate the twenty-ﬁrst century, as will efforts to contain the United
States. It will be a dangerous century, particularly for the rest of the world.
In geopolitics there is a key measure known as the “margin of error.” It
predicts how much room a country has for making mistakes. The margin of
error consists of two parts: the types of danger faced by a nation and the
amount of power it possesses. Some countries have very small margins of er­
ror. They tend to obsess over the smallest detail of foreign policy, aware that
the slightest misstep can be catastrophic. Israel and Palestine do not have
massive margins of error, because of their small size and their location. Ice­
land, on the other hand, has a lot of room for mistakes. It is small but lives
in a roomy neighborhood.
The United States has a huge margin of error. It is safe in North Amer­
ica and has tremendous power. The United States therefore tends to be care­
less in how it exercises its power globally. It’s not stupid. It simply doesn’t
need to be more careful—in fact, being more careful could often reduce its
efﬁciency. Like a banker prepared to make bad loans in the expectation that
he will do well in the long run, the United States has a policy of making
moves that other countries see as reckless. The results would be painful or
even devastating for other countries. The United States moves on and ﬂour­ishes.


We saw this in Vietnam and we see it in Iraq as well. These conﬂicts are
merely isolated episodes in U.S. history, of little lasting importance—except
to Vietnamese and Iraqis. The United States is a young and barbaric coun­
try. It becomes emotional quickly and lacks a sense of historical perspective.
This actually adds to American power by giving the country the emotional
resources to overcome adversity. The United States always overreacts. What
seems colossally catastrophic at one moment motivates Americans to solve
problems decisively. An emerging power overreacts. A mature power ﬁnds
balance. A declining power loses the ability to recover its balance.
The United States is a very young nation, and is even newer at being a
dominant global power. Like a young and powerful adolescent, it tends to
become disproportionately emotional about events that are barely remem­
bered a few years later. Lebanon, Panama, Kuwait, Somalia, Haiti, Bosnia,
and Kosovo all seemed at the time to be extraordinarily important and even
decisive. The reality is that few people remember them—and when they do,
they cannot clearly deﬁne what drew the United States into the conﬂict in
the ﬁrst place. The emotionalism of the moment exhausts itself rapidly.
The crucial ﬂip side to this phenomenon is that the Lebanese, Panama­
nians, Kuwaitis, Somalis, Haitians, Bosnians, and Kosovars all remember
their tangles with American power for a long time. What was a passing event
for the United States becomes a deﬁning moment in the other countries’
histories. Here we discover the ﬁrst and crucial asymmetry of the twentyﬁrst century. The United States has global interests and involves itself in a
large number of global skirmishes. No one involvement is crucial. For the
countries that are the object of American interest, however, any intervention
is a transformative event. Frequently the object nation is helpless in the face
of the American actions, and that sense of helplessness breeds rage even un­
der the best of circumstances. The rage grows all the more when the object
of the rage, the United States, is generally both invulnerable and indifferent.
The twenty-ﬁrst century will see both American indifference to the conse­
quences of its actions and the world’s resistance and anger toward America.

SUMMING UP
As the U.S.–jihadist war slithers to an end, the ﬁrst line of defense against
Islamic radicals will be the Muslim states themselves. They are the ultimate
targets of al Qaeda, and whatever their views of Islam or the West, the Mus­
lim states are not about to turn over political power to al Qaeda. Rather,
they will use their national power—their intelligence, security, and military
capabilities—to crush al Qaeda.
The United States wins as long as al Qaeda loses. An Islamic world in
chaos, incapable of uniting, means the United States has achieved its strate­
gic goal. One thing the United States has indisputably done since 2001 is to
create chaos in the Islamic world, generating animosity toward America—
and perhaps terrorists who will attack it in the future. But the regional
earthquake is not coalescing into a regional superpower. In fact, the region
is more fragmented than ever, and that is likely to close the book on this era.
U.S. defeat or stalemate in Iraq and Afghanistan is the likely outcome, and
both wars will appear to have ended badly for the United States. There is no
question that American execution of the war in Iraq has been clumsy, grace­
less, and in many ways unsophisticated. The United States was, indeed, ado­
lescent in its simpliﬁcation of issues and in its use of power. But on a
broader, more strategic level, that does not matter. So long as the Muslims
are ﬁghting each other, the United States has won its war.
This does not mean that it would be impossible for a nation-state to
emerge in the Islamic world at some point that could develop into a regional
power and a challenge to American interests. Turkey is the historic power in
the Muslim world, and as we will see in the chapters that lie ahead, it is
emerging again. Its rise will be the result not of the chaos caused by the fall
of the Soviet Union, but of new dynamics. Anger does not make history.
Power does. And power may be supplemented by anger, but it derives from
more fundamental realities: geography, demographics, technology, and cul­
ture. All of these will deﬁne American power, just as American power will
deﬁne the twenty-ﬁrst century.



CHAPTER 3

POPULATION, COMPUTERS, AND CULTURE WARS 


In 2002, Osama bin Laden wrote in his “Letter to America”: “You are a
nation that exploits women like consumer products or advertising tools,
calling upon customers to purchase them. You use women to serve pas­
sengers, visitors, and strangers to increase your proﬁt margins. You then rant
that you support the liberation of women.”
As this quote indicates, what al Qaeda is ﬁghting for is a traditional un­
derstanding of the family. This is not a minor part of their program: it is at
its heart. The traditional family is built around some clearly deﬁned princi­
ples. First, the home is the domain of the woman and life outside the house
is the purview of the man. Second, sexuality is something conﬁned to the
family and the home, and extramarital, extrafamilial sexuality is unaccept­
able. Women who move outside the home invite extramarital sexuality just
by being there. Third, women have as their primary tasks reproduction and
nurturing of the next generation. Therefore, intense controls on women are
necessary to maintain the integrity of the family and of society. In an inter­
esting way it is all about women, and bin Laden’s letter drives this home.
What he hates about America is that it promotes a completely different view
of women and the family.


Al Qaeda’s view is not unique to Osama bin Laden or Islam. The lengths
to which that group is prepared to go may be unique, but the issue of women
and the family deﬁnes most major religions. Traditional Catholicism, fun­
damentalist Protestantism, Orthodox Judaism, and various branches of
Buddhism all take very similar positions. All of these religions are being split
internally, as are all societies. In the United States, where we speak of the
“culture wars,” the battleﬁeld is the family and its deﬁnition. All societies
are being torn between traditionalists and those who are attempting to re­
deﬁne the family, women, and sexuality.
This conﬂict is going to intensify in the twenty-ﬁrst century, but the tra­
ditionalists are ﬁghting a defensive and ultimately losing battle. The reason
is that over the past hundred years the very fabric of human life—and par­
ticularly the life of women—has been transformed, and with it the structure
of the family. What has already happened in Europe, the United States,
and Japan is spreading to the rest of the world. These issues will rip many
societies apart, but in the end, the transformation of the family can’t be
stopped.
This is not to say that transformation is inherently a good idea or a bad
one. Instead, this trend is unstoppable because the demographic realities of
the world are being transformed. The single most important demographic
change in the world right now is the dramatic decline everywhere in birth­
rates. Let me repeat that: the most meaningful statistic in the world is an
overall decline in birthrates. Women are having fewer and fewer children
every year. That means not only that the population explosion of the last
two centuries is coming to an end but also that women are spending much
less time bearing and nurturing children, even as their life expectancy has
soared.
This seems like a simple fact, and in a way it is, but what I want to show
you is the way in which something so mundane can lead to groups like al
Qaeda, why there will be more such groups, and why they can’t win. It also
will illustrate why the European Age, which was built on a perpetually ex­
panding population (whether through conquering other people or having
more babies), is being replaced by the American Age—a country in which
living with underpopulation has always been the norm. Let’s begin with the
end of the population explosion.


The population bust


It has been generally accepted in recent decades that the globe was facing a
severe population explosion. Uncontrolled population growth would out­
strip scarce resources and devastate the environment. More people would
require more resources in the form of food, energy, and goods, which in
turn would lead to a rise in global warming and other ecological catastro­
phes. There was no disagreement on the basic premise that population was
growing.
This model no longer holds true, however. We already see a change tak­
ing place in advanced industrial countries. People are living longer, and be­
cause of declining birthrates there are fewer younger workers to support the
vast increase in retirees. Europe and Japan are experiencing this problem al­
ready. But an aging population is only the tip of the iceberg, the ﬁrst prob­
lem presented by the coming population bust.
People assume that while population growth might be slowing down in
Europe, the world’s total population will continue to spiral out of control
because of high birthrates in less developed countries. In fact, the opposite is
true. Birthrates are plunging everywhere. The advanced industrial countries
are on the cutting edge of the decline, but the rest of the world is following
right behind them. And this demographic shift will help shape the twenty­
ﬁrst century.
Some of the most important, advanced countries in the world, like Ger­
many and Russia, are going to lose large percentages of their population.
Europe’s population today, taken as a whole, is 728 million people. The
United Nations forecasts that by 2050 it will drop to between 557 and 653
million, a remarkable decline. The lower number assumes that women will
average 1.6 children each. The second number assumes 2.1 children. In Eu­
rope today, the fertility rate per woman is 1.4 children. This is why we will
be focusing on the lower projections going forward.
Traditionally, declining population has meant declining power. For Eu­
rope, this will indeed be the case. But for other countries, like the United
States, maintaining population levels or ﬁnding technological ways to aug­
ment a declining population will be essential if political power is to be re­
tained in the next hundred years.


An assertion this extreme has to be supported, so we must pause and
drill into the numbers a bit before we consider the consequences. This is
a pivotal event in human history and we need to understand why it’s hap­
pening.
Let’s start simply. Between about 1750 and 1950, the world’s population
grew from about one billion people to about three billion. Between 1950 and
2000, it doubled, from three billion to six billion. Not only was the popula­
tion of the world growing, but the growth was accelerating at an amazing
rate. If that trajectory had continued, the result would have been global ca­
tastrophe.
But the growth rate has not accelerated. It has actually slowed down dra­
matically. According to the United Nations, between 2000 and 2050 the
population will continue to grow, but only by about 50 percent, halving the
growth rate of the previous ﬁfty years. In the second half of the century, it
becomes more interesting. Again, the population will continue to grow, but
only by 10 percent statistically, according to other forecasters. This is like
slamming on the brakes. In fact, some forecasts (not by the UN) have indi­
cated that the total human population will decline by 2100.
The most dramatic effect will be seen in the advanced industrial coun­
tries, many of which will experience remarkable declines in population. The
middle tier of countries, like Brazil and South Korea, will see their popula­
tions stabilize by mid-century and slowly decline by 2100. Only in the least
developed part of the world, in countries like Congo and Bangladesh, will
populations continue to increase until 2100, but not by nearly as much as
over the past hundred years. Any way you look at it, the population explo­
sion is ending.
Let’s examine a critical number: 2.1. This is the number of children
that each woman must have, on average, in order to maintain a generally
stable world population. Anything above that number and the popula­
tion grows; anything below, the population declines, all other things be­
ing equal. According to the United Nations, women had an average of
4.5 children in 1970. In 2000, that number had dropped to 2.7 children.
Remember, this is a worldwide average. That is a dramatic drop and ex­
plains why the population continued to grow, but more slowly than be­
fore.


The United Nations forecasts that in 2050, the global fertility rate will
decline to an average of 2.05 births per woman. That is just below the 2.1
needed for a stable world population. The UN has another forecast, based
on different assumptions, where the rate is 1.6 babies per woman. So the
United Nations, which has the best data available, is predicting that by the
year 2050, population growth will be either stable or declining dramatically.
I believe the latter is closer to the truth.
The situation is even more interesting if we look at the developed re­
gions of the world, the forty-four most advanced countries. In these coun­
tries women are currently having an average of 1.6 babies each, which
means that populations are already contracting. Birthrates in the middle tier
of countries are down to 2.9 and falling. Even the least developed countries
are down from 6.6 children per mother to 5.0 today, and expected to drop
to 3.0 by 2050. There is no doubt that birthrates are plunging. The ques­
tion is why. The answer can be traced to the reasons that the population
explosion occurred in the ﬁrst place; in a certain sense, the population ex­
plosion halted itself.
There were two clear causes for the population explosion that were
equally signiﬁcant. First, there was a decline in infant mortality; second
there was an increase in life expectancies. Both were the result of modern
medicine, the availability of more food, and the introduction of basic pub­
lic health that began in the late eighteenth century.
There are no really good statistics on fertility rates in 1800, but the best
estimates fall between 6.5 and 8.0 children per woman on average. Women
in Europe in 1800 were having the same number of babies as women in
Bangladesh are having today, yet the population wasn’t growing. Most chil­
dren born in 1800 didn’t live long enough to reproduce. Since the 2.1 rule
still held, out of eight children born, six died before puberty.
Medicine, food, and hygiene dramatically reduced the number of infant
and childhood deaths, until by late in the nineteenth century, most children
survived to have their own children. Even though infant mortality declined,
family patterns did not shift. People were having the same number of babies
as before.
It’s not hard to understand why. First, let’s face the fact that people like
to have sex, and sex without birth control makes babies—and there was no


birth control at the time. But people didn’t mind having a lot of children
because children had become the basis of wealth. In an agricultural society,
every pair of hands produces wealth; you don’t have to be able to read or
program computers to weed, seed, or harvest. Children were also the basis
for retirement, if someone lived long enough to have an old age. There was
no Social Security, but you counted on your children to take care of you.
Part of this was custom, but part of it was rational economic thinking. A fa­
ther owned land or had the right to farm it. His child needed to have access
to the land to live, so the father could dictate policy.
As children brought families prosperity and retirement income, the ma­
jor responsibility of women was to produce as many children as possible. If
women had children, and if they both survived childbirth, the family as a
whole was better off. This was a matter of luck, but it was a chance worth
taking from the standpoint of both families and the men who dominated
them. Between lust and greed, there was little reason not to bring more chil­
dren into the world.
Habits are hard to change. When families began moving into cities en
masse, children were still valuable assets. Parents could send them to work
in primitive factories at the age of six and collect their pay. In early indus­
trial society factory workers didn’t need many more skills than farm laborers
did. But as factories became more complex, they had less use for six-year­
olds. Soon they needed somewhat educated workers. Later they needed
managers with MBAs.
As the sophistication of industry advanced, the economic value of chil­
dren declined. In order to continue being economically useful, children had
to go to school to learn. Rather than adding to family income, they con­
sumed family income. Children had to be clothed, fed, and sheltered, and
over time the amount of education they needed increased dramatically, un­
til today many “children” go to school until their mid-twenties and still have
not earned a dime. According to the United Nations, the average number of
years of schooling in the leading twenty-ﬁve countries in the world ranges
from ﬁfteen to seventeen.
The tendency to have as many babies as possible continued into the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Many of our grandparents or
great-grandparents come from families that had ten children. A couple of


generations before, you’d be lucky if three out of ten children survived. Now
they were almost all surviving. However, in the economy of 1900, they
could all head out and ﬁnd work by the time they reached puberty. And
that’s what most of them did.
Ten children in eighteenth-century France might have been a godsend.
Ten children in late-nineteenth-century France might have been a burden. Ten
children in late-twentieth-century France would be a catastrophe. It took a
while for reality to sink in, but eventually it became clear that most children
wouldn’t die and that children were extremely expensive to raise. Therefore,
people started having a lot fewer children, and had those children more for
the pleasure of having them than for economic beneﬁts. Medical advances
such as birth control helped achieve this, but the sheer cost of having and
raising children drove the decline in birthrates. Children went from being
producers of wealth to the most conspicuous form of consumption. Parents
began satisfying their need for nurturing with one child, rather than ten.
Now let’s consider life expectancy. After all, the longer people live, the
more people there will be at any given time. Life expectancy surged at the
same time that infant mortality declined. In 1800, estimated life expectancy
in Europe and the United States was about forty years. In 2000 it was close
to eighty years. Life expectancy has, in effect, doubled over the last two hun­
dred years.
Continued growth in life expectancy is probable, but very few people
anticipate another doubling. In the advanced industrial world, the UN
projects a growth from seventy-six years in 2000 to eighty-two years in
2050. In the poorest countries it will increase from ﬁfty-one to sixty-six.
While this is growth, it is not geometric growth and it, too, is tapering off.
This will also help reduce population growth.
The reduction process that took place decades ago in the advanced in­
dustrial world is now under way in the least developed countries. Having
ten children in São Paolo is the surest path to economic suicide. It may take
several generations to break the habit, but it will be broken. And it won’t re­
turn while the process of educating a child for the modern workforce con­
tinues to become longer and costlier. Between declining birthrates and
slowing increases in life expectancy, population growth has to end.


The population bust and the way we live

What does all this have to do with international power in the twenty-ﬁrst
century? The population bust affects all nations, as we will see in later chap­
ters. But it also affects the life cycles of people within these nations. Lower
populations affect everything from the number of troops that can ﬁght in
a war to how many people there are in the workforce to internal political
conﬂicts. The process we are talking about will affect more than just the
number of people in a country. It will change how those people live, and
therefore how those countries behave.
Let’s start with three core facts. Life expectancy is moving toward a high
of eighty years in the advanced industrial world; the number of children
women have is declining; and it takes longer and longer to become edu­
cated. A college education is now considered the minimum for social and
economic success in advanced countries. Most people graduate from college
at twenty-two. Add in law or graduate school, and people are not entering
the workforce until their mid-twenties. Not everyone follows this pattern,
of course, but a sizable portion of the population does and that portion in­
cludes most of those who will be part of the political and economic leader­
ship of these countries.
As a result, marriage patterns have shifted dramatically. People are put­
ting off marriage longer and are having children even later. Let’s consider
the effect on women. Two hundred years ago, women started having chil­
dren in their early teens. Women continued having children, nurturing them,
and frequently burying them until they themselves died. This was necessary
for the family’s well-being and that of society. Having and raising children
was what women did for most of their lives.
In the twenty-ﬁrst century this whole pattern changes. Assuming that a
woman reaches puberty at age thirteen and enters menopause at age ﬁfty,
she will live twice as long as her ancestors and will for over half her life be in­
capable of reproduction. Let’s assume a woman has two children. She will
spend eighteen months being pregnant, which is roughly 2 percent of her
life. Now assume a fairly common pattern, which is that the woman will
have these two children three years apart, that each child enters school at the


age of ﬁve, and that the woman returns to work outside the home when the
oldest starts school.
The total time the woman is engaged in reproduction and full-time nur­
turing is eight years of her life. Given a life expectancy of eighty years, the
amount of time exclusively devoted to having and raising children will be
reduced to an astounding 10 percent of her life. Childbearing is reduced from
a woman’s primary activity to one activity among many. Add to this analysis
the fact that many women have only one child, and that many use day care
and other mass nurturing facilities for their children well before the age of
ﬁve, and the entire structure of a woman’s life is transformed.
We can see the demographic roots of feminism right here. Since women
spend less of their time having and nurturing children, they are much less
dependent on men than even ﬁfty years ago. For a woman to reproduce
without a husband would have created economic disaster for her in the past.
This is no longer the case, particularly for better-educated women. Marriage
is no longer imposed by economic necessity.
This brings us to a place where marriages are not held together by need
as much as by love. The problem with love is that it can be ﬁckle. It comes
and goes. If people stay married only for emotional reasons, there will in­
evitably be more divorce. The decline of economic necessity removes a pow­
erful stabilizing force in marriage. Love may endure, and frequently does,
but by itself it is less powerful than when linked to economic necessity.
Marriages used to be guaranteed “till death do us part.” In the past, that
parting was early and frequent. There were a great many ﬁfty-year marriages
during the transition period when people were having ten surviving chil­
dren. But prior to that, marriages ended early through death, and the sur­
vivor remarried or faced economic ruin. Europe practiced what we might
call serial polygamy, in which widowers (usually, since women tended to die
in childbirth) remarried numerous times throughout their lives. In the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, habit kept marriages together for
extraordinarily long periods of time. A new pattern emerged in the later
twentieth century, however, in which serial polygamy reasserted itself, but
this time the trend was being driven by divorce rather than death.
Let’s add another pattern to this. Whereas many marriages used to take
place when one or both partners were in their early teens, people are now


marrying in their late twenties and early thirties. It was typical for men and
women to remain sexually inactive until marriage at age fourteen, but today
it is, shall we say, unrealistic to expect someone marrying at age thirty to re­
main a virgin. People would be living seventeen years after puberty without
sexual activity. That’s not going to happen.
There is now a period built into life patterns where people are going to
be sexually active but not yet able to support themselves ﬁnancially. There is
also a period in which they can support themselves and are sexually active,
but choose not to reproduce. The entire pattern of traditional life is collaps­
ing, and no clear alternative patterns are emerging yet. Cohabitation used to
be linked to formal, legal marriage, but the two are now completely decou­
pled. Even reproduction is being uncoupled from marriage, and perhaps
even from cohabitation. Longer life, the decline in fertility rates, and the
additional years of education have all contributed to the dissolution of pre­
vious life and social patterns.
This trend cannot be reversed. Women are having fewer children be­
cause supporting a lot of children in industrial, urban society is economic
suicide. That won’t change. The cost of raising children will not decline, nor
will there be ways found to put six-year-olds to work. The rate of infant
mortality is also not going to rise. So in the twenty-ﬁrst century the trend
toward having fewer, rather than more, children will continue.

Political consequences

The more educated segments of the population are the ones where life pat­
terns have diverged the most. The very poorest, on the other hand, have
lived in a world of dysfunctional families since the industrial revolution be­
gan. For them, chaotic patterns of reproduction have always been the norm.
However, between the college-educated professional and business classes on
the one side and the underclass on the other, there is a large layer of society
that has only partially experienced the demographic shifts.
Among blue- and pink-collar workers there have been other trends, the
most important of which is that they have shorter educations. The result is
less of a gap between puberty and reproduction. These groups tend to marry


earlier and have children earlier. They are far more dependent on each other
economically, and it follows that the ﬁnancial consequences of divorce can
be far more damaging. There are nonemotional elements holding their mar­
riages together, and divorce is seen as more consequential, as are extramari­
tal and premarital sex.
This group comprises many social conservatives, a small but powerful
social cohort. They are powerful because they speak for traditional values.
The chaos of the more highly educated classes can’t be called values yet; it
will be a century before their lifestyles congeal into a coherent moral system.
Therefore social conservatives have an inherent advantage, speaking coher­
ently from the authoritative position of tradition.
However, as we have seen, traditional distinctions between men and
women are collapsing. As women live longer and have fewer children, they
no longer are forced by circumstance into the traditional roles they had to
maintain prior to urbanization and industrialization. Nor is family the crit­
ical economic instrument it once was. Divorce is no longer economically cat­
astrophic, and premarital sex is inevitable. Homosexuality—and civil unions
without reproduction—also becomes unextraordinary. If sentiment is the
basis of marriage, then why indeed is gay marriage not as valid as heterosex­
ual marriage? If marriage is decoupled from reproduction, then gay mar­
riage logically follows. All these changes are derived from the radical shifts
in life patterns that are part of the end of the population explosion.
It is no accident, therefore, that traditionalists within all religious groups—
Catholics, Jews, Muslims, and others—have focused on returning to tradi­
tional patterns of reproduction. They all argue for, and many have, large fam­
ilies. Maintaining traditional roles for women in this context makes sense, as
do traditional expectations of early marriage, chastity, and the permanence of
marriage. The key is having more children, which is a traditionalist principle.
Everything else follows.
The issue is not only cropping up in advanced industrial societies. One
of the foundations of anti-Americanism, for example, is the argument that
American society breeds immorality, that it celebrates immodesty among
women and destroys the family. If you read the speeches of Osama bin Laden,
this theme is repeated continually. The world is changing and, he argues, we


are moving away from patterns of behavior that have traditionally been re­
garded as moral. He wants to stop this process.
These issues have become a global battleground as well as an internal po­
litical maelstrom in most advanced industrial countries, particularly the
United States. On one side there is a structured set of political forces that
have their roots in existing religious organizations. On the other side, there
is less a political force than an overwhelming pattern of behavior that is in­
different to the political consequences of the actions that are being taken.
This pattern of behavior is driven by demographic necessity. Certainly there
are movements defending various aspects of this evolution, like gay rights,
but the transformation is not being planned. It is simply happening.

The computer and american culture

Let’s look at this from another perspective, that of technology. As the Amer­
ican Age opens, the United States has a vested interest in the destruction of
traditional social patterns, which creates a certain amount of instability and
gives the United States maximum room to maneuver. American culture is
an uneasy melding of the Bible and the computer, of traditional values and
radical innovation. But along with demography, it is the computer that is
reshaping American culture and is the real foundation of American cultural
hegemony. This will become extraordinarily important in the next hundred
years.
The computer represents both a radical departure from previous technol­
ogy and a new way of looking at reason. The purpose of a computer is the
manipulation of quantitative data, that is, numbers. As a machine that ma­
nipulates data, it is a unique technology. But since it reduces all information—
music, ﬁlm, and the written word—to a number, it is also a unique way of
looking at reason.
The computer is based on binary logic. This simply means that it reads
electrical charges, which are either negative or positive and are treated as a 0
or a 1. It uses a string of these binary numbers to represent things we think
of as being very simple. So the capital letter A is represented as 01000001.


The small letter a is 01100001. These strings of numbers are reorganized
into machine language that in turn is managed by computer code written in
any of a number of languages, from Basic to C++ to Java.
If that seems complex, then simply remember this: To a computer, every­
thing is a number, from a letter on a screen to a bit of music. Everything is
reduced to zeros and ones. In order to manage computers, completely artiﬁ­
cial languages have been created. The purpose of those languages is getting
the computer to use the data it has been given.
But the computer can only manage things that can be expressed in bi­
nary code. It can play music, but it cannot write it (not well at least), or ex­
plain its beauty. It can store poetry but cannot explain its meaning. It can
allow you to search every book imaginable, yet it cannot distinguish be­
tween good and bad grammar, at least not well. It is superb at what it can
do, but it excludes a great deal of what the human mind is capable of doing.
It is a tool.
It is a powerful and seductive tool. Yet it operates using a logic that lacks
other, more complex, elements of reason. The computer focuses ruthlessly
on things that can be represented in numbers. By doing so, it also seduces
people into thinking that other aspects of knowledge are either unreal or
unimportant. The computer treats reason as an instrument for achieving
things, not for contemplating things. It narrows dramatically what we mean
and intend by reason. But within that narrow realm, the computer can do
extraordinary things.
Anyone who has learned a programming language understands its logi­
cal rigor, and its artiﬁciality. It doesn’t in the least resemble natural language.
In fact, it is the antithesis of natural language. The latter is ﬁlled with sub­
tlety, nuance, and complex meaning determined by context and inference.
The logical tool must exclude all of these things, as the binary logic of com­
puting is incapable of dealing with them.
American culture preceded American computing. The philosophical
concept of pragmatism was built around statements such as this by Charles
Peirce, a founder of pragmatism: “In order to ascertain the meaning of an
intellectual conception one should consider what practical consequences
might conceivably result by necessity from the truth of that conception; and
the sum of these consequences will constitute the entire meaning of the 


con­ception.” In other words, the signiﬁcance of an idea is in its practical conse­
quences. An idea without practical consequences, it follows, lacks meaning.
The entire notion of contemplative reason as an end in itself is excluded.
American pragmatism was an attack on European metaphysics on the
grounds of impracticality. American culture was obsessed with the practical
and contemptuous of the metaphysical. The computer and computer lan­
guage are the perfect manifestations of the pragmatic notion of reason.
Every line of code must have a practical consequence. Functionality is the
only standard. That a line of code could be appreciated not for its use but
for its intrinsic beauty is inconceivable.
The idea of pragmatism, as it has evolved into languages like C++, is a
radical simpliﬁcation and contraction of the sphere of reason. Reason now
deals only with some things, all of which are measured by their practical
consequences. Everything that lacks practical consequence is excluded from
the sphere of reason and sent to another, inferior sphere. In other words,
American culture does not deal easily with the true and beautiful. It values
getting things done and not worrying too much about why whatever thing
you are doing is important.
This gives American culture its central truth and its enormous drive.
The charge against American culture is that it has elevated the practical be­
yond all other forms of truth. The charge is valid, but it also fails to appre­
ciate the power of that reduction. It is in the practical that history is made.
If we look for the essence of American culture, it is not only in pragma­
tism as a philosophy but also in the computer as the embodiment of prag­
matism. Nothing exempliﬁes American culture more than the computer,
and nothing has transformed the world faster and more thoroughly than its
advent. The computer, far more than the car or Coca-Cola, represents the
unique manifestation of the American concept of reason and reality.
Computing culture is also, by deﬁnition, barbaric. The essence of bar­
barism is the reduction of culture to a simple, driving force that will tolerate
no diversion or competition. The way the computer is designed, the manner
in which it is programmed, and the way it has evolved represent a powerful,
reductionist force. It constitutes not reason contemplating its complexity,
but reason reducing itself to its simplest expression and justifying itself
through practical achievement.


Pragmatism, computers, and Microsoft (or any other American corpora­
tion) are ruthlessly focused, utterly instrumental, and highly effective. The
fragmentation of American culture is real, but it is slowly resolving itself
into the barbarism of the computer and the instrument that ultimately uses
and shapes the computer, the corporation. Corporations are an American
adaptation of a European concept. In its American form it turns into a way
of life. Corporations are as fragmented as the rest of American culture. But
in their diversity, they express the same self-certainty as any American
ideology.

Summing up

The United States is socially imitated and politically condemned. It sits on
the ideological fault line of the international system. As populations decline
due to shifts in reproductive patterns, the United States becomes the center
for radically redeﬁned modes of social life. You can’t have a modern econ­
omy without computers and corporations, and if you are going to program
computers, you need to know English, the language of computing. On one
hand, those who want to resist this trend must actively avoid the American
model of life and thought. On the other hand, those who don’t adopt Amer­
ica’s ways can’t have a modern economy. This is what gives America its
strength and continually frustrates its critics. Falling populations are re­
structuring the pattern of families and daily lives. Computers are trans­
forming, simplifying, and focusing the way people think. Corporations
are constantly reorganizing the way we work. Between these three factors,
love, reason, and daily life are being transformed, and through that trans­
formation American power is growing.
Old institutions have shattered, but new ones have not yet emerged. The
twenty-ﬁrst century will be a period in which a range of new institutions,
moral systems, and practices will begin their ﬁrst tentative emergence. The
ﬁrst half of the twenty-ﬁrst century will be marked by intense social conﬂict
globally. All of this frames the international struggles of the twenty-ﬁrst cen­tury.



CHAPTER 4
THE NEW FAULTLINES 


Where will the next earthquake strike and what will it look like? To
answer that question we need to examine the geopolitical fault
lines of the twenty-ﬁrst century. As with geology, there are many
such fault lines. Without pushing this analogy too far, we have to identify
the active fault lines in order to identify areas where friction might build up
into conﬂict. As the focus on the Islamic world subsides, what will be the
most unstable point in the world in the next era?
There are ﬁve areas of the world right now that are viable candidates.
First, there is the all-important Paciﬁc Basin. The United States Navy dom­
inates the Paciﬁc. The Asian rim of the Paciﬁc consists entirely of trading
countries dependent on access to the high seas, which are therefore depend­
ent on the United States. Two of them—China and Japan—are major pow­
ers that could potentially challenge U.S. hegemony. From 1941 to 1945 the
United States and Japan fought over the Paciﬁc Basin, and control of it re­
mains a potential issue today.
Second, we must consider the future of Eurasia after the fall of the Soviet
Union. Since 1991, the region has fragmented and decayed. The successor
state to the Soviet Union, Russia, is emerging from this period with renewed


self-conﬁdence. Yet Russia is also in an untenable geopolitical position. Un­
less Russia exerts itself to create a sphere of inﬂuence, the Russian Federa­
tion could itself fragment. On the other hand, creating that sphere of
inﬂuence could generate conﬂict with the United States and Europe.
Third, there is continuing doubt about the ultimate framework of Eu­
rope. For ﬁve centuries Europe has been an arena of constant warfare. For
the last sixty years it has been either occupied or trying to craft a federation
that would make the return of war impossible. Europe may yet have to deal
with the resurgence of Russia, the bullying of the United States, or internal
tensions. The door is certainly not closed on conﬂict.
Fourth, there is the Islamic world. It is not instability that is troubling,
but the emergence of a nation-state that, regardless of ideology, might form
the basis of a coalition. Historically, Turkey has been the most successful
center of power in the Muslim world. Turkey is also a dynamic and rapidly
modernizing country. What is its future, and what is the future of other
Muslim nation-states?
Fifth, there is the question of Mexican–American relations. Normally,
the status of Mexico would not rise to the level of a global fault line, but its
location in North America makes it important beyond its obvious power. As
the country with the ﬁfteenth highest GDP in the world, it should not be
underestimated on its own merits. Mexico has deep and historical issues
with the United States, and social forces may arise over the next century that
cannot be controlled by either government.
In order to pinpoint events that will occur in the future, we need to ex­
amine now which of these events are likely to occur and in what order. A
fault line does not necessarily guarantee an earthquake. Fault lines can exist
for millennia causing only occasional tremors. But with this many major
fault lines, conﬂict in the twenty-ﬁrst century is almost certain.

The pacific basin

The western shore of the Paciﬁc has been the fastest-growing region in the world for the past half century. 
It contains two of the world’s largest economies, those of Japan and China. Along with other East Asian economies,


they are heavily dependent on maritime trade, shipping goods to the United
States and Europe and importing raw material from the Persian Gulf and the
rest of the Pacific Basin. Any interruption in the flow of commodities would
be damaging. An extended interruption would be catastrophic.
Let’s consider Japan, the world’s second-largest economy and the only
major industrial power to possess no major natural resources of any sort.
Japan must import all of its major minerals, from oil to aluminum. Without
those imports—particularly oil—Japan stops being an industrial power in a
matter of months. To gauge the importance of this flow, bear in mind that
Japan attacked Pearl Harbor in 1941 because the United States had interfered with its access to raw materials.
China has also emerged as a major industrial power in the last generation, with growth surpassing that of any other major economy in the world,
although its economy is still far smaller than that of Japan or the United
States. Nevertheless, China is now a key player in the Pacific Basin. Previously, it was much more self-sufficient than Japan in terms of primary commodities. But as China has grown, it has outstripped its own resources and
become a net importer of raw materials.


The Paciﬁc now has two major Asian powers that are heavily dependent
on imports to fuel their economy and on exports to grow their economy.
Japan and China, along with South Korea and Taiwan, all depend on access
to the Paciﬁc in order to transport their goods and commodities. Since the
U.S. Navy controls the Paciﬁc Ocean, they rely on the United States for
their economic well-being. That is a huge bet for any nation to make on an­
other.
There is another side to this. The United States consumes massive
amounts of Asia’s industrial products, which beneﬁts the United States as a
whole by providing consumers with cheap goods. At the same time, this
trade pattern devastates certain American economic sectors and regions by
undermining domestic industry. What beneﬁts consumers can simultane­
ously increase unemployment and decrease wages, creating complex politi­
cal crosscurrents within the United States. One of the characteristics of the
United States is that it tends to be oversensitive to domestic political con­
cerns because it has a great deal of room to maneuver in foreign policy.
Therefore, regardless of the overall beneﬁts of trade with Asia, the United
States could wind up in a situation where domestic political considerations
force it to change its policy toward Asian imports. That possibility, however
remote, represents a serious threat to the interests of East Asia.
China sends almost one-quarter of all its exports to the United States. If
the United States barred Chinese products, or imposed tariffs that made
Chinese goods uncompetitive, China would face a massive economic crisis.
The same would be true for Japan and other Asian countries. Countries fac­
ing economic disaster become unpredictable. They can become aggressive
in trying to open up other markets, sometimes through political or military
pressure.
Militarily, however, the United States could shut down access to the Pa­
ciﬁc Ocean whenever it wished. Economically, the United States is depend­
ent on trade with Asia, but not nearly as dependent as Asia is on trade with
the United States. The United States is also susceptible to internal political
pressures from those groups disproportionately affected by cheaper Asian
imports. It is possible that the United States, responding to domestic pres­
sures, might try to reshape economic relations in the Paciﬁc Basin. One of
the tools it can use is protectionist legislation, backed up by its military


strength. So East Asia has no real effective counter to an American military
or economic move.
Subjectively, the last thing any nation in the region wants is conﬂict.
Objectively, however, there is a massive imbalance of power. Any shift in
America’s policies could wreak havoc on East Asia, and a shift in American
policy is far from unimaginable. The threat of American sanctions on
China, for example, through which the United States might seek to limit
Chinese importation of oil, strikes at the very heart of the Chinese national
interest. Therefore, the Chinese must use their growing economic strength
to develop military options against the United States. They will simply be
acting in accordance with the fundamental principle of strategic planning:
hope for the best, plan for the worst.
Over the course of the last ﬁfty years, the western Paciﬁc has dramati­
cally increased its economic power, but not its military power—and that
imbalance has left East Asia vulnerable. China and Japan will therefore have
no choice but to try to increase their military power in the coming century,
which the United States will see as a potential threat to U.S. control of the
western Paciﬁc. It will interpret a defensive move as aggressive, which objec­
tively it is, whatever their subjective intent. Add to this the ever-evolving na­
tions of South Korea and Taiwan, and the region is certain to be a powder
keg during the twenty-ﬁrst century.
What’s more, any Asian country that believes that huge mega-surges in
the price of oil are a realistic possibility cannot discount the threat of an
American energy grab. In the near term, the next twenty to ﬁfty years, this
is actually a very real scenario. Any rational Asian power must plan for this.
The only two that have the resources to challenge the United States at sea
are China and Japan, each antagonistic to the other yet sharing a common
fear of American behavior during an energy price spike.
Control of the Paciﬁc intersects with a more speciﬁc issue—control of
the sea lanes used for energy transportation. The higher the price of oil, and
the longer non-hydrocarbon energy sources are from being a reality, the
greater the likelihood of a confrontation over sea lanes. The imbalance of
power in this region is severe. That, coupled with the issues of energy trans­
port and access to the American markets, gives the Paciﬁc Basin its massive
geopolitical fault line.


Eurasia

For most of the second half of the twentieth century, the Soviet Union con­
trolled Eurasia—from central Germany to the Paciﬁc, as far south as the
Caucasus and the Hindu Kush. When the Soviet Union collapsed, its west­
ern frontier moved east nearly a thousand miles, from the West German
border to the Russian border with Belarus. From the Hindu Kush its border
moved northward a thousand miles to the Russian border with Kazakhstan.
Russia was pushed from the border of Turkey northward to the northern
Caucasus, where it is still struggling to keep its foothold in the region. Russ­
ian power has now retreated farther east than it has been in centuries. Dur­
ing the Cold War it had moved farther west than ever before. In the coming
decades, Russian power will settle somewhere between those two lines.
After the Soviet Union dissolved at the end of the twentieth century, for­
eign powers moved in to take advantage of Russia’s economy, creating an era
of chaos and poverty. They also moved rapidly to integrate as much as they
could of the Russian empire into their own spheres of inﬂuence. Eastern
Europe was absorbed into NATO and the EU, and the Baltic states were
also absorbed into NATO. The United States entered into a close relation­
ship with both Georgia in the Caucasus and with many of the Central Asian
“stans,” particularly after September 11, when the Russians allowed U.S.
forces into the area to wage the war in Afghanistan. Most signiﬁcantly,
Ukraine moved into an alignment with the United States and away from
Russia—this was a breaking point in Russian history.
The Orange Revolution in Ukraine, from December 2004 to January
2005, was the moment when the post–Cold War world genuinely ended for
Russia. The Russians saw the events in Ukraine as an attempt by the United
States to draw Ukraine into NATO and thereby set the stage for Russian dis­
integration. Quite frankly, there was some truth to the Russian perception.
If the West had succeeded in dominating Ukraine, Russia would have
become indefensible. The southern border with Belarus, as well as the
southwestern frontier of Russia, would have been wide open. In addition,
the distance between Ukraine and western Kazakhstan is only about four
hundred miles, and that is the gap through which Russia has been able to
project power toward the Caucasus (see map, page 71). We should assume,


then, that under these circumstances Russia would have lost its ability to
control the Caucasus and would have had to retreat farther north from
Chechnya. The Russians would have been abandoning parts of the Russian
Federation itself, and Russia’s own southern flank would become highly vulnerable. Russia would have continued to fragment until it returned to its
medieval frontiers.
Had Russia fragmented to this extent, it would have created chaos in
Eurasia—to which the United States would not have objected, since the U.S.
grand strategy has always aimed for the fragmentation of Eurasia as the first line
of defense for U.S. control of the seas, as we have seen. So the United States had
every reason to encourage this process; Russia had every reason to block it.
After what Russia regarded as an American attempt to further damage it,
Moscow reverted to a strategy of reasserting its sphere of influence in the areas of the former Soviet Union. The great retreat of Russian power ended in


Ukraine. Russian influence is now increasing in three directions: toward Central Asia, toward the Caucasus, and, inevitably, toward the West, the Baltics,
and Eastern Europe. For the next generation, until roughly 2020, Russia’s
primary concern will be reconstructing the Russian state and reasserting
Russian power in the region.
Interestingly, the geopolitical shift is aligning with an economic shift.
Vladimir Putin sees Russia less as an industrial power than as an exporter of raw
materials, the most important of which is energy (particularly natural gas).
Moving to bring the energy industry under state supervision, if not direct control, he is forcing out foreign interests and reorienting the industry toward exports, particularly to Europe.
High energy prices have helped stabilize Russia’s


economy internally. But he will not conﬁne his efforts to energy alone. He also
is seeking to capitalize on Russian agriculture, timber, gold, diamonds, and
other commodities. He is transforming Russia from an impoverished disaster
into a poor but more productive country. Putin also is giving Russia the tool
with which to intimidate Europe: the valve on a natural gas pipeline.
Russia is pressing back along its frontiers. It is deeply focused on Central
Asia and will over time ﬁnd success there, but Russia will have a more difﬁ­
cult time in the even more crucial Caucasus. The Russians do not intend to
allow any part of the Russian Federation to break away. As a result, there
will be friction, particularly in the next decade, with the United States and
other countries in the region as Russia reasserts itself.
But the real ﬂash point, in all likelihood, will be on Russia’s western
frontier. Belarus will align itself with Russia. Of all the countries in the for­
mer Soviet Union, Belarus has had the fewest economic and political re­
forms and has been the most interested in re-creating some successor to the
Soviet Union. Linked in some way to Russia, Belarus will bring Russian
power back to the borders of the former Soviet Union.
From the Baltics south to the Romanian border there is a region where
borders have historically been uncertain and conﬂict frequent. In the north,
there is a long, narrow plain, stretching from the Pyrenees to St. Petersburg.
This is where Europe’s greatest wars were fought. This is the path that
Napoleon and Hitler took to invade Russia. There are few natural barriers.
Therefore, the Russians must push their border west as far as possible to cre­
ate a buffer. After World War II, they drove into the center of Germany on
this plain. Today, they have retreated to the east. They have to return, and
move as far west as possible. That means the Baltic states and Poland are, as
before, problems Russia has to solve.
Deﬁning the limits of Russian inﬂuence will be controversial. The
United States—and the countries within the old Soviet sphere—will not
want Russia to go too far. The last thing the Baltic states want is to fall un­
der Russian domination again. Neither do the states south of the northern
European plain, in the Carpathians. The former Soviet satellites—particu­
larly Poland, Hungary, and Romania—understand that the return of Rus­
sian forces to their frontiers would represent a threat to their security. And
since these countries are now part of NATO, their interests necessarily affect


the interests of Europe and the United States. The open question is where
the line will be drawn in the west. This has been a historical question, and it
was a key challenge in Europe over the past hundred years.
Russia will not become a global power in the next decade, but it has no
choice but to become a major regional power. And that means it will clash
with Europe. The Russian–European frontier remains a fault line.

Europe

Europe is still in the process of reorganizing itself after the loss of its empire
and two devastating world wars, and it remains to be seen whether that re­
organization will be peaceful. Europe is not going to regain its empire, but
the complacent certainty that intra-European wars have ended needs to be
examined. Central to this is the question of whether Europe is a spent vol­
cano or whether it is merely dormant. The European Union has a total
GDP of over $14 trillion, a trillion more than the United States. It is possi­
ble that a region of such wealth—and of such diversity in wealth—will re­
main immune from conﬂict, but it is not guaranteed.
It is unreasonable to talk of Europe as if it were one entity. It is not, in
spite of the existence of the European Union. Europe consists of a series of
sovereign and contentious nation-states. There is a general entity called Eu­
rope, but it is more reasonable to think of four Europes (we exclude Russia
and the nations of the former Soviet Union from this list—although geo­
graphically European, these have a very different dynamic from that of Eu­
rope):
•	 Atlantic Europe: the nations that front the Atlantic Ocean and North
Sea directly and that were the major imperial powers during the past
ﬁve hundred years.
•	 Central Europe: essentially Germany and Italy, which did not come
into existence until the late nineteenth century as modern nationstates. It was their assertion of national interest that led to the two
world wars of the twentieth century.
•	 Eastern Europe: the nations running from the Baltic to the Black Sea


that were occupied by Soviet troops in World War II and developed
their recent national identities from this experience.
• There is, of course, a fourth less significant Europe, the Scandinavian
countries.
In the first half of the twentieth century, Atlantic Europe was the imperial heart of the world. Central Europeans were later comers and challengers. Eastern Europeans were the victims. Torn apart by two world wars,
Europe faced a fundamental question: What was the status of Germany in
the European system? The Germans, frozen out of the imperial system created by Atlantic Europe, sought to overturn that system and assert their


dominance. The conclusion of World War II found Germany shattered, di­
vided and occupied, controlled by Soviets in the east, and England, France,
and the United States in the west.
West Germany was indispensable to the United States and its NATO al­
liance because of the confrontation with the Soviets. Creating a German
army, obviously, posed a problem. If the origins of the two world wars were
in the growth of German power, and Germany was encouraged to be pow­
erful again, what was to prevent a third European war? The answer rested in
the integration of the German army into NATO—essentially putting it un­
der American command in the ﬁeld. But the broader answer lay in the inte­
gration of Germany into Europe as a whole.
During the 1950s, when NATO was created, the European Economic
Community was also conceived. The European Union, which emerged
from it, is a schizophrenic entity. Its primary purpose is the creation of an
integrated European economy, while leaving sovereignty in the hands of in­
dividual nations. Simultaneously, it is seen as the preface to a federation of
European countries, in which a central European government, with a par­
liament and professional civil service, would govern a federal Europe where
national sovereignty was limited to local matters, and defense and foreign
policy rested with the whole.
Europe has not achieved this goal. It has created a free-trade zone and a
European currency, which some members of the free-trade zone use and
others do not. It has failed to create a political constitution, however, leav­
ing individual nations sovereign—and therefore never has produced a
united defense or foreign policy. Defense policy, to the extent it is coordi­
nated, is in the hands of NATO, and not all members of NATO are mem­
bers of the EU (notably the United States). With the collapse of the Soviet
empire, individual countries in Eastern Europe were admitted to the EU
and NATO.
In short, post–Cold War Europe is in benign chaos. It is impossible to
unravel the extraordinarily complex and ambiguous institutional relation­
ships that have been created. Given the history of Europe, such confusion
would normally lead to war. But Europe, excepting the former Yugoslavia,
has no energy for war, no appetite for instability, and certainly no desire for
conﬂict. Europe’s psychological transformation has been extraordinary.


Where, prior to 1945, slaughter and warfare had been regular pastimes for
centuries, after 1945 even the conceptual chaos of European institutions
could not generate conﬂict beyond rhetoric.
Underneath the surface of the EU, the old European nationalisms con­
tinue to assert themselves, albeit sluggishly. This can be seen in economic
negotiations within the EU. The French, for example, assert the right to
protect their farmers from excessive competition, or the right not to honor
treaties controlling their deﬁcits. Therefore, in a geopolitical context, Eu­
rope has not become a uniﬁed transnational entity.
For these reasons, talking of Europe as if it were a single entity like the
United States, or China, is illusory. It is a collection of nation-states, still
shell-shocked by World War II, the Cold War, and the loss of empire. These
nation-states are highly insular and determine their geopolitical actions ac­
cording to their individual interests. Primary interactions are not between
Europe and the rest of the world, but among European nations. In this
sense, Europe behaves far more like Latin America than like a great power.
In Latin America, Brazil and Argentina spend a great deal of time thinking
about each other, knowing that their effect on the globe is limited.
Russia is the immediate strategic threat to Europe. Russia is interested
not in conquering Europe, but in reasserting its control over the former So­
viet Union. From the Russian point of view, this is both a reasonable at­
tempt to establish some minimal sphere of inﬂuence and essentially a
defensive measure. However, it is a defensive measure that will immediately
affect the three Baltic states, which are now integrated into European insti­
tutions.
Obviously the Eastern Europeans want to prevent a Russian resurgence.
The real question is what the rest of Europe might do—and especially, what
Germany might do. The Germans are now in a comfortable position with a
buffer between them and the Russians, free to focus on their internal eco­
nomic and social problems. In addition, the heritage of World War II
weighs heavily on the Germans. They will not want to act alone, but as part
of a uniﬁed Europe.
Germany’s position is unpredictable. It is a nation that has learned, given
its geopolitical position, that it is enormously dangerous to assert its na­
tional interest. In 1914 and 1939, Germany attempted to act decisively in


response to geopolitical threats, and each time its efforts ended catastrophi­
cally. The German analysis is that engaging in politico-military maneuvers
outside of a broad coalition exposes Germany to tremendous danger. At­
lantic Europe sees Germany as a buffer against Russia and will see any threat
in the Baltics as being irrelevant to their interests. Therefore, they will not
join the coalition Germany needs to face the Russians. So the most likely
outcome will be German inaction, limited American involvement, and a
gradual return of Russian power into the borderland between Europe and
Russia.
But there is another scenario. In this scenario Germany will recognize
the imminent danger to Poland in Russian domination of the Baltics. See­
ing Poland as a necessary part of German national security, it will thus exer­
cise a forward policy, designed to protect Poland by protecting the Baltics.
Germany will move to dominate the Baltic basin. Since the Russians will
not simply abandon the ﬁeld, the Germans will ﬁnd themselves in an ex­
tended confrontation with the Russians, competing for inﬂuence in Poland
and in the Carpathian region.
Germany will ﬁnd itself, of necessity, both split off from its aggressive
past and from the rest of Europe. While the rest of Europe will try to avoid
involvement, the Germans will be engaged in traditional power politics. As
they do that, their effective as well as potential power will soar and their psy­
chology will shift. Suddenly, a united Germany will be asserting itself again.
What starts defensively will evolve in unexpected ways.
This is not the most likely scenario. However, the situation might galva­
nize Germany back into its traditional role of looking at Russia as a major
threat, and looking at Poland and the rest of Eastern Europe as a part of its
sphere of inﬂuence and as protection against the Russians. This depends
partly on how aggressively the Russians move, how tenaciously the Balts re­
sist, how much risk the Poles are willing to take, and how distant the United
States intends to be. Finally, it depends on internal German politics.
Internally, Europe is inert, still in shock over its losses. But external
forces such as Islamic immigration or Russian attempts to rebuild its empire
could bring the old fault line back to life in various ways.


We have already discussed the Islamic world in general as a fault line. The
current crisis is being contained, but the Islamic world, overall, remains un­
stable. While this instability will not gel into a general Islamist uprising, it
does raise the possibility of a Muslim nation-state taking advantage of the
instability, and therefore the weaknesses within other states, to assert itself as
a regional power. Indonesia, the largest Muslim state in the world, is in no
position to assert itself. Pakistan is the second-largest Muslim state. It is also
a nuclear power. But it is so internally divided that it is difﬁcult to see how
it could evolve into a major power or, geographically, how it could spread its
power, bracketed by Afghanistan to the west, China and Russia to the
north, and India to the east. Between instability and geography, Pakistan is
not going to emerge as a leading Muslim state.
After Indonesia and Pakistan, there are three other major Muslim
nation-states. The largest is Egypt with 80 million people, Turkey is second
with 71 million people, and Iran is third with 65 million.
When we look at the three economically, Turkey has the seventeenthlargest economy in the world, with a GDP of about $660 billion. Iran is
twenty-ninth, with a GDP of just under $300 billion. Egypt is ﬁfty-second,
with a GDP of about $125 billion a year. For the past ﬁve years Turkey’s
economy has been growing at 5 to 8 percent a year, one of the highest sus­
tained growth rates for any major country. With the exception of two years
of recession, Iran has also had a sustained GDP growth rate of over 6 per­
cent for the past ﬁve years, as has Egypt. These two countries are growing
fast, but they are starting with a much smaller base than Turkey. Compared
to European countries, Turkey already has the seventh-largest economy and
is growing faster than most.
Now, it’s true that economic size is not everything. Iran appears to be the
most aggressive of the three geopolitically—but that is actually its basic
weakness. In trying to protect its regime against the United States, Sunni
Muslims, and anti-Iranian Arabs (Iran is not an Arab country), Iran is con­
stantly forced to be prematurely assertive. In the process, it draws the atten­
tion of the United States, which then inevitably focuses on Iran as a
dangerous power.


Because of its interests in the Persian Gulf and Iraq, Iranian goals run
counter to those of the United States. That means Iran must divert resources
to protect itself against the possibility of American attack at a time when its
economy needs to develop very rapidly in order to carry it into the ﬁrst rank
regionally. The bottom line is that Iran irritates the United States. Sufﬁ­
ciently alarmed, the United States could devastate Iran. Iran is simply not
ready for regional power status. It is constantly forced to dissipate its power
prematurely. Attempting to become a major regional power while the world’s
greatest power is focused on your every move is, to say the least, difﬁcult.
There is also the question of geography. Iran is on the margins of the re­
gion. Afghanistan is to the east, and there is little to be gained there. In any
expansion of inﬂuence to the north, Iran would collide with the Russians.
Iraq is a possible direction in which to move, but it can also become both a
morass and a focal point for Arab and American countermeasures. It is not
easy to increase Iranian regional power. Any move will cost more than it is
worth.
Egypt is the largest country in the Arab world and has been its tradi­
tional leader. Under Gamal Abdel Nasser, it made a major play to become
the leader of the Arab world. The Arab world, however, was deeply frag­
mented, and Egypt managed to antagonize key players like Saudi Arabia.
After the Camp David accords with Israel in 1978, Egypt stopped trying to
expand its power. It had failed anyway. Given its economy, and its relative
isolation and insularity, it is hard to see Egypt becoming a regional power
within any meaningful time frame. It is more likely to fall into someone
else’s sphere of inﬂuence, whether Turkish, American, or Russian, which has
been its fate for several centuries.
Turkey is a very different case. It is not only a major modern economy,
but it is by far the largest economy in the region—much larger than Iran,
and perhaps the only modern economy in the entire Muslim world. Most
important, it is strategically located between Europe, the Middle East, and
Russia.
Turkey is not isolated and tied down; it has multiple directions in which
it can move. And, most important, it does not represent a challenge to Amer­
ican interests and is therefore not constantly confronted with an American
threat. This means it does not have to devote resources to blocking the


United States. With its economy surging, it will likely soon reemerge in its
old role, as the dominant force in the region.
It must be remembered that until World War I, Turkey was the seat of
a major empire (see map, page 82). Shorn of its empire, Turkey became a
secular state governing a Muslim population. It was, until 1918, the most
powerful Muslim country in the world. And, at its height in the fourteenth
to sixteenth centuries, the Turkish empire was far reaching and extremely
powerful.
By the sixteenth century, Turkey was the dominant Mediterranean
power, controlling not only North Africa and the Levant but also southeastern Europe, the Caucasus, and the Arabian Peninsula.
Turkey is an internally complex society, with a secular regime protected
by a military charged constitutionally with that role and a growing Islamist
movement. It is far from certain what sort of internal government it might
end up having. But when we look at the wreckage of the Islamic world after


the American invasion of Iraq in 2003 and consider which country must be
taken seriously in the region, it seems obvious that it must be Turkey, an ally
of the United States and the region’s most important economic power.

Mexico

If anyone had said in 1950 that the world’s great economic powerhouses a
half century later would be Japan and Germany, ranked second and third,
that person would have been ridiculed. If you argued in 1970 that by 2007
China would be the world’s fourth-largest economic power, the laughter
would have been even more intense. But it would have been no funnier
than arguing in 1800 that the United States by 1900 would be a world
power. Things change, and the unexpected should be expected.
It is important to note, therefore, that in 2007 Mexico had the world’s
fifteenth-largest economy, just a bit behind Australia. Mexico ranked much
lower in per capita income, of course, placing sixtieth, with a per capita income 


of roughly $12,000 a year as measured by the International Monetary
Fund, ranking with Turkey and way ahead of China, undoubtedly a major
power.
Per capita income is important. But the total size of the economy is even
more important for international power. Poverty is a problem, but the size of
the economy determines what percentage of your resources you can devote
to military and related matters. The Soviet Union and China both had low
per capita incomes. Yet the sheer sizes of their economies made them great
powers. In fact, a substantial economy plus a large population have histori­
cally made a nation something to be reckoned with, regardless of poverty.
Mexico’s population was about 27 million in 1950. It surged to about
100 million over the next ﬁfty years and to 107 million by 2005. The UN
forecast for 2050 is between 114 million and 139 million people, with 114
million being more probable. Having increased about fourfold in the last
ﬁfty years, Mexico’s population will be basically stable in the next ﬁfty. But
Mexico will not lose population (like the advanced industrial countries will
in the future), and Mexico has the workforce it needs to expand. This gives
it an advantage. So, in terms of population or size, Mexico is not a small
country. Certainly it is an unstable country, torn by drugs and cartels, but
China was in chaos in 1970. Chaos can be overcome.
There are plenty of other countries like Mexico that we would not label
as signiﬁcant geopolitical fault lines. But Mexico is fundamentally different
from any of these, like Brazil or India. Mexico is in North America, which,
as we have discovered, is now the center of gravity of the international sys­
tem. It also fronts both the Atlantic and Paciﬁc oceans and shares a long and
tense border with the United States. Mexico has already fought a major war
with the United States for domination of North America, and lost. Mexico’s
society and economy are intricately bound together with those of the
United States. Mexico’s strategic location and its increasing importance as a
nation make it a potential fault line.
To understand the nature of the fault line, let me brieﬂy touch on the
concept of borderland. Between two neighboring countries, there is fre­
quently an area that has, over time, passed back and forth between them. It
is an area of mixed nationalities and cultures. For example, Alsace-Lorraine
lies between France and Germany. It has a unique mixed culture and indi­viduals

with different national loyalties. French, German, and a mixed re­
gional argot are spoken there. Right now, France controls the region. But re­
gardless of who controls it at any given time, it is a borderland, with two
cultures and an underlying tension. The world is ﬁlled with borderlands.
Think of Northern Ireland as the borderland between the United Kingdom
and Ireland. Kashmir is a borderland between India and Pakistan. Think of
the Russian–Polish border, or of Kosovo, the borderland between Serbia and
Albania. Think of the French-Canadian–U.S. border. These are all border­
lands of varying degrees of tension.
There is a borderland between the United States and Mexico, with Mex­
icans and Americans sharing a mixed culture. The borderland is on both
sides of the ofﬁcial border. The U.S. side is unlike the rest of the United
States, and the Mexican side is unlike the rest of Mexico. Like other border­
lands, this one is its own unique place, with one exception: Mexicans on
both sides of the border have deep ties to Mexico, and Americans have deep
ties to the United States. Underneath the economic and cultural mixture,
there is always political tension. This is particularly true here because of the
constant movement of Mexicans into the borderland, across the border, and
throughout the United States. The same cannot be said of Americans mi­
grating south into Mexico.
Most borderlands change hands many times. The U.S.–Mexican border­
land has changed hands only once so far.
Northern Mexico was slowly absorbed by the United States beginning
with the 1835–1836 revolution in Texas and culminating in the MexicanAmerican War of 1846–1848. It constituted the southwestern part of today’s
United States. The border was set at the Rio Grande, and later adjusted in
the west to include the south of Arizona. The indigenous Mexican popula­
tion was not forcibly displaced. Mexicans continued to live in the area,
which was later occupied by a much larger number of American settlers
from the east. During the second half of the twentieth century, another
population movement from Mexico into the borderland and beyond took
place, further complicating the demographic picture.
We can draw a distinction between conventional immigration and pop­
ulation movements in a borderland. When other immigrant groups arrive
in a country, they are physically separated from their homeland and sur­rounded 


by powerful forces that draw their children into the host culture
and economy. A movement into a borderland is different. It is an extension
of one’s homeland, not a separation from it. The border represents a political boundary, not a cultural or economic boundary, and immigrants are not
at a great distance from home. They remain physically connected, and their
loyalties are complex and variable.
Mexicans who move into the borderland behave differently from Mexicans living in Chicago. Those in Chicago behave more like conventional
immigrants. Mexicans in the borderland potentially can regard themselves
as living in occupied territory rather than a foreign country. This is no different from the way American settlers in Texas viewed their position prior to
the revolution. They were Mexican citizens, but they saw themselves primarily as Americans and created a secessionist movement that tore Texas away
from Mexico.


At a certain point, the status of the borderland simply becomes a ques­
tion of military and political power. The borderland belongs to the stronger
side, and the question of strength is determined on the ground. Since 1848,
the political border has been ﬁxed by the overwhelming power of the
United States. Populations might shift. Smuggling might take place. But the
political boundaries are ﬁxed by military reality.
Later in the century, the current border will have been in place for two
hundred years. Mexican national power might reemerge, and the demogra­
phy of the borderland on the American side may have shifted so dramati­
cally that the political boundaries might not be able to hold. At that time,
it’s quite possible that Mexico may no longer be the ﬁfteenth-biggest coun­
try economically, but well into the top ten. Stranger things have happened,
and free trade with the United States helps. The countries currently ranked
ahead of Mexico include many European countries with severe demo­
graphic problems.
Given the impact of a potential Mexican–American confrontation on
the border, there is no question but that this fault line must be taken seri­
ously.

Summing up

If we are looking for new challenges after the U.S.–jihadist war is over, there
are two obvious places to look. Mexico and Turkey are clearly not yet ready
for a signiﬁcant global role, and Europe will remain insular and divided (it
will react to events but will not initiate them). That leaves two fault lines,
the Paciﬁc and Eurasia, and, in the context of 2020, that means two coun­
tries possibly asserting themselves: China or Russia. A third possibility, more
distant in the context of 2020, is Japan, but Japan’s behavior will depend
heavily on China’s. Therefore, we need to examine with some care the
geopolitical positions of China and Russia in order to predict which will be­
come active ﬁrst, and which will therefore pose the greatest challenge to the
United States in the next decade.
What we are talking about here, geopolitically, are what we call “sys­
temic” conﬂicts. The Cold War was a systemic conﬂict. It pitted the two


leading powers against each other in a way that deﬁned the entire interna­
tional system. There were other conﬂicts, but most of them got sucked into
the vortex of the major conﬂict. Thus everything from the Arab–Israeli wars
to Chilean internal politics to Congolese independence got drawn into the
Cold War and shaped by it. The two world wars were also systemic con­
ﬂicts.
By deﬁnition, such a conﬂict must include the dominant geopolitical
power at the time. Therefore, it must include the United States. And, again
by deﬁnition, the United States will include itself in any major confronta­
tion. If Russia and China were to confront each other, U.S. indifference or
neutrality would be highly improbable. The outcome of the confrontation
would mean too much to the United States. Moreover, Russia and China
could not ﬁght each other without absolute guarantees that the United
States would stay out of the war. The United States is so powerful that its al­
liance with either would mean the defeat of the other.
Which country, China or Russia, is more likely to act in such a way as to
bring it into confrontation with the United States? Given what we have seen
of American grand strategy, the United States is not inclined to begin a con­
ﬂict itself, unless it is faced with an aggressive regional power seeking to in­
crease its security to the point of being able to threaten American interests
in a fragmented Eurasian landmass. So, looking into future decades, we
need to address the inclinations of China and Russia. Let’s begin with the
power everyone takes most seriously China.



CHAPTER 5

CHINA 2020
Paper Tiger

Any discussion of the future has to begin with a discussion of China.
One-quarter of the world lives in China, and there has been a great
deal of discussion of China as a future global power. Its economy
has been surging dramatically in the past thirty years, and it is certainly a
signiﬁcant power. But thirty years of growth does not mean unending
growth. It means that the probability of China continuing to grow at this
rate is diminishing. And in the case of China, slower growth means sub­
stantial social and political problems. I don’t share the view that China is go­
ing to be a major world power. I don’t even believe it will hold together as a
uniﬁed country. But I do agree that we can’t discuss the future without ﬁrst
discussing China.
China’s geography makes it unlikely that it will become an active fault line.
If it were to become an area of conﬂict, it would be less China striking out
than China becoming the victim of others taking advantage of its weakness.
China’s economy is not nearly as robust as it might seem, and its political sta­
bility, which depends heavily on continuing rapid growth, is even more pre­
carious. China is important, however, because it appears to be the most likely
global challenger in the near term—at least in the minds of others.



Again, using geopolitics as our framework, we will begin by considering
the basics.
First, China is an island. It is obviously not surrounded by water, but it
is surrounded by impassable terrain and wastelands that effectively isolate it
from the rest of the world (see map below).
To China’s north are Siberia and the Mongolian steppe—inhospitable,
lightly settled, and difficult to traverse. To the southwest are the impassable
Himalayas. The southern border with Myanmar, Laos, and Vietnam is simultaneously mountains and jungle, and to the east are oceans. Only its
western border with Kazakhstan can be traveled by large numbers of people,
but there too, movement involves a level of effort not frequently justified in
Chinese history.
The vast majority of China’s population lives within one thousand miles
of the coast, populating the eastern third of the country, with the other twothirds being quite underpopulated (see map, page 90).
China was completely conquered only once—by the Mongols in the


twelfth century—and it has rarely extended its power beyond its present
borders. China is not historically aggressive and has only intermittently involved itself with the rest of the world. It must be remembered that China
has not always engaged in international trade, periodically closing itself off
and avoiding contact with foreigners. When it does engage in trade, it does
so using overland routes like the Silk Road through Central Asia and merchant ships sailing from its eastern ports (see map, page 91). The Europeans
encountered a China in the mid-nineteenth century that was going through
one of its isolationist periods. It was united but relatively poor. The Europeans forced their way in, engaging coastal China in intense trade. This had
two effects. The first was the dramatic increase in wealth in the coastal areas
that were engaged in trade. The second was the massive increase in inequality between China’s coast and the poor interior regions. This disparity also
led to the weakening of the central government’s control over the coastal regions, and to increased instability and chaos. The coastal regions preferred
close ties to (and even domination by) the Europeans.


The period of chaos lasted from the mid-nineteenth century until the
Communists took power in 1949. Mao had tried to foment a revolution in
coastal cities like Shanghai. Having failed, he took the famous long march
into the interior, where he raised an army of poor peasants, fought a civil
war, and retook the coast. He then returned China to its pre-European enclosure. From 1949 until Mao’s death, China was united and dominated by
a strong government, but was isolated and poor.

China’s gamble

Mao’s death led his successors to try once more for the historic Chinese
dream. They wanted a China that was wealthy from international trade
but united under a single powerful government. Deng Xiaoping, Mao’s
successor, knew that China could not remain isolated permanently and
still be secure. Someone would take advantage of China’s economic weakness. Deng therefore gambled. He bet that this time China could open its
borders, engage in international trade, and not be torn apart by internal
conflict.


The coastal regions again became prosperous and closely tied to outside
powers. Inexpensive products and trade produced wealth for the great
coastal cities like Shanghai, but the interior remained impoverished. Ten­
sions between the coast and the interior increased, but the Chinese govern­
ment maintained its balance and Beijing continued to rule, without losing
control of any of the regions and without having to risk generating revolt by
being excessively repressive.
This has gone on for about thirty years, which is not very long by any
standard (and certainly not by Chinese ones). The open question is whether
the internal forces building up in China can be managed. And this is the
point at which we begin our analysis of China and its effect on the interna­
tional system in the twenty-ﬁrst century. Will China remain part of the
global trading system? And if it does, will it disintegrate again?
China is gambling at the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century that it
can carry out an indeﬁnite balancing act. The assumption is that it will be
able to gradually shift resources away from the wealthier coastal regions
toward the interior without meeting resistance from the coast and with­
out encountering restlessness in the interior. Beijing wants to keep the vari­
ous parts of China happy and is doing everything in its power to achieve
that end.
Underlying this is another serious, and more threatening, problem. China
appears to be a capitalist country with private property, banks, and all the
other accoutrements of capitalism. But it is not truly capitalist in the sense
that the markets do not determine capital allocation. Who you know counts
for much more than whether you have a good business plan. Between Asian
systems of family and social ties and the communist systems of political re­
lationships, loans have been given out for a host of reasons, none of them
having much to do with the merits of the business. As a result, not surpris­
ingly, a remarkably large number of these loans have gone bad—“nonper­
forming,” in the jargon of banking. The amount is estimated at somewhere
between $600 billion and $900 billion, or between a quarter and a third of
China’s GDP, a staggering amount.
These bad debts are being managed through very high growth rates
driven by low-cost exports. The world has a huge appetite for cheap exports,
and the cash coming in from them keeps businesses with huge debts aﬂoat.


But the lower China sets its prices, the less proﬁt there is in them. Proﬁtless
exports drive a giant churning of the economic engine without actually get­
ting it anywhere. Think of it as a business that makes money by selling
products at or below cost. A huge amount of cash ﬂows into the business,
but it ﬂows out just as fast.
This has been an ongoing issue in East Asia, and the example of Japan is
instructive. Japan during the 1980s was seen as an economic superpower. It
was devastating American businesses—MBAs were being taught to learn
from the Japanese and emulate their business practices. Certainly Japan was
growing extremely rapidly, but its rapid growth had less to do with manage­
ment than with Japan’s banking system.
Japanese banks, under government regulation, paid extremely low inter­
est rates on money deposited by ordinary Japanese. Under the various laws,
the only option for most Japanese was to put money into Japan’s post ofﬁce,
which doubled as a bank. The post ofﬁce paid minimal interest rates. The
government turned around and lent this money to Japan’s largest banks,
again at interest rates well below international levels. These banks lent it
again cheaply to businesses with which they were linked, so Sumitomo
Bank loaned the money to Sumitomo Chemical. While American compa­
nies were borrowing money at double-digit rates in the 1970s, Japanese
companies were borrowing money at a fraction of that amount.
It was no surprise that Japanese businesses did better than American
ones. The cost of money was much lower. It is also no surprise that the
Japanese had extremely high savings rates. Japan had virtually no public re­
tirement plan at the time, and corporate pensions were minimal. Japanese
planned for retirement through savings. They weren’t more frugal, just more
desperate. And this pool of desperate depositors had no alternative but to
make deposits at very low interest rates.
While high interest rates imposed discipline on Western economies,
culling out the weaker companies, Japanese banks were lending money at
artiﬁcially low rates to friendly corporations. No real market existed. Money
was ﬂowing and relationships were the key. As a result, a lot of bad loans
were made.
The primary means of ﬁnancing in Japan was not raising equity in the
stock market. It was borrowing money from banks. Boards of directors con­sisted 


of company employees and bankers who were not interested in proﬁts
nearly as much as they were in cash ﬂow that would keep their companies
aﬂoat and pay off their debts. So Japan had one of the lowest rates of return
on capital in the industrialized world. But it had a fabulous growth rate in
terms of size because of the way the Japanese structured their economy.
They lived by exporting.
The Japanese had to. With an extremely high savings rate driving the
system, average Japanese citizens were not spending money, and therefore
Japan could not build the economy on domestic demand. And since Japa­
nese companies were controlled not by investors but by insiders and bankers,
what they wanted to do was increase the cash coming in. How much, if any,
proﬁt was generated mattered less. Therefore, low-cost exports surged. More
money was lent, more cash was needed, and more exports were sent out.
The economy grew. But underneath it, a crisis was brewing.
The casual ways in which Japanese banks made loans increased the num­
ber of nonperforming loans—loans that were not being repaid. A lot of bad
ideas were funded. Rather than write these off and let the businesses in­
volved go into bankruptcy, Japanese banks covered up with more loans to
keep the companies alive. Loans surged, and since depositors’ money was
spent maintaining the system, exports to bring in even more money were es­
sential. The system was awash with money, but underneath it a vast array of
companies on life support—and companies struggling to increase cash
without regard for proﬁt—were undermining the entire ﬁnancial system.
Massive surges in exports were producing very little proﬁt. The entire sys­
tem was churning just to keep itself aﬂoat.
From the outside, Japan was surging, taking over markets with incredi­
ble products at cheap prices. It was not obsessed with proﬁts like American
ﬁrms were, and the Japanese appeared to have a hammerlock on the future.
In fact, the opposite was true. Japan was living off a legacy of cheap,
government-controlled money, and low prices were a desperate attempt to
keep the cash coming in so the banking system would hold together.
In the end, the debt structure grew too massive and it became impossible
to stay in front of it with exports. Japanese banks began to collapse and were
bailed out by the government. Instead of permitting a massive recession to
impose discipline, Japan used various salvaging means to put off extreme pain


in return for a long-term malaise that is still lingering. Growth plunged,
markets plunged. Interestingly, while the crisis hit in the early 1990s, many
Westerners did not notice that the Japanese economy had failed until years
later. They were still talking about the Japanese economic miracle in the
mid-1990s.
How is this relevant to China? China is Japan on steroids. It is not only
an Asian state that values social relations above economic discipline but a
communist state that allocates money politically and manipulates economic
data. It is also a state in which equity holders—demanding proﬁts—are less
important than bankers and government ofﬁcials, who demand cash. Both
economies rely heavily on exports, both have staggeringly high growth rates,
and both face collapse when the growth rate begins even to barely slow.
Japan’s bad debt rate around 1990 was, by my estimate, about 20 percent of
GDP. China’s, under the most conservative estimate, is about 25 percent—
and I would argue the number is closer to 40 percent. But even 25 percent
is staggeringly high.
China’s economy appears healthy and vibrant, and if you look only at
how fast the economy is growing, it is breathtaking. Growth is only one fac­
tor to examine, however. The more important question is whether such
growth is proﬁtable. Much of China’s growth is very real, and it generates
the money necessary to keep the banks satisﬁed. But this growth really does
not strengthen the economy. And if and when it slacks off, for example be­
cause of a recession in the United States, the entire structure could crumble
very fast.
This is not a new story in Asia. Japan was a growth engine in the 1980s.
Conventional wisdom said it was going to bury the United States. But in re­
ality, while Japan’s economy was growing fast, its growth rates were unsus­
tainable. When growth slumped, Japan had a massive banking crisis from
which it has not really fully recovered almost twenty years later. Similarly,
when East Asia’s economy imploded in 1997, it came as a surprise to many,
since the economies had been growing so fast.
China has expanded extraordinarily for the last thirty years. The idea
that such growth rates can be sustained indeﬁnitely or permanently violates
basic principles of economics. At some point the business cycle, culling
weak business, must rear its ugly head—and it will. At some point a simple


lack of skilled labor will halt continued growth. There are structural limits
to growth, and China is reaching them.


China’s political crisis

Japan solved its problem with a generation of low growth. It had the politi­
cal and social discipline to do this without unrest. East Asia solved it in two
ways. Some countries, like South Korea and Taiwan, imposed painful mea­
sures and came out stronger than ever, but this was possible only because
they had strong states able to impose pain. Some countries, like Indonesia,
never really recovered.
The problem for China is political. China is held together by money,
not ideology. When there is an economic downturn and the money stops
rolling in, not only will the banking system spasm, but the entire fabric of
Chinese society will shudder. Loyalty in China is either bought or coerced.
Without available money, only coercion remains. Business slowdowns can
generally lead to instability because they lead to business failure and unem­
ployment. In a country where poverty is endemic and unemployment wide­
spread, the added pressure of an economic downturn will result in political
instability.
Recall how China split into coastal and interior regions between the
British intrusion and Mao’s triumph. Businesses on the coast, prosperous
from foreign trade and investment, gravitated to their foreign interests, try­
ing to break free from the central government. They drew in European
imperialists—and Americans—who had ﬁnancial interests in China. To­
day’s situation is potentially the same. A businessman in Shanghai has inter­
ests in common with Los Angeles, New York, and London. In fact, he
makes far more money from these relationships than he does from Beijing.
As Beijing tries to clamp down on him, not only will he want to break free
of its control, but he will try to draw in foreign powers to protect his and
their interests. In the meantime, the much poorer people in the interior of
the country will be either trying to move to the coastal cities or pressuring
Beijing to tax the coast and give them money. Beijing, caught in the middle,
either weakens and loses control or clamps down so hard that it moves back


to a Maoist enclosure of the country. The critical question is which outcome
is more likely.
The Chinese regime rests on two pillars. One is the vast bureaucracy that
operates China. The second is the military-security complex that enforces
the will of the state and the Communist Party. A third pillar, the ideological
principles of the Communist Party, has now disappeared. Egalitarianism,
selﬂessness, and service to the people are now archaic values, preached but
not believed by or practiced by the Chinese people.
State, party, and security apparati are as affected by the decline in ideol­
ogy as the rest of society. Communist Party ofﬁcials have been the personal
beneﬁciaries of the new order. If the regime were to try to bring the coastal
regions under control, it is hard to imagine the apparatus being particularly
aggressive, as it is part of the same system that enriched those regions. In the
nineteenth century the same problem emerged when government ofﬁcials
along the coast didn’t want to enforce Beijing’s edicts. They were on the side
of doing business with foreigners.
If there is indeed a serious economic crisis, the central government will
have to ﬁnd a substitute ideology for communism. If people are to sacriﬁce,
it must be for something they believe in—and if the Chinese cannot believe
in communism, they can still believe in China. The Chinese government
will attempt to limit disintegration by increasing nationalism and the natu­
ral companion of nationalism, xenophobia. Historically, China has a deep
distrust of foreigners, and the party will need to blame someone for eco­
nomic devastation. As Mao blamed foreigners for China’s weakness and
poverty, the party will again blame foreigners for China’s economic problems.
Since there will be substantial confrontations with foreign states on eco­
nomic issues—they will be defending their economic investments in China—
playing the nationalist card will come easily. The idea of China as a great
power will substitute for the lost ideology of communism. Disputes will
help bolster the position of the Chinese government. By blaming foreigners
for problems and confronting foreign governments diplomatically and with
growing military power, the Chinese will generate public support for the
regime. This is most likely to take place in the 2010s.
The most natural confrontation would be with Japan and/or the United
States, both historical enemies with whom smoldering disputes already ex­ist. 

Russia is unlikely to be treated as an enemy. However, the probability of
a military confrontation with the Japanese or the Americans is limited. It
would be difﬁcult for the Chinese to engage either country aggressively. The
Chinese have a weak navy that could not survive a confrontation with the
United States. Therefore, invading Taiwan might be tempting in theory but
is not likely to happen. China does not have the naval power to force its way
across the Taiwan Strait, and certainly not the ability to protect convoys
shuttling supplies to Taiwanese battleﬁelds. China is not going to develop a
naval capacity that can challenge the United States within a decade. It takes
a long time to build a navy.

China, then, has three possible future paths. In the ﬁrst, it continues to grow
at astronomical rates indeﬁnitely. No country has ever done that, and China
is not likely to be an exception. The extraordinary growth of the past thirty
years has created huge imbalances and inefﬁciencies in China’s economy
that will have to be corrected. At some point China will have to go through
the kind of wrenching readjustment that the rest of Asia already has under­
gone.
A second possible path is the recentralization of China, where the con­
ﬂicting interests that will emerge and compete following an economic slow­
down are controlled by a strong central government that imposes order and
restricts the regions’ room to maneuver. That scenario is more probable than
the ﬁrst, but the fact that the apparatus of the central government is ﬁlled
with people whose own interests oppose centralization would make this dif­
ﬁcult to pull off. The government can’t necessarily rely on its own people to
enforce the rules. Nationalism is the only tool they have to hold things
together.
A third possibility is that under the stress of an economic downturn,
China fragments along traditional regional lines, while the central govern­
ment weakens and becomes less powerful. Traditionally, this is a more plau­
sible scenario in China—and one that will beneﬁt the wealthier classes as
well as foreign investors. It will leave China in the position it was in prior to
Mao, with regional competition and perhaps even conﬂict and a central gov­
ernment struggling to maintain control. If we accept the fact that China’s


economy will have to undergo a readjustment at some point, and that this
will generate serious tension, as it would in any country, then this third out­
come ﬁts most closely with reality and with Chinese history.

Ajapanese variant

The advanced industrial world will be experiencing a contraction of popu­
lation in the 2010s, and labor will be at a premium. For some countries, due
to entrenched cultural values, immigration either is not an option or is at
least a very difﬁcult one. Japan, for example, is extremely averse to immigra­
tion, yet it must ﬁnd a source of labor that is under its control and that can
be taxed to support older workers. Most workers with a choice of where to
go will not choose Japan, as it is fairly inhospitable to foreigners who want
to become citizens. Koreans in Japan are not citizens of Japan. Even if they
have lived all their lives and worked in Japan, they are issued papers by the
Japanese police calling them “Korean” (neither north nor south) and are un­
able to become Japanese citizens.
Consider, however, that China is a vast pool of relatively low-cost labor.
If the Chinese won’t come to Japan, Japan may come to China, as it has be­
fore. Using Chinese labor in enterprises created by the Japanese but located
in China will be an alternative to immigration—and it will not only be
Japan doing this.
Remember that Beijing will be trying simultaneously to tighten its grip
on the country. Traditionally, when the central government is clamping
down on China, it is prepared to accept lower economic growth. While a
large-scale, concentrated Japanese presence sucking up Chinese labor might
make a great deal of economic sense for local entrepreneurs and governments
and even for Beijing, it makes little political sense. It would cut directly
against Beijing’s political interests. But Japan will not want the Chinese gov­
ernment diverting money to its own ends. That would defeat the entire pur­
pose of the exercise.
By approximately 2020, Japan will have Chinese allies in the ﬁght to
bring in Japanese investment on terms favorable to Japan. Coastal regions
will be competing to attract Japanese investment and resisting Beijing’s pres­sure 


and its nationalist ideology. Interior China might not beneﬁt from
Japan’s presence, but businesses and governments along the coast would.
The Japanese, with large amounts of money, will have recruited allies in the
coastal cities who do not want to pay the price that will be needed to satisfy
the demands of the interior. An alliance between one or more coastal re­
gions and Japan will emerge, confronting the power of Beijing. The
amount of money that Japan will bring to bear will rapidly divide the cen­
tral party itself and weaken the central government’s ability to assert its con­
trol on the coastal cities.
China will be seen as part of the solution for countries like Japan that are
feeling heavy pressure from demographic problems but cannot manage
large-scale immigration. Unfortunately the timing will not be good. An in­
evitable downturn in the Chinese economy will make the central govern­
ment more assertive and more nationalist. But the central government will
itself be weakened by the corrosive effect of money. China will remain for­
mally united, but power will tend to devolve to the regions.
A very real future for China in 2020 is its old nightmare—a country di­
vided among competing regional leaders, foreign powers taking advantage
of the situation to create regions where they can deﬁne economic rules to
their advantage, and a central government trying to hold it all together but
failing. A second possibility is a neo-Maoist China, centralized at the cost of
economic progress. As always, the least likely scenario is the continuation of
the current situation indeﬁnitely.
It all boils down to this: China does not represent a geopolitical fault line
in the next twenty years. Its geography makes that unlikely under any cir­
cumstances, and China’s level of military development needs more than a
decade to overcome this geographical limit. Internal stresses on the Chinese
economy and society will give China far greater internal problems than it
can reasonably handle, and therefore it will have little time for foreign pol­
icy adventures. To the extent that China will be involved with foreign pow­
ers, it will be defending itself against encroachment rather than projecting
its own power.



CHAPTER 6

RUSSIA 2020
Rematch

In geopolitics, major conﬂicts repeat themselves. France and Germany,
for example, fought multiple wars, as did Poland and Russia. When a
single war does not resolve an underlying geopolitical issue, it is refought
until the issue is ﬁnally settled. At the very least, even without another war,
tension and confrontation are ongoing. Signiﬁcant conﬂicts are rooted in
underlying realities—and they do not go away easily. Keep in mind how
quickly Balkan geopolitics led to a recurrence of wars that had been fought
a century earlier.
Russia is the eastern portion of Europe and has clashed with the rest of
Europe on multiple occasions. The Napoleonic wars, the two world wars,
and the Cold War all dealt, at least in part, with the status of Russia and its
relationship to the rest of Europe. None of these wars ultimately settled this
question, because in the end a united and independent Russia survived or
triumphed. The problem is that the very existence of a united Russia poses
a signiﬁcant potential challenge to Europe.
Russia is a vast region with a huge population. It is much poorer than
the rest of Europe, but it has two assets—land and natural resources. As
such it is a constant temptation for European powers, which see an oppor­tunity 

to increase their size and wealth to the east. Historically, though, Eu­
ropeans who have invaded Russia have come to a disastrous end. If they are
not beaten by the Russians, they are so exhausted from ﬁghting them that
someone else defeats them. Russia occasionally pushes its power westward,
threatening Europe with the Russian masses. At other times passive and ig­
nored, Russia is often taken advantage of. But, in due course, others pay for
underestimating it.
The Cold War only appeared to have settled the Russian question. Had
the Russian Federation collapsed in the 1990s and the region fragmented
into multiple, smaller states, Russian power would have disappeared, and
with it the challenge Russian power poses to Europe. Had the Americans,
Europeans, and Chinese moved in for the kill, the Russian question would
have been ﬁnally settled. But the Europeans were too weak and divided at
the end of the twentieth century, the Chinese too isolated and preoccupied
with internal issues, and after September 11, 2001, the Americans were too
distracted by the Islamist war to act decisively. What actions were taken by
the United States were insufﬁcient and unfocused. In fact, these actions
only served to alert the Russians to the great potential danger from the
United States and ensured they would respond to it.
Given the simple fact that Russia did not disintegrate, the Russian geo­
political question will reemerge. Given the fact that Russia is now reenergiz­
ing itself, that question will come sooner rather than later. The conﬂict will
not be a repeat of the Cold War, any more than World War I was a repeat of
the Napoleonic wars. But it will be a restatement of the fundamental Russ­
ian question: If Russia is a united nation-state, where will its frontiers lie
and what will be the relationship between Russia and its neighbors? That
question will represent the next major phase in world history—in 2020,
and in the years leading up to it.

Russian dynamics

If we are going to understand Russia’s behavior and intentions, we have to begin with Russia’s fundamental weakness—its borders, particularly in the
northwest. Even when Ukraine is controlled by Russia, as it has been for


centuries, and Belarus and Moldavia are part of the Russian empire as well,
there are still no natural borders in the north. The center and south are an­
chored on the Carpathian Mountains, as far north as the Slovakian-Polish
border, and to the east of them are the Pripet marshes, boggy and impassa­
ble. But in the north and south (east of the Carpathians), there are no
strong barriers to protect Russia—or to protect Russia’s neighbors.
On the northern European plain, no matter where Russia’s borders are
drawn, it is open to attack. There are few signiﬁcant natural barriers any­
where on this plain. Pushing its western border all the way into Germany, as
it did in 1945, still leaves Russia’s frontiers without a physical anchor. The
only physical advantage Russia can have is depth. The farther west into Eu­
rope its borders extend, the farther conquerors have to travel to reach
Moscow. Therefore, Russia is always pressing westward on the northern Eu­
ropean plain and Europe is always pressing eastward.
That is not the case with other borders of Russia—by which we mean to
include the former Soviet Union, which has been the rough shape of Russia
since the end of the nineteenth century. In the south, there was a natural se­
cure boundary. The Black Sea leads to the Caucasus, separating Russia from
Turkey and Iran. Iran is further buffered by the Caspian Sea, and by the
Kara Kum Desert in southern Turkmenistan, which runs along the Afghan
border, terminating in the Himalayas. The Russians are concerned with the
Iranian–Afghan segment, and might push south as they have done several
times. But they are not going to be invaded on that border. Their frontier
with China is long and vulnerable, but only on a map. Invading Siberia is
not a practical possibility. It is a vast wilderness. There is a potential weak­
ness along China’s western border, but not a signiﬁcant one. Therefore, the
Russian empire, in any of its incarnations, is fairly secure except in northern
Europe, where it faces its worst dangers—geography and powerful Euro­
pean nations.
Russia had its guts carved out after the collapse of communism. St. Pe­
tersburg, its jewel, was about a thousand miles away from NATO troops in
1989. Now it is less than one hundred miles away. In 1989, Moscow was
twelve hundred miles from the limits of Russian power. Now it is about two
hundred miles. In the south, with Ukraine independent, the Russian hold
on the Black Sea is tenuous, and it has been forced to the northern extreme


of the Caucasus. Afghanistan is occupied, however tentatively, by the Amer­
icans, and Russia’s anchor on the Himalayas is gone. If there were an army
interested in invading, the Russian Federation is virtually indefensible.
Russia’s strategic problem is that it is a vast country with relatively poor
transportation. If Russia were simultaneously attacked along its entire pe­
riphery, in spite of the size of its forces, it would be unable to easily protect
itself. It would have difﬁculty mobilizing forces and deploying them to mul­
tiple fronts, so it would have to maintain an extremely large standing army
that could be predeployed. This pressure imposes a huge economic burden
on Russia, undermines the economy, and causes it to buckle from within.
That is what happened to the Soviet state. Of course, this is not the ﬁrst
time Russia has been in peril.
Protecting its frontiers is not Russia’s only problem today. The Russians
are extremely well aware that they are facing a massive demographic crisis.
Russia’s current population is about 145 million people, and projections for
2050 are for between 90 million and 125 million. Time is working against
it. Russia’s problem will soon be its ability to ﬁeld an army sufﬁcient for its
strategic needs. Internally, the number of Russians compared to other eth­
nic groups is declining, placing intense pressure on Russia to make a move
sooner rather than later. In its current geographical position, it is an acci­
dent waiting to happen. Given Russia’s demographic trajectory, in twenty
years it may be too late to act, and its leaders know this. It does not have to
conquer the world, but Russia must regain and hold its buffers—essentially
the boundaries of the old Soviet Union.
Between their geopolitical, economic, and demographic problems, the
Russians have to make a fundamental shift. For a hundred years the Rus­
sians sought to modernize their country through industrialization, trying to
catch up to the rest of Europe. They never managed to pull it off. Around
2000 Russia shifted its strategy. Instead of focusing on industrial develop­
ment as they had in the past century, the Russians reinvented themselves as
exporters of natural resources, particularly energy, but also minerals, agri­
cultural products, lumber, and precious metals.
By de-emphasizing industrial development, and emphasizing raw mate­
rials, the Russians took a very different path, one more common to coun­
tries in the developing world. But given the unexpected rise of energy and


commodity prices, this move not only saved the Russian economy but also
strengthened it to the point where Russia could afford to drive its own se­
lective reindustrialization. Most important, since natural resource produc­
tion is less manpower-intensive than industrial production, it gave Russia an
economic base that could be sustained with a declining population.
It also gave Russia leverage in the international system. Europe is hungry
for energy. Russia, constructing pipelines to feed natural gas to Europe,
takes care of Europe’s energy needs and its own economic problems, and
puts Europe in a position of dependency on Russia. In an energy-hungry
world, Russia’s energy exports are like heroin. It addicts countries once they
start using it. Russia has already used its natural gas resources to force neigh­
boring countries to bend to its will. That power reaches into the heart of
Europe, where the Germans and the former Soviet satellites of Eastern Eu­
rope all depend on Russian natural gas. Add to this its other resources, and
Russia can apply signiﬁcant pressure on Europe.
Dependency can be a double-edged sword. A militarily weak Russia can­
not pressure its neighbors, because its neighbors might decide to make a
grab for its wealth. So Russia must recover its military strength. Rich and
weak is a bad position for nations to be in. If Russia is to be rich in natural
resources and export them to Europe, it must be in a position to protect
what it has and to shape the international environment in which it lives.
In the next decade Russia will become increasingly wealthy (relative to
its past, at least) but geographically insecure. It will therefore use some of its
wealth to create a military force appropriate to protect its interests, buffer
zones to protect it from the rest of the world—and then buffer zones for the
buffer zones. Russia’s grand strategy involves the creation of deep buffers
along the northern European plain, while it divides and manipulates its
neighbors, creating a new regional balance of power in Europe. What Rus­
sia cannot tolerate are tight borders without buffer zones, and its neighbors
united against it. This is why Russia’s future actions will appear to be ag­
gressive but will actually be defensive.
Russia’s actions will unfold in three phases. In the ﬁrst phase, Russia will
be concerned with recovering inﬂuence and effective control in the former
Soviet Union, re-creating the system of buffers that the Soviet Union pro­
vided it. In the second phase, Russia will seek to create a second tier of


buffers beyond the boundaries of the former Soviet Union. It will try to do
this without creating a solid wall of opposition, of the kind that choked it
during the Cold War. In the third phase—really something that will have
been going on from the beginning—Russia will try to prevent anti-Russian
coalitions from forming.

It is important to step back here and look at the reasons why the former So­
viet Union stayed intact in the latter half of the twentieth century. The
Soviet Union was held together not simply by force but by a system of eco­
nomic relationships that sustained it in the same way that the Russian em­
pire before it was sustained. The former Soviet Union shares a common
geography—that is, vast and mostly landlocked, in the heart of Eurasia. It
has extremely poor internal transport systems, as is common in landlocked
areas where the river systems don’t match with agricultural systems. It is
therefore difﬁcult to transport food—and after industrialization, difﬁcult to
move manufactured goods.
Think of the old Soviet Union as that part of the Eurasian landmass that
stretched westward from the Paciﬁc Ocean along the wastelands north of
populated China, northwest of the Himalayas, and continued along the
border with South Central Asia to the Caspian, and then on to the Cauca­
sus. It was buffered by the Black Sea and then by the Carpathian Moun­
tains. Along the north, there was only the Arctic. Within this space, there
was a vast landmass, marked by republics with weak economies.
If we think of the Soviet Union as a natural grouping of geographically
isolated and economically handicapped countries, we can see what held
it together. The countries that made up the Soviet Union were bound to­
gether of necessity. They could not compete with the rest of the world
economically—but isolated from global competition, they could comple­
ment and support each other. This was a natural grouping readily domi­
nated by the Russians. The countries beyond the Carpathians (the ones
Russia occupied after World War II and turned into satellites) were not in­
cluded in this natural grouping. If it weren’t for Soviet military force, they
would have been oriented toward the rest of Europe, not Russia.
The former Soviet Union consisted of members who really had nowhere


else to go. These old economic ties still dominate the region, except that
Russia’s new model, exporting energy, has made these countries even more
dependent than they were previously. Attracted as Ukraine was to the rest of
Europe, it could not compete or participate with Europe. Its natural eco­
nomic relationship is with Russia; it relies on Russia for energy, and ulti­
mately it tends to be militarily dominated by Russia as well.
These are the dynamics that Russia will take advantage of in order to re­
assert its sphere of inﬂuence. It will not necessarily re-create a formal politi­
cal structure run from Moscow—although that is not inconceivable. Far
more important will be Russian inﬂuence in the region over the next ﬁve to
ten years, which will surge. In order to think about this, let’s break it down
into three theaters of operation: the Caucasus, Central Asia, and the Euro­
pean theater, which includes the Baltics.

The caucasus

The Caucasus is the boundary between Russian and Turkish power, and has
historically been a ﬂash point between the two empires. It was also a ﬂash
point during the Cold War. The Turkish–Soviet border ran through the
Caucasus, with the Soviet side consisting of three separate republics: Arme­
nia, Georgia, and Azerbaijan, all now independent. The Caucasus also ran
north into the Russian Federation itself, including into the Muslim areas of
Dagestan and, most important, Chechnya, where a guerrilla war against
Russian domination raged after the fall of communism.
From a purely defensive point of view, the precise boundaries of Russian
and Turkish inﬂuence don’t matter so long as both are based somewhere in
the Caucasus. The rugged terrain makes defense relatively easy. However,
should the Russians lose their position in the Caucasus altogether and be
pushed north into the lowlands, Russia’s position would become difﬁcult.
With the gap between Ukraine and Kazakhstan only a few hundred miles
wide, Russia would be in strategic trouble.
This is the reason the Russians are so unwilling to compromise on Chech­
nya. The southern part of Chechnya is deep in the northern Caucasus. If that
were lost, the entire Russian position would unravel. Given a choice, the Rus­sians 

would prefer to be anchored farther south, in Georgia. Armenia is an ally
of Russia. If Georgia were Russian, its entire position would be much more stable. Controlling Chechnya is indispensable. Reabsorbing Georgia is desirable.
Holding Azerbaijan does not provide a strategic advantage—but the Russians
would not mind having it as a buffer with the Iranians. Russia’s position here
is not intolerable, but Georgia, not incidentally closely allied with the United
States, is a tempting target, as was seen in the August 2008 conflict.
Bitter rivalries continue to rage in the region, as always happens in
mountainous regions where small nationalities persist. The Armenians, for
example, hate the Turks, whom they accuse of conducting genocide against
them early in the twentieth century. Armenia looks to the Russians for protection. Armenian–Georgian rivalry is intense and, in spite of the fact that
Stalin was a Georgian, the Georgians are hostile to the Armenians and extremely 

wary of the Russians. The Russians believe the Georgians looked
the other way while weapons were shipped through their country to the
Chechens, and the fact that the Georgians are very close to the Americans
makes the situation even worse. Azerbaijan is hostile to Armenia—and
therefore close to Iran and Turkey.
The situation in the Caucasus is not only difﬁcult to understand but also
difﬁcult to deal with. The Soviet Union actually managed to solve the com­
plexity by incorporating all these countries into the Soviet Union after
World War I and ruthlessly suppressing their autonomy. It is impossible for
Russia to be indifferent to the region now or in the future—unless it is pre­
pared to lose its position in the Caucasus. Therefore, the Russians are indeed
going to reassert their position, starting with Georgia. Since the United States
sees Georgia as a strategic asset, Russia’s reassertion there will lead to con­
frontation with the United States. Unless the Chechen rebellion completely
disappears, the Russians will have to move south, then isolate the rebellion
and nail down their position in the mountains.
There are two powers that will not want this to happen. The United
States is one, and the other is Turkey. Americans will see Russian domina­
tion of Georgia as undermining their position in the region. The Turks will
see this as energizing the Armenians and returning the Russian army in
force to their borders. The Russians will become more convinced of the
need to act because of this resistance. A duel in the Caucasus will result.

Central asia

Central Asia is a vast region running between the Caspian Sea and the Chi­
nese border. It is primarily Muslim and therefore, as we have seen, was part
of the massive destabilization that took place in the Muslim world after the
fall of the Soviet Union. By itself it has some economic value, as a region
with energy reserves. But it has little strategic importance to the Russians—
unless another great power was to dominate it and use it as a base against
them. If that were to happen, it would become enormously important.
Whoever controls Kazakhstan would be a hundred miles from the Volga, a
river highway for Russian agriculture.


During the 1990s, Western energy companies flocked to the region.
Russia had no problem with that. It wasn’t in a position to compete, and it
wasn’t in a position to control the region militarily. Central Asia was a neutral zone of relative indifference to the Russians. All of that changed on September 11, 2001, which redefined the geopolitics of the region. September
11 made it urgent for the United States to invade Afghanistan. Unable to
mount an invasion by itself quickly, the United States asked the Russians for
help.
One thing they asked for was Russian help in getting the Northern Alliance, an anti-Taliban group in Afghanistan, to play the major role on the
ground. The Russians had sponsored the Northern Alliance and effectively
controlled it. Another thing the Americans asked for was Russian support in
securing bases for the United States in several Central Asian countries. Technically


these were independent countries, but the United States was asking
for help with the Northern Alliance and couldn’t afford to anger the Rus­
sians. The Central Asian countries did not want to anger the Russians
either—and U.S. planes had to ﬂy over the former Soviet Union to get to
them.
The Russians agreed to an American military presence in the region,
thinking they had an understanding with the United States that this was a
temporary situation. But as the war in Afghanistan dragged on, the United
States stayed on; and as it stayed on, it became more and more inﬂuential
with the various republics in the region. Russia realized that what had been
a benign buffer zone was becoming dominated by the main global power—
a power that was pressing Russia in Ukraine, the Caucasus, and the Baltics.
In addition, as the price of energy rose and Russia adopted its new eco­
nomic strategy, Central Asia’s energy became even more signiﬁcant.
Russia did not want American forces a hundred miles from the Volga.
Russia simply had to react. It didn’t act directly, but it began manipulating
the political situation in the region, reducing American power. It was a
move designed to return Central Asia to the Russian sphere of inﬂuence.
And the Americans, on the other side of the world, isolated by chaotic
Afghanistan, Iran, and Pakistan, were in no position to resist. The Russians
reasserted their natural position. And tellingly, it was one of the few places
U.S. naval power couldn’t reach.
Central Asia is an area where the United States can’t remain under Rus­
sian pressure. It is a place where the Chinese could potentially cause prob­
lems, but as we’ve seen, that is unlikely to happen. China has economic
inﬂuence there, but the Russians, in the end, have both military and ﬁnan­
cial capabilities that can outduel them. The Russians might offer China ac­
cess to Central Asia, but the arrangements created in the nineteenth century
and maintained by the Soviet Union will reassert themselves. Therefore, it is
my view that Central Asia will be back in the Russian sphere of inﬂuence by
the early 2010s, long before the major confrontation begins in the west, in
Europe.

The european theater

The European theater is, of course, the area directly west of Russia. In this
region, Russia’s western border faces the three Baltic states of Estonia,
Latvia, and Lithuania, and the two independent republics of Belarus and
Ukraine. All of these were part of the former Soviet Union and of the Russ­
ian empire. Beyond these countries lies the belt of former Soviet satellites:
Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, Romania, and Bulgaria. The Russians must
dominate Belarus and Ukraine for their basic national security. The Baltics
are secondary but still important. Eastern Europe is not critical, so long as
the Russians are anchored in the Carpathian Mountains in the south and
have strong forces on the northern European plain. But of course, all of this
can get complicated.
Ukraine and Belarus are everything to the Russians. If they were to fall
into an enemy’s hands—for example, join NATO—Russia would be in
mortal danger. Moscow is only a bit over two hundred miles from the Rus­
sian border with Belarus, Ukraine less than two hundred miles from Vol­
gograd, formerly Stalingrad. Russia defended against Napoleon and Hitler
with depth. Without Belarus and Ukraine, there is no depth, no land to
trade for an enemy’s blood. It is, of course, absurd to imagine NATO posing
a threat to Russia. But the Russians think in terms of twenty-year cycles,
and they know how quickly the absurd becomes possible.
They also know that the United States and NATO have systematically
expanded their reach by extending membership in NATO to Eastern Eu­
rope and the Baltic states. As soon as the United States began trying to recruit
Ukraine into NATO, the Russians changed their view both of American in­
tentions and of Ukraine. From the Russian point of view, NATO expanding
into Ukraine threatens Russian interests in the same way as if the Warsaw
Pact had moved into Mexico. When a pro-Western uprising in 2004—the
Orange Revolution—seemed about to sweep Ukraine into NATO, the Rus­
sians accused the United States of trying to surround and destroy Russia.
What the Americans were thinking is open to debate. That Ukraine in
NATO would be potentially devastating to Russian national security is not.
The Russians did not mobilize their army. Rather, they mobilized their
intelligence service, whose covert connections in Ukraine were superb. The


Russians undermined the Orange Revolution, playing on a split between
pro-Russian eastern Ukraine and pro-European western Ukraine. It
proved not to be difﬁcult at all, and fairly quickly Ukrainian politics be­
came gridlocked. It is only a matter of time before Russian inﬂuence will
overwhelm Kiev.
Belarus is an easier issue. As noted earlier, Belarus is the least reformed
member of the former Soviet republics. It remains a centralized, authoritar­
ian state. More important, its leadership has repeatedly mourned the pass­
ing of the Soviet Union and has proposed union of some sort with Russia.
Such a union will, of course, have to be on Russian terms, which has led to
tension, but there is no possibility of Belarus joining NATO.
The reabsorption of Belarus and Ukraine into the Russian sphere of in­
ﬂuence is a given in the next ﬁve years. When that happens, Russia will have
roughly returned to its borders with Europe between the two world wars. It
will be anchored in the Caucasus in the south, with Ukraine protected, and
in the north its borders on the northern European plain will abut Poland
and the Baltic countries. That will pose the questions of who the most pow­
erful country in the north is and where the precise frontiers will be. The real
ﬂash point will be the Baltics.
The traditional path to invade Russia is a three-hundred-mile gap be­
tween the northern Carpathians and the Baltic Sea. This is ﬂat, easily tra­
versed country with few river barriers. This northern European plain is a
smooth ride for invaders. A European invader can move due east to Moscow
or to St. Petersburg in the northwest. During the Cold War, the distance
from St. Petersburg to NATO’s front line was also more than a thousand
miles. Today the distance is about seventy miles. This explains the strategic
nightmare Russia faces in the Baltics—and what it will need to do to ﬁx the
problem.
The three Baltic countries were once part of the Soviet Union. Each be­
came independent after it collapsed. And then, in that narrow window, each
became part of NATO. As we have seen, the Europeans are most likely too
far into their decadent cycle to have the energy to take advantage of the sit­
uation. However, the Russians are not going to risk their national security
on that assumption. They saw Germany go from being a cripple in 1932 to
being at the gates of Moscow in 1941. The inclusion of the Baltic countries


along with Poland in NATO has moved NATO’s frontier extraordinarily
close to the Russian heartland. For a country that was invaded three times in
the last two hundred years, the comfortable assumption that NATO and its
members are no threat is not something it can risk.
From the Russian point of view, the major invasion route into their
country is not only wide open but also in the hands of countries with a pro­
nounced hostility to Russia. The Baltic countries have never forgiven the
Russians for their occupation. The Poles are equally bitter and deeply dis­
trustful of Russian intentions. Now that they are part of NATO, these
countries form the front line. Behind them is Germany, a country as dis­
trusted by Russia as Russia is by the Poles and Balts. The Russians are cer­
tainly paranoid—but that doesn’t mean they don’t have enemies or that they
are crazy.
This would be the point of any confrontation. The Russians can live with
a neutral Baltic region. Living with a Baltic region that is part of NATO and
close to the Americans, however, is a much more difﬁcult risk to take. On
the other hand, the Americans, having backed down in Central Asia, and
being cautious in the Caucasus, can’t retreat from the Baltics. Any compro­
mise over the three NATO members would send Eastern Europe into a
panic. Eastern Europe’s behavior would become unpredictable, and the pos­
sibility of Russian inﬂuence spreading westward would increase. Russia has
the greater interest, but the Americans could bring substantial power to bear
if they chose.
Russia’s next move likely will be an agreement with Belarus for an inte­
grated defense system. Belarus and Russia have been linked for a very long
time, so this will be a natural reversion. And that will bring the Russian
army to the Baltic frontier. It will also bring the army to the Polish fron­
tier—and that will start the confrontation in its full intensity.
The Poles fear the Russians and the Germans. Trapped between the two,
without natural defenses, they fear whichever is stronger at any time. Unlike
the rest of Eastern Europe, which at least has the barrier of the Carpathians
between them and the Russians—and shares a border with Ukraine, not
Russia—the Poles are on the dangerous northern European plain. When the
Russians return to their border in force in the process of confronting the
Baltic states, the Poles will react. Poland has almost forty million people. It


is not a small country, and since it will be backed by the United States, not
a trivial one.
Polish support will be thrown behind the Balts. The Russians will pull
the Ukrainians into their alliance with Belarus and will have Russian forces
all along the Polish border, and as far south as the Black Sea. At this point
the Russians will begin the process of trying to neutralize the Balts. This, I
believe, will all take place by the mid-2010s.
The Russians will have three tools at their disposal to exert their inﬂu­
ence over the Baltic states. First, covert operations. In the same way the
United States has ﬁnanced and energized non-governmental organizations
around the world, the Russians will ﬁnance and energize Russian minorities
in these countries, as well as whatever pro-Russian elements exist, or can be
bought. When the Balts suppress these movements, it will give the Russians
a pretext for using their second tool, economic sanctions, particularly by
cutting the ﬂow of natural gas. Finally, the Russians will bring military pres­
sure to bear through the presence of substantial forces near these borders.
Not surprisingly, the Poles and Balts both remember the unpredictability of
the Russians. The psychological pressure will be enormous.
There has been a great deal of talk in recent years about the weakness of
the Russian army, talk that in the decade after the collapse of the Soviet
Union was accurate. But here is the new reality—that weakness started to
reverse itself in 2000, and by 2015 it will be a thing of the past. The coming
confrontation in northeastern Europe will not take place suddenly, but will
be an extended confrontation. Russian military strength will have time to
develop. The one area in which Russia continued research and development
in the 1990s was in advanced military technologies. By 2010, it will certainly
have the most effective army in the region. By 2015–2020, it will have a
military that will pose a challenge to any power trying to project force into
the region, even the United States.
Russia will be facing a group of countries that cannot defend themselves
and a NATO alliance that is effective only if the United States is prepared to
use force. As we have seen, the United States has a single core policy in
Eurasia—preventing any power from dominating Eurasia or part of it. If
China weakens or fragments and the Europeans are weak and divided, the
United States will have a fundamental interest: avoiding general war, by


keeping the Russians focused on the Balts and Poles, unable to think glob­ally.
The United States will use its traditional method for supporting these
countries: technology transfer. As we approach 2020, this method will be
much more effective. The new technology for warfare will require smaller,
more efﬁcient military forces, meaning that lesser countries can wield mili­
tary power disproportionately if they have access to advanced technologies.
The United States will be eager to increase the power of Poland and the
Baltic countries and have them tie down the Russians. If Russia has to be
contained, this is the best way to contain it. Georgia in the Caucasus repre­
sents a secondary ﬂash point, irritating to the Russians, something that di­
verts forces from Europe, and therefore will be an area where the United
States will intrude. But it will be Europe, not the Caucasus, that will matter.
Given American power, there will be no direct attack by the Russians,
nor will the Americans allow any adventures by their allies. Rather, the Rus­
sians will seek to bring pressure on the United States elsewhere in Europe
and in other parts of the world. For example, they will seek to destabilize
countries on their border, like Slovakia and Bulgaria. The confrontation will
spread along the entire frontier between Russia and the rest of Europe.
Russia’s basic strategy will be to try to break up NATO and isolate East­
ern Europe. The key to this will be the Germans, followed by the French.
Neither of them wants another confrontation with Russia. They are insular
nations, and Germany is dependent on Russian natural gas. The Germans
are trying to reduce this dependency and probably will to some extent, but
they will continue to depend on the delivery of a substantial quantity of nat­
ural gas, which they will not be able to do without. The Russians will there­
fore argue to the Germans that the Americans are again using them to
contain Russia, but that the Russians, far from threatening Germany, have a
shared interest—a stable, neutral buffer between them, consisting of an in­
dependent Poland. The question of the Baltic states should not, they will ar­
gue, enter into it. The only reason Americans would care about the Baltics is
if they were planning aggression against Russia. Russia will be prepared to
guarantee Baltic autonomy in the context of a broad confederation, as well
as Polish security, in return for reduction of arms and neutrality. The alter­
native—war—would not be in the interests of the Germans or the French.


The argument will probably work, but I believe this will play out in an
unexpected way. The United States, always excessively aggressive from the
European point of view, will be stirring up unnecessary trouble in Eastern
Europe as a threat to the Russians. If the Germans allow NATO to do this,
they will be drawn into a conﬂict they don’t want. Therefore, I believe they
will block NATO support for Poland, the Baltics, and the rest of Eastern
Europe—NATO requires unanimity to function, and Germany is a major
power. The Russian expectation will be that the shock of the withdrawal of
NATO support would cause the Poles and others to buckle.
The opposite happens. Poland, caught in its historic nightmare between
Russia and Germany, will become even more dependent on the United States.
The United States, seeing a low-cost opportunity to tie down the Russians
and split Europe down the middle, weakening the European Union in the
process, will increase its support for Eastern Europe. Around 2015 a new
bloc of nations, primarily the old Soviet satellites coupled with the Baltic
states, will emerge. Far more energetic than the Western Europeans, with far
more to lose, and backed by the United States, this bloc will develop a sur­
prising dynamism.
The Russians will respond to this subtle American power grab by trying
to increase pressure on the United States elsewhere in the world. In the
Middle East, for example, where the interminable confrontation between
Israel and the Palestinians will continue, the Russians will increase military
aid to the Arabs. In general, wherever anti-American regimes exist, Russian
military aid will be forthcoming. A low-grade global confrontation will be
under way by 2015 and will intensify by 2020. Neither side will risk war,
but both sides will be maneuvering.
By 2020 this confrontation will be the dominant global issue—and
everyone will think of it as a permanent problem. The confrontation will
not be as comprehensive as the ﬁrst cold war. The Russians will lack the
power to seize all of Eurasia, and they will not be a true global threat. They
will, however, be a regional threat, and that is the context in which the
United States will respond. There will be tension all along the Russian fron­
tier, but the United States will not be able to (or need to) impose a complete
cordon around Russia as it did around the Soviet Union.
Given the confrontation, the European dependence on hydrocarbons,


much of it derived from Russia, will become a strategic issue. The American
strategy will be to de-emphasize the focus on hydrocarbon energy sources.
This will kick into high gear the American interest in developing alternative
sources of energy. Russia, as before, will focus on its existing industries rather
than on the development of new ones. That will mean increased oil and nat­
ural gas production rather than new energy sources. As a result, Russia is not
going to be in the forefront of the technological developments that will
dominate the later portions of the century.
Instead, Russia will need to develop its military capabilities. Thus, as it
has over the past two centuries, Russia will devote the bulk of its research
and development money to applying new technologies toward military
ends and expanding existing industries, causing it to fall behind the United
States and the rest of the world in nonmilitary but valuable technology. It
will be particularly hurt, paradoxically, by its hydrocarbon riches—because
it will not be motivated to develop new technologies and will be burdened
by military spending.
During the ﬁrst phase of Russia’s reassertion of power, until about 2010
or so, Russia will be grossly underestimated. It will be perceived as a frac­
tured country with a stagnant economy and a weak military. In the 2010s,
when the confrontation intensiﬁes on its borders and its immediate neigh­
bors become alarmed, the greater powers will continue to be dismissive.
The United States in particular tends to ﬁrst underestimate and then
overestimate enemies. By the middle of the 2010s, the United States will
again be obsessed with Russia. There is an interesting process to observe
here. The United States swings between moods but actually, as we have
seen, executes a very consistent and rational foreign policy. In this case, the
United States will move to its manic state but will focus on keeping Russia
tied in knots without going to war.
It will matter a great deal where the fault line lies. If Russia’s resurgence
is to be a minimal crisis, the Russians will dominate Central Asia and the
Caucasus and possibly absorb Moldova, but they will not be able to absorb
the Baltic states, or dominate any nations west of the Carpathians. If the
Russians do manage to absorb the Baltics and gain signiﬁcant allies in the
Balkans, like Serbia, Bulgaria, and Greece—or Central European countries


such as Slovakia—the competition between the United States and Russia
will be more intense and frightening.
In the end though, it won’t truly matter. Russian military power will be
severely strained confronting the fraction of American military power that
the United States decides to wield in responding to Russia’s moves. Regard­
less of what the rest of Europe does, Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary,
and Romania will be committed to resisting Russian advances and will
make any deal the United States wants in order to gain its support. The line
therefore will be drawn in the Carpathian Mountains this time, rather than
in Germany as it was during the Cold War. The Polish northern plains will
be the main line of confrontation, but the Russians will not move militarily.
The causes that ignited this confrontation—and the Cold War before
it—will impose the same outcome as the Cold War, this time with less effort
for the United States. The last confrontation occurred in Central Europe.
This one will take place much farther to the east. In the last confrontation
China was an ally of Russia, at least in the beginning. In this case China will
be out of the game. Last time, Russia was in complete control of the Cauca­
sus, but now it will not be, and it will be facing American and Turkish pres­
sure northward. In the last confrontation Russia had a large population, but
this time around it has a smaller and declining population. Internal pres­
sure, particularly in the south, will divert Russian attention from the west
and eventually, without war, it will break. Russia broke in 1917, and again
in 1991. And the country’s military will collapse once more shortly after 2020.



CHAPTER 7
AMERICAN POWERAND 
THE CRISIS OF 2030


A wall is being built along the southern border of the United States.
The goal is to keep illegal immigrants out. The United States built
its economic might on the backs of immigrants, but since the
1920s there has been a national consensus that the ﬂow of immigrants
should be limited so that the economy can absorb them, and to ensure that
jobs will not be taken away from citizens. The wall along the Mexican bor­
der is the logical conclusion to this policy.
In the 1920s, the world was in the midst of an accelerating population
explosion. The problem facing the United States, and the world, was what
to do with an ever-increasing pool of labor. Labor was cheap, and it tended
to move to countries that were wealthy. The United States, facing an on­
slaught of potential immigrants, decided to limit their entry in order to
keep the price of labor—wages—from plunging.
The assumption on which U.S. immigration policy was built will not be
true in the twenty-ﬁrst century. The population surge is abating, and people
are living longer. This leads to an older population, with fewer younger
workers. It means that the United States will be short of workers no later


than 2020 and accelerating throughout the decade, and will need immi­
grants to ﬁll the gap. But it will need new workers at the same time that the
rest of the industrial world needs them. In the twentieth century, the prob­
lem was limiting immigration. In the twenty-ﬁrst century, the problem will
be attracting enough immigrants.
The second collapse of Russia will appear to open the door to a golden age
for the United States. But a massive internal economic crisis caused by a short­
age of labor will emerge just as the confrontation with Russia is ending.
We can already see the leading edge of this crisis today in the graying of
the population of advanced industrialized countries. Part of the crisis will be
social—the family structures that have been in place for centuries will con­
tinue to break down, leaving larger numbers of elderly people with no one
to care for them. And as I stated earlier, there will be more and more elderly
people to care for. This will create intense political struggle between social
conservatism and ever-changing social reality. We are already seeing this in
popular culture—from talk shows to politicians—but it will intensify dra­
matically until a crisis point is reached in the mid-2020s.
The crisis will come to a head, if history is any guide, in the presidential
election of either 2028 or 2032. I say that because there is an odd—and not
entirely explicable—pattern built into American history. Every ﬁfty years,
roughly, the United States has been confronted with a deﬁning economic
and social crisis. The problem emerges in the decade before the crisis be­
comes apparent. A pivotal presidential election is held that changes the
country’s political landscape over the following decade or so. The crisis is re­
solved, and the United States ﬂourishes. Over the next generation, the solu­
tion to the old problem generates a new one, which intensiﬁes until there is
another crisis and the process repeats itself. Sometimes the deﬁning mo­
ment is not readily apparent until later, and sometimes it can’t be missed.
But it is always there.
To understand the reasons why I believe we will see a crisis in the 2020s,
it’s important to understand this pattern in some detail. Just as you can’t in­
vest in stocks without understanding historical patterns, you can’t make
sense out of my forecasting here without understanding American political
and economic cycles.


In its history so far, the United States has had four such complete cycles
and is currently about halfway through its ﬁfth. The cycles usually begin
with a deﬁning presidency and end in a failed one. So the Washington cycle
ends with John Quincy Adams, Jackson ends with Ulysses S. Grant, Hayes
with Herbert Hoover, and FDR with Jimmy Carter. Underneath the poli­
tics, the crises are deﬁned by the struggle between a declining dominant
class linked to an established economic model and the emergence of a new
class and a new economic model. Each faction represents a radically differ­
ent way of viewing the world and a different deﬁnition of what it means to
be a good citizen, and reﬂects the changing ways of making a living.

The first cycle: from founders to pioneers

America was founded in 1776, with the Declaration of Independence. From
that moment on, it had a national identity, a national army, and a national
congress. The founders consisted primarily of a single ethnic group—
Englishmen with a smattering of Scots. These prosperous men saw them­
selves as the guardians of the new governing regime, different in character
from the unlanded and unmonied masses—and certainly from African slaves.
But they couldn’t build the country by themselves. Pioneers were needed
to move the country outward and settle the land west of the Alleghenies.
These pioneers were men completely unlike Jefferson or Washington. Typi­
cally they were poor, uneducated immigrants, mostly Scots-Irish, who were
searching for small parcels of land to clear and farm. They were men like
Daniel Boone.
By the 1820s, a political battle was raging between these two groups, as
the ideals of the founders collided with the interests of the settlers. The so­
cial tension turned into economic crisis and culminated in the election of
the champion of the new generation, Andrew Jackson, in 1828. This fol­
lowed the failed presidency of John Quincy Adams, the last of the founding
generation.

Second cycle: from pioneers to small-town america

Under Jackson, the most dynamic class in America was that of the pioneerfarmers who settled the center of the continent. The old founding class
didn’t vanish, but the balance of political power shifted from them to the
poorer (but much more numerous) settlers heading west. Jackson’s prede­
cessors had favored a stable currency to protect investors. Jackson champi­
oned cheap money to protect debtors, the people who voted for him. Where
Washington, the gentleman farmer, soldier, and statesman, was the em­
blematic hero of the ﬁrst cycle, Abraham Lincoln, born in a log cabin in
Kentucky, was the emblematic hero of the second.
By the end of this cycle, after the Civil War, the West was no longer
characterized by the hardscrabble subsistence farming of ﬁrst-generation pi­
oneers. By 1876, farmers not only owned their land but also were making
money at farming. The landscape changed as well, homesteads giving rise to
small towns that had developed to serve the increasingly prosperous farm­
ers. Small-town banks took the farmers’ deposits and invested the money on
Wall Street, which in turn invested the money in railroads and industry.
But there was a problem. The cheap-money policies that had been fol­
lowed for ﬁfty years might have helped the pioneers, but those same policies
were hurting their children, who had turned the farms of the West into
businesses. By the 1870s the crisis of cheap money had become unbearable.
Low interest rates were making it impossible to invest the proﬁts from the
farms—and especially from the businesses that were serving the farmers.
A strong, stable currency was essential if America was to grow. In 1876,
Rutherford B. Hayes was elected president after the failed presidency of
Ulysses S. Grant. Hayes—or more precisely his secretary of the treasury,
John Sherman—championed money backed by gold, which limited inﬂa­
tion, raised interest rates, and made investment more attractive. Poorer
farmers were hurt, but wealthier farmers and ranchers and their small-town
bankers were helped. This ﬁnancial policy fueled the rapid industrialization
of the United States. For ﬁfty years it drove the American economy in an ex­
traordinary expansion, until it choked on its own success, just as in the two
earlier cycles.


Third cycle: from small towns to industrial cities

Just as Daniel Boone was celebrated long after his day was done, so were the
virtues of small-town American life. Millions of immigrant workers had
been imported to work in mines and factories, settling mainly in the big
cities. They were mostly Irish, Italian, and Eastern European. These immi­
grants were completely different from anyone seen in the United States be­
fore. Think about it: a nation that was essentially white and Protestant with
a black underclass was suddenly teeming with immigrants who looked,
spoke, and acted very differently. Hence, they were regarded with suspicion
and hostility by small-town America. Big cities, where these new immi­
grants settled to work in factories, came to be viewed as the center of an
alien and corrupt culture.
However, small-town values now started to work against America. The
ﬁnancial system had run on tight money since the late 1870s. This encour­
aged savings and investment but limited consumption and credit. As the
population living in cities exploded—both from high birthrates and immi­
gration—low wages made life difﬁcult for new immigrants. As investment
grew, the ability of the workers to buy the products they produced became
severely constrained. The result was the Great Depression, in which con­
sumers had no money to buy the products they needed, so factories making
these products laid workers off, in a seemingly endless cycle. Hard work and
frugality, the ethics of small-town America, were hardly sufﬁcient against
such powerful macroeconomic forces.
In 1932, Franklin Roosevelt succeeded the failed presidency of Her­
bert Hoover. Roosevelt proceeded to reverse the policies of the preceding
political generation by looking for ways to increase consumption through
transfers of wealth from investors to consumers. He championed the in­
dustrial, urban workers at the expense of the declining small towns and
their values.
Ultimately, though, the New Deal didn’t end the Depression—World
War II did it, by allowing the government to spend vast amounts of money
to build factories and hire workers. The aftermath of World War II was even


more decisive in ending the Depression. After the war ended, a series of laws
was created that allowed returning soldiers to buy homes on credit, easily ﬁ­
nance a college education, and become white-collar professionals. The fed­
eral government built an interstate highway system, opening up the areas
around cities for residential construction. These measures constituted a vast
transfer of wealth, spurring growth in factory and ofﬁce work and main­
taining wartime economic gains. The American middle class was born.
Roosevelt’s reforms—dictated by World War II—were aimed at supporting
the urban working class. They turned the ethnic working classes’ children
into middle-class suburbanites.

Fourth cycle: from industrial cities
to service suburbs

As always, one solution creates the next problem. The Depression was over­
come by increasing demand, by creating jobs and social supports and
then transferring money to consumers. High tax rates were imposed on the
wealthy, relatively low interest rates were offered to facilitate home owner­
ship, and consumer credit was introduced for a range of purchases. The
policies kept the economy humming.
But by the 1970s, the formula was no longer working. High tax rates
made the risk of starting businesses prohibitive and favored large, increas­
ingly inefﬁcient corporations. Marginal tax rates—the highest rates paid—
were in excess of 70 percent for the wealthy and for corporations. By
penalizing success, this tax policy discouraged investment. Factories aged
and became obsolete, even as consumption remained high due to ready con­
sumer credit. Without investment, the industrial plant, and the economy as
a whole, became increasingly less efﬁcient and less competitive globally.
In the late 1970s the baby boomers entered the period of family forma­
tion, when demand for credit was the highest. All of these factors, coupled
with an energy crisis, brought the situation to a head. Under President
Jimmy Carter, the entire economy was teetering. Long-term interest rates
were in the mid-teens. Inﬂation was over 10 percent, as was unemployment.


Carter’s solution was tax cuts for the middle and lower classes, which only
increased consumption and put further pressure on the system. All of the
economic stimuli that had worked in the previous ﬁfty years had not only
stopped working but were making the situation even worse.
In 1980, Ronald Reagan was elected president. Reagan faced a crisis of
underinvestment and overconsumption. Reagan’s solution was maintaining
consumption while simultaneously increasing the amount of investment
capital. He did so through “supply-side economics”: reducing taxes in order
to stimulate investment. Reagan did not want to stiﬂe demand, making
consumers unable to purchase products. His aim was for the upper classes
and corporations to be able to modernize the economy through investment.
This represented a radical restructuring of the American economy during
the 1980s, setting the stage for the boom of the 1990s.
Reagan’s policies transferred political and economic power away from
the cities and into the suburbs. Because of the innovations of the FDR–
Carter era, a massive population shift to the suburbs had transformed
the country. The interstate highway system and other well-maintained
roads allowed people access to less developed, less expensive land while
permitting them to easily commute into the city. These suburbanites grew
more and more wealthy over the course of the second half of the century,
and by the 1980s they were primed to beneﬁt from Reagan’s economic
policies.
Reagan thus completed the reorientation of the American economy
away from the principles of the New Deal, which favored urban working
class consumption over all other considerations, toward the suburban pro­
fessional and entrepreneurial classes. In this, he was seen by some as betray­
ing the heart of American society, the cities, and the soul of American labor,
unionized workers. Just as FDR, Hayes, and Jackson were viliﬁed, so was
Reagan viliﬁed as a betrayer of America’s common man. But Reagan had no
more choice in the end than did Roosevelt or Hayes or Jackson. Reality dic­
tated this evolution.

Fifth cycle: from service suburbs to a permanent migrant class

Now we turn to the future.
If the ﬁfty-year pattern holds—and a series of cycles that has lasted 220
years has a fairly reliable track record—we are now exactly in the middle of
the ﬁfth cycle, the one ushered in by Ronald Reagan’s election in 1980. This
pattern indicates that the current structure of American society is in place
until approximately 2030, and that no president, regardless of ideology, can
alter the basic economic and social trends.
Dwight Eisenhower was elected in 1952, twenty years after Roosevelt,
but he was unable to change the basic patterns that had been established by
the New Deal. Teddy Roosevelt, the great progressive, couldn’t signiﬁcantly
shift the course set by Rutherford Hayes. Lincoln afﬁrmed the principles of
Jackson. Jefferson, far from breaking Washington’s system, acted to afﬁrm
it. In every cycle, the opposition party wins elections, sometimes electing
great presidents. But the basic principles remain in place. Bill Clinton could
not change the basic realities that had been in place since 1980, nor will any
president from either party change them now. The patterns are too power­
ful, too deeply rooted in fundamental forces.
But we are dealing with cycles, and every cycle ends. If the pattern holds,
we will see increasing economic and social tensions in the 2020s, followed
by a decisive shift in an election at some point around then, likely 2028 or
2032. The question now is this: What will the crisis of the 2020s be about
and what will the solution be? One thing we know: the solution to the last
cycle’s crisis will engender the problem of the next, and the next solution
will dramatically change the United States.
The U.S. economy is currently built on a system of readily available
credit for both consumer spending and business development—interest
rates are historically low. Much of the wealth comes from equities growth—
homes, 401(k)s, land—rather than traditional savings. The savings rate is
low, but the growth in wealth is high.
There is nothing artiﬁcial about this growth. The restructuring of the
1980s kicked off a massive productivity boom driven by entrepreneurial ac­tivity.


The introduction not only of new technologies but of new patterns of
doing business increased worker productivity dramatically and also increased
the real value of businesses. Think of Microsoft and Apple as examples of
1980s-style new industry. Where during the previous cycle corporations like
General Motors and U.S. Steel had dominated the economic landscape, in
this cycle growth in jobs was centered on more entrepreneurial, less capital­
intensive companies.
Consumer demand and equity prices live in a delicate balance. If con­
sumer demand falls for any reason, the value of things, from homes to busi­
nesses, will decline. These values help drive the economy, from lines of
consumer credit to business loans. They deﬁne the net worth of an individ­
ual or business. If equity declines, demand decreases, so a downward spiral is
created. Until now, the problem has been growing the economy as fast as the
population. Now the challenge is making sure the economy doesn’t decline
faster than the population. Ideally, it should continue to grow in spite of
population decline.
A little over a decade away from the likely commencement of the ﬁrst
crisis of the twenty-ﬁrst century, we should already be able to glimpse its be­
ginnings. There are three storms on the horizon. The ﬁrst is demographic.
In the late 2010s, the major wave of baby boomers will be entering their
seventies, cashing in equities and selling homes to live off the income. The
second storm is energy. Recent surges in the cost of oil may only be a cycli­
cal upturn following twenty-ﬁve years of low energy prices. These surges
could also be the ﬁrst harbingers, though, of the end of the hydrocarbon
economy.
Finally, productivity growth from the last generation of innovations is
peaking. Great entrepreneurial companies of the 1980s and 1990s like Mi­
crosoft and Dell have become major corporations, with declining proﬁt
margins reﬂecting declining productivity growth. In general, the innova­
tions of the last quarter century are already factored into the price of equity.
Maintaining the thunderous pace of the past twenty years will be difﬁcult.
All of this will put pressure on equity prices—real estate and stocks. The
economic tools for managing equity prices aren’t there. During the past
hundred years, tools for managing interest rates and money supply—con­
trols of credit—have been created. But tools for managing equity prices are


only now beginning to emerge, as the mortgage meltdown of 2008 showed.
There has been talk of a speculative bubble in housing and stocks already; it
is only beginning, and I suspect that we will not see it at its most intense for
another ﬁfteen to twenty years or so. But when this cycle climaxes, the
United States will be smashed by demography, energy, and innovation crises.
It is worth pausing to consider the ﬁnancial crisis in 2008. For the most
part, it was a routine culmination of a business cycle. During an aggressive
upsurge in an economy, interest rates are necessarily low. Conservative in­
vestors seek to increase yield without increasing risk. Financial institutions
are ﬁrst and foremost marketing organizations, designed to devise products
satisfying demand. As the business cycle moves to climax, ﬁnancial institu­
tions must become more aggressive in crafting these products, frequently in­
creasing the hidden risk in the product. At the end of the cycle, the weakness
is revealed and the house comes crashing down. Consider the dot-com melt­
down at the turn of the century.
When the devastation affects a ﬁnancial sector, rather than a non-ﬁnancial
economic sector like dot-coms, the consequences are doubled. First, there
are ﬁnancial losses. Second, the ability of the ﬁnancial sector to function, to
provide liquidity to the economy, contracts. In the United States, the nor­
mal solution has been federal intervention. In the 1970s, the federal gov­
ernment intervened in a possible meltdown in municipal bonds by bailing
out New York City—guaranteeing its bonds. In the 1980s, when third
world countries began defaulting on debt because of declining commodity
prices, the United States led an international bailout that essentially guaran­
teed the third world debt via the Brady Bond. In 1989, when a collapse in the
commercial real estate market devastated the savings and loan industry, the
federal government intervened through the Resolution Trust Corporation.
The crisis of 2008 was triggered by the decline of housing prices, forcing the
government to intervene to guarantee those loans and other functions of the
ﬁnancial system.
Debt is measured against net worth. If you owe a thousand dollars and
have a net worth that’s negative, you have problems if you lose your job. If
you owe a million dollars but have a net worth of a billion dollars, you don’t
have a problem. The U.S. economy has a net worth measured in hundreds
of trillions of dollars. Therefore, a debt crisis measuring a few trillion cannot


destroy it. The problem is, how can this country’s net worth be used to
cover the bad loans, since that net worth is in hundreds of millions of pri­
vate hands? Only the government can do that, and it does it by guarantee­
ing the debts, using the state’s sovereign taxing power, and utilizing the
Federal Reserve’s ability to print money to bail out the system.
In that sense, the 2008 crisis was not materially different from previous
crises. While the underlying economy will go through a recession, recessions
are normal and common parts of the business cycle. But at the same time,
we are seeing an important harbinger of the more distant future. The decline
in housing prices has many reasons, but lurking in back of it is a demo­
graphic reality. As global population growth declines, the historic assump­
tion that land and other real estate will always rise in price due to greater
demand becomes suspect. The crisis of 2008 was not yet really a demo­
graphically driven crisis. But it showed a process that will reveal itself more
fully over the next twenty years: an equity crisis driven by demographics.
Declines in residential real estate prices are startling. They have not been
drivers in the past. This one is hardly a deﬁning moment. Think of it as a
straw in the wind, a sign of things to come—from pressure on real estate to
greater government control of the economy.
When we talk of economic crisis, all fears turn immediately to the Great
Depression. In fact, historically, the terminal crisis of a cycle has usually re­
sembled deep discomfort more than the profound agony of the Depression.
The stagﬂation of the 1970s or the short, sharp crises of the 1870s are far
more likely than the prolonged, systemic failure of the 1930s. As will be
true for the crisis of the 2020s, we don’t have to be facing a Great Depres­
sion in order to be confronting a historical turning point.

For the ﬁrst century of the United States, the driving problem was the struc­
ture of land ownership. For the next 150 years, the primary issue was how to
manage the relationship between capital formation and consumption. The
solution swung between favoring capital formation and favoring consump­
tion, sometimes settling on balancing the two. But for 250 years of Ameri­
can history, labor was never an issue. The population always grew and the
younger, working-age cohorts were more numerous than the older.


Underlying the crisis of 2030 is the fact that labor will no longer be the
reliable component it has been up to that point. The surge in birthrate fol­
lowing World War II and the increase in life expectancy will create a large
aging population, increasingly out of the workforce but continuing to con­
sume. And here’s a fact that should get you thinking: when Social Security
set the retirement age at sixty-ﬁve, the average life expectancy for a male was
sixty-one. It makes us realize how little Social Security was designed to pay
out. The subsequent surge in life expectancy has changed the math of re­
tirement entirely.
The decline in birthrates since the 1970s, coupled with later and later
entry into the workforce, reduces the number of workers to each retiree.
During the 2020s this trend will intensify. It is not so much that workers
will be supporting retirees, although that will be a factor. The problem will
be that retirees, drawing on equity in homes and retirement funds, will still
be consuming at high rates. Therefore, workers will be needed to ﬁll their
demand. With a declining workforce, and steady demand for goods and ser­
vices, inﬂation will soar because the cost of labor will go through the roof. It
will also accelerate the rate at which retirees exhaust their wealth.
Retirees will divide into two groups. Those lucky or smart enough to
have equity reserves in houses and 401(k)s will be forced to sell those assets.
A second group of retirees will have few or no assets. Social Security, under
the best of circumstances, leaves people in abject poverty. The pressure to
maintain reasonable standards of living and health care for the baby boomers
will be intense, and it will come from a group that will continue to retain
disproportionate political power because of their numbers. Retirees vote
disproportionately to other groups, and the baby boomer vote will be par­
ticularly huge. They will vote themselves beneﬁts.
Governments around the world—this won’t only be happening in the
United States—will be forced to either increase taxes or borrow heavily. If
the former, they will be taxing the very group that would be beneﬁting from
the increased wages necessitated by the labor shortage. If there is increased
borrowing, the government will be entering a shrinking capital market at
the same time that boomers are withdrawing capital from that market,
further driving up interest rates and, in a replay of the 1970s, increasing in­
ﬂation due to a surging supply of money. Unemployment is the only thing


that won’t echo the 1970s. Whoever can work will have a job—at high
wages—but those wages will be badly squeezed by taxes or inﬂation.
Boomers will start retiring in about 2013. If we assume an average re­
tirement age of seventy (and health and ﬁnancial need will push it there),
the years after will see the start of a surging retired population. A signiﬁcant
drop-off won’t occur until well after 2025, and the economic repercussions
will continue to echo well after that. Those born in 1980 will be coping
with this problem from their mid-thirties to their mid-forties. For an im­
portant part of their working life, they will be living in an increasingly dys­
functional economy. From a broad historical point of view this is just a
passing problem. For those born between 1970 and 1990 this not only will
be painful but will deﬁne their generation. It may not be on the order of an­
other Great Depression, but those who remember the stagﬂation of the
1970s will have a point of reference.
Baby boomers came in with a generation gap. They will go out with a
generation gap.
Whoever is elected president in 2024 or 2028 will face a remarkable
problem. Like Adams, Grant, Hoover, and Carter, this president will be us­
ing the last period’s solutions to solve the new problem. Just as Carter tried
to use Roosevelt’s principles to solve stagﬂation, making the situation worse,
the ﬁnal president in this period will use Reagan’s solution, ﬁelding a tax cut
for the wealthy to generate investment. Tax cuts will increase investment at
a time when labor shortages are most intense, further increasing the price of
labor and exacerbating the cycle.
Just as the problems leading to previous crises were unprecedented, so
the problem emerging in the 2020s will be unprecedented. How can we in­
crease the amount of available labor? The labor shortage will have two solu­
tions. One is to increase productivity per worker, and the other is to
introduce more workers. Given the magnitude and time frame of this
problem, the only immediate solution will be to increase the number of
workers—and to do that through increased immigration. From 2015 on­
ward, immigration will be rising, but not quickly enough to alleviate the
problem.
American political culture, ever since 1932, has been terriﬁed of a labor
surplus—of unemployment. The issue of immigration will have been re­garded 

for a century in terms of lowering wages. Immigration has been
viewed through the prism of population explosion. The idea that it could
resolve a problem—a shortage of labor—would have been as alien a concept
as the idea in 1930 that unemployment was not the result of laziness.
In the 2020s this concept will shift again, and by the election of either
2028 or 2032 a sea change in American political thinking will have taken
place. Some will argue that there are plenty of workers available, but that
they don’t have the incentive to work because taxes are too high. The failing
president will try to solve the problem with tax cuts to motivate nonexistent
workers to join the workforce by stimulating investment.
Rapid and dramatic increases in the workforce through immigration will
be the real solution. The breakthrough will be the realization that the his­
torical view of labor scarcity does not work any longer. For the foreseeable
future, the problem will be that there is simply not enough labor to be em­
ployed. And this will not be a uniquely American problem. Every advanced
industrial country will be facing the same problem—and most of them will
be in much greater trouble. Quite simply, they will be hungry for new work­
ers and taxpayers. In the meantime, the middle-tier countries that have been
the source of immigration will have improved their economies substantially
as their own populations stabilized. Any urgency to immigrate to other
countries will be subsiding.
It is hard to imagine now, in 2009, but by 2030 advanced countries will
be competing for immigrants. Crafting immigrant policy will involve not
ﬁnding ways to keep them out, but ﬁnding ways to induce them to come to
the United States rather than Europe. The United States will still have ad­
vantages. It is easier now to be an immigrant in the United States than it is
in France, and that will continue to be the case. Moreover, the United States
has more long-term opportunities than European countries do, if for no
other reason than that it has lower population density. But the fact is that
the United States will have to do something it hasn’t done in a long time—
create incentives to attract immigrants to come here.
Retirees will favor the immigration solution for obvious reasons. But the
workforce will be divided. Those who fear that their income will be reduced
by competition will oppose it vehemently. Other workers, in less precarious
positions, will support immigration, particularly in areas that will reduce


the cost of services they require. In the end, the politics will turn not so
much on the principle of immigration as on identifying the areas in which
immigration will be economically useful and the skills immigrants will
need, and managing the settlement of immigrants so that they do not over­
whelm particular regions.
Back to the incentives. The United States will have to offer immigrants a
range of competitive beneﬁts, from highly streamlined green-card processes
to specialized visas catering to the needs and wishes of the immigrant work­
force and quite possibly to bonuses—paid directly through the government
or through ﬁrms that are hiring them—along with guarantees of employ­
ment. And immigrants will certainly comparison shop.
This process will result in a substantial increase in the power of the fed­
eral government. Since 1980 we have seen a steady erosion of government
power. The immigration reform that will be needed around 2030 will re­
quire direct government management, however. If private businesses man­
age the process, the federal government at least will be enforcing guarantees
to make certain immigrants are not defrauded and that the companies can
deliver on their promises. Otherwise, unemployed immigrants will become
a burden. Simply opening the borders will not be an option. The manage­
ment of the new labor force—the counterpart to the management of capital
and credit markets—will dramatically enhance federal power, reversing the
pattern of the Reagan period.
Imported labor will be of two classes. One will consist of those able to
support the aging population, such as physicians and housekeepers. The
other will be those who can develop technologies that increase productivity
in order to address the labor shortage over the longer term. Therefore, pro­
fessionals in the physical sciences, engineering, and health care, along with
manual laborers of various sorts, will be the primary kinds of workers that
are recruited.
This inﬂux of immigrants will not be on the order of the 1880–1920
immigration but will certainly be more substantial than any immigration
wave since. It will also change the cultural character of the United States.
The very plasticity of American culture is its advantage, and this will be cru­
cial in helping it to attract immigrants. We should expect international fric­
tion from the process of recruiting immigrants as well. The United States


pursues its ends ruthlessly, and will outbid and outmaneuver other coun­
tries for scarce labor as well as drain educated workers from developing
countries. This will, as we will see, affect the foreign policy of these coun­
tries.
For the United States, on the other hand, it will be merely another ﬁftyyear cycle in its history successfully navigated and another wave of immi­
grants attracted and seduced by the land of opportunity. Whether they
come from India or Brazil, their children will be as American in a genera­
tion as previous immigration cohorts were throughout America’s history.
This applies to everyone except for one group—the Mexicans. The
United States occupies land once claimed by Mexico, and its border with
that nation is notoriously porous. Population movements between Mexico
and the United States differ from the norm, particularly in the borderlands.
This region will be the major pool from which manual labor is drawn in the
2030s, and it will cause serious strategic problems for the United States later
in the century.
But around 2030 an inevitable step will be taken. A labor shortage that
destabilizes the American economy will force the United States to formalize
a process that will have been in place since around 2015 of intensifying im­
migration into the United States. Once this is done, the United States will
resume the course of its economic development, accelerating in the 2040s as
the boomers die and the population structure begins to resemble the normal
pyramid once again, rather than a mushroom. The 2040s should see a surge
in economic development similar to those of the 1950s or 1990s. And this
period will set the stage for the crisis of 2080. But there is a lot of history to
come between now and then.



CHAPTER 8
A new world emerges


The collapse of Russia in the early 2020s will leave Eurasia as a whole
in chaos. The Russian Federation itself will crack open as Moscow’s
grip shatters. Regions, perhaps even the thinly populated Paciﬁc re­
gion, will break away, its interests in the Paciﬁc Basin far outweighing its in­
terest in or connection to Russia proper. Chechnya and the other Muslim
regions will break off. Karelia, with close ties to Scandinavia, will secede.
Such disintegration will not be conﬁned to Russia. Other countries of the
former Soviet Union will fragment as well. The burdens imposed by Moscow
will be entirely unsustainable. Where previously the collapse of the Soviet
Union led to oligarchs controlling the Russian economy, the collapse of the
2020s will lead to regional leaders going their own way.
This disintegration will take place during a period of Chinese regional­
ism. China’s economic crisis will kick off a regional phase in Chinese history
that, during the 2020s, will intensify. The Eurasian landmass east of the
Carpathians will become disorganized and chaotic as regions struggle for lo­
cal political and economic advantage, with uncertain borders and shifting
alliances. In fact, fragmentation on both sides of the Chinese border, from
Kazakhstan to the Paciﬁc, will start to render the boundaries meaningless.


From the United States’ point of view, this will represent a superb outcome. The fifth geopolitical imperative for the United States was that no
power be in a position to dominate all of Eurasia. With both China and
Russia in chaos, the possibility is more distant than ever. There is, in fact,
little need for the United States to even involve itself in maintaining the balance of power inside the region. In the coming decades the balance of power
will maintain itself.
Eurasia will become a “poacher’s paradise.” For the countries around
the periphery of the region, there will be extraordinary opportunities to
poach. The vast region is rich in resources, labor, and expertise. The collapse of central authority will be an opportunity for countries on its periphery to take advantage of the situation. Fear, need, and avarice are the
perfect combination of factors that would allow the periphery to try to exploit the center.
Three nations will be in particularly opportune positions for taking advantage of this. First, Japan will be in a position to exploit opportunities in
the Russian maritime region and in eastern China. Second, Turkey will be
in a position to press northward into the Caucasus and potentially beyond.
Finally, an alliance of Eastern European countries, led by Poland, and including 

the Baltic states, Hungary, and Romania, together will regard this as
an opportunity not only to return to older borders but also to protect them­
selves against any future Russian state. A powerful secondary beneﬁt for
these countries is this: by increasing their strength, they will be further pro­
tecting themselves against their traditional Western enemy, Germany. These
Eastern European countries will be looking at this as an opportunity for re­
deﬁning the balance of power in the region. India, for all its size, will not be
in this game. Geographically isolated by the Himalayas, India will not be
able to take serious advantage of the situation.
The American view of this activity in the 2020s will be supportive. East­
ern Europe, Turkey, and Japan will be allies of the United States. Turkey and
Japan will have been its allies for seventy-ﬁve years by that point, Eastern
Europe for thirty years. During the confrontation with Russia, each will,
more or less, and for its own reasons, work with the United States, which
will regard them, as it did other allies, as extensions of the American will.
The events of the 2020s will have much broader implications beyond
Russia and China, however. The ﬁrst will be the changing status of Asia in
relation to the Paciﬁc, and therefore in relation to the United States. The
second will be the state of the Muslim world following the U.S.–jihadist
war. The third will be the internal order of Europe in an age of FrancoGerman decline and Eastern European emergence. The fragmentation of
NATO is a given once the Germans and the French opt out of defending the
Baltic countries. NATO is based entirely on collective defense, the idea that
an attack on one member is an attack on all members. Embedded in this
idea is the understanding that NATO is prepared, in advance, to go to the
defense of any member country that is at risk. Since the Baltic states will be
at risk, a force will need to be forward deployed there as well as in Poland.
The unwillingness of some of the members to participate in collective de­
fense means that action will need to be taken outside the context of NATO.
NATO, therefore, will cease to exist in any meaningful form.
All of these issues will be on the table in the 2010s as the confrontation
with Russia develops. They will be suspended—or at the very least not be
high on the global agenda—during the conﬂict. But eventually these ques­
tions are going to reemerge. Once the Russian threat has passed, each of
these regions must come to terms with its own geopolitics.


Asia

Japanese involvement in China goes back to the nineteenth century. During
the period of turmoil between Europe’s interventions in China in the midnineteenth century and the end of World War II, Japan was continually
exerting its inﬂuence in China, usually seeking some kind of economic ad­
vantage. The Chinese have bitter memories of Japanese behavior in China
in the 1930s and 1940s, but not so bitter as to block the Japanese from re­
turning to invest in post-Maoist China.
In the 1930s, Japan looked to China for markets, and to a lesser extent
for labor. In the 2020s, the emphasis will be, as we have pointed out, on la­
bor. With China regionalizing and to some extent fragmenting, Japan will
have faced its old Chinese temptation in the 2010s and 2020s. Establishing
some form of dominance over a Chinese region could rapidly contribute to
solving Japan’s demographic problems without forcing the Japanese to pay
the social and cultural price of immigration. But Japan will need to foster
deep ties to whatever region it dominates in China.
Various Chinese regions will be looking for protection from the central
government as well as for investment capital and technology. Thus, the latenineteenth- and early-twentieth-century symbiotic relationship, based on
coastal China’s need for investment and technology and Japan’s need for la­
bor, will reassert itself.
Historically, Japan has another interest besides a need for labor—access
to raw materials. As I have stated, Japan is the world’s second-largest econ­
omy, but it must import almost all of its raw materials. This has been a his­
torical challenge for Japan and was the main reason that it went to war with
the United States in 1941. Many people forget that Japan was divided in­
ternally before the decision was ﬁnally made to attack Pearl Harbor. Some
Japanese leaders argued that an invasion of Siberia would provide Japan
with the raw materials it needed and was less risky than taking on the United
States. Either way, the seriousness with which the Japanese pursued (and
will continue to pursue) raw materials must not be underestimated.
Paciﬁc Russia is extremely rich in all sorts of minerals, including hydro­
carbons. By the 2020s, Japan will be facing energy problems and a contin­
ued dependence on the Persian Gulf, which in turn would mean being


entangled with the United States. Given American hubris after the second
fall of Russia, Japan, like the rest of the world, will be increasingly uneasy
about America’s next move. Therefore, with Russia fragmenting, it would
seem to make a great deal of sense for the Japanese to seek, at the very least,
economic control over Pacific Russia. Japan will respond whenever its access
to raw materials is threatened.
Japan will have a direct interest, then, in both northeast China and Pacific Russia, but it will have no appetite for military adventure. At the same
time, Japan will be facing economic disaster by mid-century unless it starts


making some decisive moves in the 2020s. By 2050 Japan’s population
could drop to as low as 107 million from the current 128 million, with 40
million of those over the age of sixty-ﬁve and 15 million under the age of
fourteen. With 55 million people out of the workforce, Japan will be hard
pressed to maintain its economy at manageable levels. Between labor and
energy concerns, Japan will have no choice but to attempt to become a re­
gional power.
Let us look more closely at Japan and its history. It is currently the
world’s second-largest economic power, and will continue to be well into
the twenty-ﬁrst century. In many ways, the Japanese social structure that
persisted through industrialization, through World War II, and during its
economic miracle in the 1980s is the same structure that was in place before
industrialization.
Japan is notable for internal stability that persists through major shifts in
economic and political policy. Following its initial encounter with the West
and the realization that industrial powers could squash countries like Japan,
it began industrializing at a dizzying pace. After World War II, Japan re­
versed a deeply embedded militaristic tradition and suddenly became one
of the most paciﬁst nations in the world. It then grew at an extraordinary
rate until 1990, when its economic expansion halted due to ﬁnancial fail­
ures, at which time the Japanese accepted their reversal of fortune with
equanimity.
The mixture of continuity in culture and social discipline has allowed
Japan to preserve its core values while changing its ways of doing things.
Other societies frequently cannot change course suddenly and in an orderly
fashion. Japan can and does. Its geographical isolation protects it from divi­
sive social and cultural forces. In addition, Japan has a capable ruling elite
that recruits new members based on merit, and a highly disciplined popula­
tion prepared to follow that elite. This is a strength that makes Japan not
necessarily unpredictable, but simply capable of executing policy shifts that
would tear other countries apart.
We cannot assume that Japan will continue its reticence and paciﬁsm in
the 2020s. It will hold on as long as possible; the Japanese have no desire for
military conﬂict, because of their long national memory of the horrors of
World War II. At the same time, the current paciﬁsm is an adaptive tool for


the Japanese, not an eternal principle. Given its industrial and technological
base, moving to a more assertive military stance is simply a question of a
shift in policy. And given the pressures it will experience demographically
and economically in the coming years, such a change is almost inevitable.
Japan will at ﬁrst try to get what it needs through economic means. But
Japan will not be alone in seeking to augment its labor force without immi­
gration, nor will it be the only country looking to control foreign energy
sources. The Europeans will also be interested in creating regional economic
relationships. The fragmented regions of China and Russia will gladly play
the Europeans and Japanese off each other.
Japan’s challenge is that it can’t afford to lose this game. For Japan, given
its needs and geographic location, exerting its inﬂuence in East Asia is the
only game in town. Japanese power in the region will encounter resistance
in a number of ways. First, the Chinese central government, which has been
waging anti-Japanese campaigns for years, will see Japan as deliberately un­
dermining the integrity of the Chinese nation. Chinese regions themselves,
allied with other foreign powers, will seek to dominate their counterparts. A
complex struggle will emerge, potentially threatening Japan’s interests and
compelling it to intervene more directly than it might wish. Japan’s last re­
sort will be an increased militarism, which, even if it’s a long way off, will
eventually assert itself. By the 2020s and 2030s, as Chinese and Russian in­
stability increases and as foreign presences rise, the Japanese, like others, will
have to defend their interests.
By about 2030, the United States will have to reevaluate its view of
Japan, as that country becomes more assertive. Japan, like the United States,
is inherently a maritime power. It survives by importing raw materials and
exporting manufactured products. Access to sea lanes is essential to its exis­
tence. As Japan begins to move from large-scale economic involvement to
small-scale military presence in East Asia, it will be particularly interested in
protecting its regional sea lanes.
Southern Japan is about ﬁve hundred miles from Shanghai. Five hun­
dred miles also brings you from Japan to Vladivostok, Sakhalin Island, and
the Chinese coast north of Shanghai. That radius will represent the outer
limit of Japanese military interests. But even to protect such a small area,
Japan will need a capable navy, air force, and space surveillance system. The


truth is, Japan has these already, but by 2030 they will be explicitly oriented
toward excluding unwelcome intruders in Japan’s sphere of inﬂuence.
It is at this point that Japan’s newfound assertiveness will begin to chal­
lenge American strategic interests. The United States wants to dominate all
oceans. The reemergence of Japanese regional power not only threatens this
interest but sets the stage for increased Japanese power globally. As Japan’s
interests in mainland Asia increase, its air and naval capabilities will need to
improve as well. And as these improve, there is no guarantee that its range of
action won’t increase as well. It is, from the American point of view, a dan­
gerous cycle.
The situation is likely to play out as follows: As the United States begins
to react to increased Japanese power, the Japanese will become increasingly
insecure, resulting in a downward spiral in U.S.–Japanese relations. Japan,
pursuing its fundamental national interests in Asia, must control its sea lanes.
Conversely, the Americans, viewing global sea lane control as an absolute re­
quirement for their own national security, will press back on the Japanese,
trying to contain what the United States will perceive as increased Japanese
aggressiveness.
Right in the middle of the growing Japanese sphere of inﬂuence is Korea,
which we expect will be united well before 2030. A united Korea will have a
population of about seventy million, not much less than Japan. South Korea
currently ranks twelfth economically in the world, and will rank higher in
2030 after uniﬁcation. Korea historically fears Japanese domination. As
Japan increases its power in China and Russia, Korea will be trapped in the
middle, and it will be afraid. Korea will not be a trivial power in its own
right, but its real importance will come from the United States seeing Korea
as a counterbalance to Japanese power and as a base for asserting its own
power in the Sea of Japan. Korea will want U.S. support against a rising
Japan, and an anti-Japanese coalition will start to emerge.
In the meantime, changes will be taking place inside China. In recent
centuries, China has run on a thirty- to forty-year cycle. China ceded Hong
Kong to the British in 1842. In about 1875 the Europeans began taking
control of China’s tributary states. In 1911 the Manchu dynasty was over­
thrown by Sun Yat-sen. In 1949 the Communists took control of China.
Mao died in 1976 and the period of economic expansion began. By 2010


China will be struggling with internal disruption and economic decline.
This means that another reversal is likely sometime in the 2040s.
This reversal will be a reassertion of political control by Beijing and a
campaign to limit the foreign presence in China. But obviously, this process
won’t begin in the 2040s. It will culminate there. It will be emerging in the
2030s as foreign encroachment, particularly by the Japanese, gets more in­
tense. This will be another lever the United States will use to control the sit­
uation. It will support Beijing’s efforts to reunify China and control Japan,
a reversion of U.S. policy to the pre–World War II model.
By the 2040s, the United States and Japan will have reached a profound
divergence of interests. The United States will be allied with Seoul and Bei­
jing, all of them concerned about increased Japanese power. The Japanese,
fearing American interference in their sphere of inﬂuence, will necessarily
increase their military power. But Japan will be profoundly isolated, facing
the regional coalition the United States will have created as well as American
military power. There will be no way the Japanese can cope with the pres­
sure alone, yet there will be no one nearby to help. However, technological
shifts will create geopolitical shifts, and opportunities for Japan to form its
own coalition will emerge at the other end of Asia.

Turkey

During the Russo–American confrontation in Europe leading up to 2020,
there is going to be a subsidiary confrontation in the Caucasus. The Rus­
sians will press south into the region, reabsorbing Georgia and linking up
with their Armenian allies. The return of the Russian army to Turkey’s bor­
ders, however, will create a massive crisis in Turkey. A century after the fall
of the Ottoman Empire and the rise of modern Turkey, the Turks will have
to face again the same threat they faced in the Cold War.
As Russia later crumbles, the Turks will make an unavoidable strategic
decision around 2020. Relying on a chaotic buffer zone to protect them­
selves from the Russians is a bet they will not make again. This time, they
will move north into the Caucasus, as deeply as they need to in order to
guarantee their national security in that direction.


There is a deeper issue. By 2020, Turkey will have emerged as one of the
top ten economies in the world. Already ranked seventeenth in 2007, and
growing steadily, Turkey is not only an economically viable country but a
strategically crucial one. In fact, Turkey enjoys one of the strongest geo­
graphic locations of any Eurasian country. Turkey has easy access to the Arab
world, Iran, Europe, the former Soviet Union, and above all the Mediter­
ranean. The Turkish economy grows in part because Turkey is a center of re­
gional trade as well as a productive economic power in its own right.
By 2020 Turkey will be a surging, fairly stable economic and military
power in a sea of chaos. Apart from the instability to its north, it will face
challenges in every other direction as well. Iran, which has not been eco­
nomically or militarily signiﬁcant for centuries but whose internal affairs are
historically unpredictable, lies to the southeast. To the south, there is the
permanent instability and lack of economic development of the Arab world.
To the northwest, there is the perpetual chaos of the Balkan Peninsula,
which includes Turkey’s historic enemy, Greece.
None of these regions will be doing particularly well in the 2020s, for
several reasons. The Arabian Peninsula to Turkey’s south will, in particular,
be confronting an existential crisis. Except for oil, the Arabian Peninsula has
few resources, little industry, and minimal population. Its importance has
rested on oil, and historically the wealth produced by oil has helped stabilize
the region. But by 2020 the Arabian Peninsula will be declining. Though it
will not yet be out of oil, and far from improverished, the handwriting will
be on the wall and crisis will loom. Struggles between factions in the House
of Saud will be endemic, along with instability in the other sheikhdoms of
the Persian Gulf.
The broader issue, though, will be the extreme fragmentation of the en­
tire Islamic world. Historically divided, it has been badly destabilized by the
U.S.–jihadist war. During the U.S.–Russian confrontation of the late
2010s, the Middle East will be further destabilized by Russian attempts to
create problems for the United States to the south of Turkey. The Islamic
world in general, and the Arab world in particular, will be divided along
every line imaginable in the 2020s.
The Balkans, to Turkey’s northwest, will also be unstable. Unlike the
Cold War in the twentieth century, when U.S. and Soviet power locked Yu­goslavia 

into place, the second round of the U.S.–Russian confrontation
will destabilize the region. Russia will be much less powerful than it was the
ﬁrst time around and will confront a hostile Hungary and Romania. Just as
the Russians will work to contain Turkey (through the Arab countries to
Turkey’s south), so they will attempt to contain Hungary and Romania by
trying to turn Bulgaria, Serbia, and Croatia against them. They will cast a
broad net, knowing that they will fail in some cases but hoping for enough
success to divert Turkey’s attention. As Greece, Macedonia, Bosnia, and
Montenegro are drawn into the Balkan conﬂicts, the region will once again
become a shambles. The immediate periphery of Turkey is going to be un­
stable, to say the least.
The Islamic world is incapable of uniting voluntarily. It is, however, ca­
pable of being dominated by a Muslim power. Throughout history, Turkey
has been the Muslim power most often able to create an empire out of part
of the Islamic world—certainly since the Mongol invasions of the thirteenth
century. The century between 1917 and 2020 has been an anomaly, because
Turkey has ruled only over Asia Minor. But Turkish power—the Ottoman
Empire or a Turkic power ruling out of Iran—has been a long-term reality
in the Islamic world. In fact, Turkey once dominated the Balkans, the Cau­
casus, the Arabian Peninsula, and North Africa (see map on page 84).
During the 2020s, that power will begin to reemerge. Even more than
Japan, Turkey will be critical in the confrontation with the Russians. The
Bosporus, the strait connecting the Aegean and the Black Sea, blocks Russ­
ian access to the Mediterranean. Turkey historically controlled the Bosporus,
and therefore Russia historically saw Turkey as a power that was blocking its
interests. It will be no different in the 2010s or early 2020s. The Russians
will need access to the Bosporus to counter the Americans in the Balkans.
The Turks know that if the Russians are given such access and succeed in
achieving their geopolitical goals, Turkish autonomy will be threatened. The
Turks, therefore, will be committed to their alliance with the United States
against Russia.
As a result, the Turks will be instrumental in America’s anti-Russian
strategy. The United States will encourage Turkey to press north in the Cau­
casus and will want Turkish inﬂuence in Muslim areas of the Balkans, as
well as in the Arab states to the south, to increase. It will help Turkey in­crease


its maritime capabilities—naval, air, and space—to challenge the
Russians in the Black Sea. It will ask the Turkish navy to share the naval bur­
den in the Mediterranean and use its power to block Russian adventures in
North Africa. The United States also will do everything it can to encourage
Turkish economic development, which will further stimulate its already
surging economy.
When the Russians ﬁnally collapse, the Turks will be left in a position
they haven’t been in for a century. Surrounded by chaos and weakness, the
Turks will have an economic presence throughout the region. They also will
have a substantial military presence. When the Russians collapse, the re­
gional geopolitics will reorganize—without real effort on their part—around
the Turks, who will become the dominant power in the region, projecting
inﬂuence in all directions. Turkey will not be a formal empire yet, but it will
be, without a doubt, the center of gravity in the Islamic world.
Of course the Arab world will have severe problems with Turkey’s
reemerging power. Turkish mistreatment of Arabs under the old Ottoman
Empire has not been forgotten. But the only other regional players that
could exert as much power will be Israel and Iran, and Turkey will be much
less objectionable to the Arabs. With the Arabian Peninsula beginning its
decline, the security and economic development of the Arab countries will
depend on close ties to Turkey.
The Americans will see this development as a positive step. First, it
will reward a close ally. Second, it will stabilize an unstable region. Third, it
will bring the still signiﬁcant hydrocarbon supplies of the Persian Gulf un­
der the inﬂuence of the Turks. Finally, the Turks will block Iranian ambi­
tions in the region.
But while the immediate response will be positive, the longer-term geo­
political outcome will run counter to American grand strategy. As we have
seen, the United States creates regional powers to block greater threats in
Eurasia. However, the United States also fears regional hegemons. They can
evolve into not only regional challengers but global ones. That is precisely
how the United States will begin to view Turkey. As the 2020s come to an
end, U.S.–Turkish relations will become increasingly uncomfortable.
The Turkish perception of the United States will change as well. In the
2030s the United States will be seen as a threat to Turkish regional interests.


In addition, there might well be an ideological shift in Turkey, which has
been a secular state since the fall of the Ottoman Empire. Historically, the
Turks have taken a ﬂexible approach to religion, using it as a tool as much as
a system of belief. As it faces U.S. opposition to the spread of its inﬂuence,
Turkey may ﬁnd it useful to harness Islamist energies by portraying itself as
being not only Muslim but also an Islamic power (as opposed to a faction
like al Qaeda) attempting to create an Islamic superstate. This would shift
Arab Muslims in the region from a position of reluctant alignment to ener­
getic participation in Turkey’s expansion, regardless of the history and cyni­
cism of the move. We will see, as a result, the United States confronting a
potentially powerful Islamic state that is organizing the Arab world and the
eastern Mediterranean. The United States will be existentially threatened by
the combination of Turkey’s political power and the vibrancy of its econ­
omy, even as challenges continue to arise on other fronts.

Poland

The most enthusiastic participants in the American confrontation with the
Russians will be the former Soviet satellites, particularly Poland. In a sense,
they will be leading the Americans as much as being led. Poland has every­
thing to lose from Russia’s reemergence and little to protect it from the Rus­
sians. As the Russians come back to its frontier, Poland will look to the rest
of Europe to support it through NATO. There will be little enthusiasm in
Germany or France for any confrontation, so Poland will do what it histor­
ically did when confronted by Russia or Germany—it will seek an outside
power to protect it. Historically this did not work. The guarantees made by
France and Britain in 1939 did nothing to protect Poland against Germany
or Russia. The United States will be different. It is not a power in decline,
but a young, vigorous risk taker. To Poland’s pleasant surprise, the United
States will be strong enough to block the Russians.
The rest of Europe, particularly France and Germany, will have ex­
tremely mixed feelings about America’s superiority over the Russians. Hav­
ing lived through one cold war in the twentieth century, they will have little
desire to live through another one. At a time of declining populations in all


of these countries, the Germans and the French might be relieved to see
Russia—also with a declining population but still enormous—broken up.
However, they will not be happy to see the United States in a strong posi­
tion in Europe outside of institutions like NATO, which the Europeans ac­
tually used to control and contain the United States.
Nor will Germany, France, and the rest of Western Europe be used to
the sudden self-conﬁdence of Poland or of the Czech Republic, Slovakia,
Hungary, and Romania. The confrontation with Russia will paradoxically
make these countries feel more secure because of the strong bilateral ties
with the United States through which they seek to block Russian power.
Freed from their primordial fear of the Russians and increasingly uncon­
cerned about a weakening Germany, these countries will see themselves as
relatively safe for the ﬁrst time in several centuries. Indeed, the FrancoGerman decline will be felt all around the European periphery, driven partly
by population decline, partly by moribund economies, and partly by the
geopolitical miscalculation of opting out of the confrontation with Russia
(and therefore disrupting NATO). The net result will be an intensiﬁcation
of the crisis of conﬁdence that has undermined France and Germany since
World War I.
As a result, there will be a general redeﬁnition of the European power
structure. The collapse of the Russians will give the Eastern Europeans both
the opportunity and the need to adopt a more aggressive foreign policy in
the east. Eastern Europe will become the most dynamic region of Europe.
As Russia collapses, the Eastern European countries will extend their inﬂu­
ence and power to the east. The Slovaks, Hungarians, and Romanians have
been the least vulnerable to the Russians because the Carpathians formed a
natural barrier. The Poles, on the northern European plain, will be the most
vulnerable, yet at the same time the largest and most important Eastern Eu­
ropean nation.
As the Russians fall apart, the Poles will be the ﬁrst to want to press east­
ward, trying to create a buffer zone in Belarus and Ukraine. As the Poles as­
sert their power, the Carpathian countries will also project power east of the
mountains, into Ukraine. For ﬁve hundred years, Eastern Europe has been a
backwater, trapped between the great Atlantic European powers and Ger­
many on the one side, and Russia on the other. In the wake of the collapse


of Russian power, the European order will shift to the east, to an Eastern
Europe with deep ties to the United States.
A political confederation among the Baltic countries, Poland, Slovakia,
Hungary, and Romania will be impossible. They will have too many cul­
tural and historical differences between them. But an alliance between at
least some of them is easy to imagine, especially when they share the com­
mon interest of moving to the east.
That is precisely what they will do in the 2030s. Using their growing
economic power—and military force as well, left over from their close col­
laboration with the Americans—they will form an alliance and face no sig­
niﬁcant resistance to any eastern move. On the contrary, given the chaos,
many in the region will actually welcome them as a stabilizing force. The
difﬁculty will be coordinating the movement and avoiding major conﬂicts
over particular areas. The region is naturally fractious; however, in the late
2020s and 2030s, that will be the last thing on the Eastern European mind.
Making certain that Russia never returns and increasing their labor force
will be the major considerations.
The precise lines of an Eastern European advance are impossible to pre­
dict. However, seeing an occupation of St. Petersburg from Estonia, or a
Polish occupation of Minsk, or a Hungarian occupation of Kiev is no more
difﬁcult to imagine than a Russian occupation of Warsaw, Budapest, or
Berlin. What goes west can go east, and if the Russians crumble, then an
eastward movement out of Eastern Europe is inevitable. In this scenario,
Poland becomes a major and dynamic European power, leading a coalition
of Eastern European countries.
The balance of power within Europe by 2040 will therefore shift to the
east. All of Europe will be experiencing a demographic problem, but East­
ern Europe will be able to compensate for it through the kind of complex ﬁ­
nancial relations that the United States traditionally maintains with allies.
Eastern European countries might not surpass Western European countries
in the absolute size of their economies, but certainly Eastern Europe will
surpass Western Europe in terms of dynamism.
So what does all this mean for France and Germany? It was one thing to
live in a Europe that was disorganized but in which France and Germany
were the decisive powers. It is quite another thing to live in a Europe that is


reorganizing itself and leaving them behind. With Britain drawn deeply
into the American economic orbit and the Iberian Peninsula similarly at­
tracted to the opportunities of an American relationship, the French and the
Germans will face a profound dilemma.
Decadence means that you no longer have an appetite for great adven­
tures, but it does not mean that you no longer want to survive. By 2040,
France and Germany are going to be has-beens, historically. Between popu­
lation crises and the redeﬁnition of the geopolitics of Europe, the French
and Germans will be facing a decisive moment. If they do not assert them­
selves, their futures will be dictated by others and they will move from deca­
dence to powerlessness. And with powerlessness would come a geopolitical
spiral from which they would not recover.
The key problem for France and Germany in their existential difﬁculties
will be the United States. Although Eastern Europe will be surging as we ap­
proach the middle of the century, this surge will not be sustainable without
support from the United States. If the United States could be forced to
abandon its inﬂuence in Europe, Eastern Europe would not have the ability
or conﬁdence to pursue its strategic interests in the east. The old order
would therefore be able to reassert itself, and some level of security could be
retained by France and Germany.
Obviously, the French and Germans won’t be in any position to con­
front the Americans directly, or to force them out alone. But with the end of
the U.S.–Russian conﬂict, the immediate American interest in the region
will decline. Inasmuch as U.S. power will still be in a state of constant ﬂux,
and its attention span short, the possibility of a reduced American presence
will be real. There still may be an opportunity for the French and Germans
to overawe the Eastern Europeans—particularly if American attention is di­
verted elsewhere in the world, such as toward the Paciﬁc.
U.S. interest in Europe may wane in the immediate wake of Russia’s col­
lapse, seemingly opening the door to increased Franco-German power. But
this will be transitory. As the U.S. crisis with Japan and Turkey emerges and
intensiﬁes, the U.S. interest in Europe, as we shall see, will reemerge. The
United States will have a very real interest in Eastern Europe once the Turks
start to make their move in the 2020s. And that will likely be enough to
block the reemergence of German and French power.


Summing up

The fragmentation of China in the 2010s and the breakup of Russia in the
2020s will create a vast vacuum from the Paciﬁc to the Carpathians. All
around the periphery there will be opportunities for nibbles, bites, and then
entire mouthfuls by minor countries. Finland will take back Karelia, Roma­
nia will take back Moldova, India will help Tibet break free, and Taiwan will
extend its power across the Taiwan Strait while Europeans and Americans
create regional spheres of inﬂuence in China as well. There will be many op­
portunities for poaching.
But three nations will have both the power and the need to do some­
thing dramatic. Japan will expand its power to include both maritime Rus­
sia and areas of China. Turkey will expand its power not only into the
Caucasus but also throughout the areas to its northwest and south. Poland,
leading a coalition of Eastern European powers, will push eastward and
deep into Belarus and Ukraine.
The United States will look at all of this benignly for the ﬁrst decade or
so, much as it viewed the world in the 1990s. Poland, Turkey, and Japan will
be U.S. allies. Increasing their strength will in turn strengthen the United
States. And if moralism is needed, it could be argued that these countries ac­
tually will be helping bring prosperity to their neighbors.
By the mid-2030s, however, as all three continue to increase their power,
the United States will begin to feel uneasy. By the 2040s, it will be down­
right hostile. The ﬁfth geopolitical principle for the United States is to op­
pose any power controlling all of Eurasia. Suddenly there will be three
regional hegemons emerging simultaneously, and two of them (Japan and
Turkey) will be signiﬁcant maritime powers—one in the northwest Paciﬁc
and one in the eastern Mediterranean. Both will also have developed signiﬁ­
cant capabilities in space, and we will see in the next chapter how that be­
comes relevant by mid-century. The bottom line is as follows: In the 2040s,
the United States will do what it does when it becomes uneasy. It will begin
to act.



CHAPTER 9

THE 2040s
Prelude to War

The years around 2040 will be a ﬂush time in the United States, com­
parable to the 1990s, 1950s, or 1890s. About ten to twenty years
after a ﬁfty-year cyclical shift in the United States, the changes intro­
duced start powering the economy. Economic, technological, and immigra­
tion shifts introduced in the 2030s will take effect by the end of the decade.
Productivity gains from robotics and the surge in health care opportunities
presented by genetic science will fuel growth. As in the 1990s, the internal
processes of American research and development (particularly those ramped
up during the second cold war) will bear fruit.
As we have seen countless times in history, however, ﬂush times are not
necessarily peaceful or stable times internationally. The question that will
come to the fore in 2040 will be this: What will be the relationship between
the United States and the rest of the world? On one level, the United States
will be so powerful that virtually any action it takes will affect someone in
the world. On the other hand, the United States will have such power, par­
ticularly after the Russian retreat and Chinese instability, that it can afford
to be careless. The United States is dangerous in its most benign state, but
when it focuses down on a problem it can be devastatingly relentless. The


global impulse will be to block the United States, but in practical terms that
will be easier said than done. Those who can avoid confronting the United
States will choose that path because the risks of confrontation will be too
high. Simultaneously, the rewards of collaboration will be substantial. These
crosscurrents will be settled in different ways by different powers.
Around 2040, the most contentious issue on the table will be the ques­
tion of the future of the Paciﬁc Basin. It will be addressed more narrowly as
a question of the northwest Paciﬁc, and more narrowly still as Japanese pol­
icy toward China and Siberia. The surface issue will be Japan’s increasingly
aggressive role on the mainland of Asia as it pursues its own economic
interests and interferes with other powers, including the United States. Ad­
ditionally, there will be the question of Japanese respect for Chinese sover­
eignty and the question of self-determination for maritime Russia.
On a deeper level, the United States will be alarmed by Japan’s rapidly
growing maritime power, including sea-based and space-based military sys­
tems. Japan, still importing oil from the Persian Gulf, will be increasing its
power in the South China Sea and in the Strait of Malacca. In the early
2040s, the Japanese will be concerned with the stability of the Gulf and will
begin to probe and patrol in the Indian Ocean in order to protect their in­
terests. Japan will have well-established, close economic ties with many of
the island chains of the Paciﬁc, and will begin to enter into agreements with
them for satellite tracking and control stations. U.S. intelligence will suspect
that these will also serve as bases for Japanese hypersonic anti-ship missiles.
Hypersonic missiles move faster than ﬁve times the speed of sound—by the
mid-twenty-ﬁrst century, they will travel in excess of ten times the speed of
sound, eight thousand miles an hour and faster. Hypersonics can be mis­
siles, crashing directly into targets, or unmanned aircraft, releasing muni­
tions on targets and then returning home.
The Japanese will share waters with the American Seventh Fleet and
space with the U.S. Space Command—by now an increasingly independent
service of the American military. Neither side will be provoking incidents at
sea or in space, and both nations will be maintaining formally cordial rela­
tions. But the Japanese will be exquisitely aware of America’s concern—that
its private lake, the Paciﬁc, contains a power that it does not fully control.
Japan will be deeply concerned with protecting its sea lanes against po­tential 


Threats in the south, particularly in the waters of Indonesia, which
are the paths between the Paciﬁc and Indian oceans. Indonesia is an archi­
pelago consisting of many islands and many ethnic groups. It is inherently
fragmented, and it has—and will continue to have—many separatist move­
ments. Japan will play a complex game in backing some of these movements
versus others in order to secure the various straits in Indonesian waters.
Japan will also want to be able to keep the U.S. Navy out of the western
Paciﬁc. Toward this end, it will do three things. First, it will build and de­
ploy hypersonic anti-ship missiles in its home islands, able to strike deep
into the Paciﬁc. Second, it will enter into agreements to allow sensors and
missiles to be based on Paciﬁc islands it already dominates economically,
like the Bonin Islands (which include Iwo Jima), the Marshalls, and Nauru.
The strategy here will be to create choke points that would potentially inter­
dict U.S. transpaciﬁc trade and military transport. This, in turn, will create
predictability in American routing, making it easier for Japanese satellites to
monitor the movement of American ships. The most disturbing thing for
the Americans, however, will be the degree of Japanese activity in space,
where not only military but commercial and industrial facilities will be un­
der construction.
American policy will be complex, as always, and inﬂuenced by different
factors. The idea of a strong China threatening the Russian rear will become
an obsession in the U.S. intelligence and military communities in the 2010s
and 2020s. In the 2030s this fear will become an idée ﬁxe in the State De­
partment, where old policies never change or die. The United States will
therefore continue its commitment to a secure and stable China. But this
will become a major irritant in U.S.–Japanese relations by 2040. Obviously,
Japanese behavior in China will be incompatible with the American idea of
a stable China. By 2040 the relationship between Washington and Beijing
will grow closer, irritating the Japanese no end.

Turkey

Turkey, meanwhile, will move decisively northward into the Caucasus as
Russia crumbles. Part of this move will consist of military intervention, and


part will occur in the way of political alliances. Equally important, much of
Turkey’s inﬂuence will be economic—the rest of the region will need to
align itself with the new economic power. Turkish inﬂuence inevitably will
spread northward, beyond the Caucasus into Russia and Ukraine, asserting
itself in the politically uncertain Don and Volga river valleys, and eastward
toward the agricultural heartland of Russia. Muslim Turkey will inﬂuence
Muslim Kazakhstan, spreading Turkish power into Central Asia. The Black
Sea will be a Turkish lake, and Crimea and Odessa will trade heavily with
Turkey. There will be massive Turkish investment throughout this region.
Russia will have created a system of alliances to the south of Turkey be­
fore its collapse, much as it did during the Cold War. As Russia weakens and
withdraws, it will leave behind a belt of instability from the Levant to Af­
ghanistan. Turkey will have no appetite for engaging Iran and will be quite
content to leave it isolated and alone. But the instability in Syria and Iraq
will directly affect Turkish interests, particularly as the Kurds become free to
start thinking about setting up their own state again. Syria and Iraq will be
weak without Russian support, torn apart by traditional internal conﬂicts.
Between the danger of instability spreading north and the threat of other
powers ﬁlling the vacuum, the Turks will move south. Certainly the Turks
won’t want the Americans moving into Iraq: they will have had enough of
that in the 2000s.
The Balkans will be in chaos during this time as well. As the Russians
weaken, their allies in the Balkans will also weaken, creating regional imbal­
ances. The Hungarians and Romanians will try to ﬁll some of these voids, as
will the Greeks (Turkey’s historic enemies). As the new regional power,
Turkey will be drawn into the Balkans as a result of this widespread instabil­
ity. Turkey will already have had close relations with Muslim countries in the
Balkans—Bosnia and Albania—and they will seek to expand their sphere of
inﬂuence not so much out of aggressive appetite, but out of the fear of the
intentions of other countries.
Geographically speaking, there is only one essential goal for any power
in this region: control of the eastern Mediterranean and Black seas. It is im­
portant to remember that Turkey has been historically both a land and naval
power. The closer any European powers come to the Bosporus, the strait
connecting the Black Sea to the Aegean Sea, the more dangerous it is for


Turkey. Turkish control of the Bosporus means pushing European powers
out of the Balkans, or at least blocking them decisively. Therefore, involve­
ment in the Balkans is essential in order for Turkey to become a major re­
gional power.
And, by the mid-2040s, the Turks will indeed be a major regional power.
They will create systems of relationships deep into Russia that feed agricul­
tural products and energy into Turkey. They will dominate Iraq and Syria,
and therefore their sphere of inﬂuence will reach the Saudi Peninsula with
its dwindling oil and natural gas reserves, which are fueling the American
economy. The Turks will push their sphere of inﬂuence northwest, deep
into the Balkans, where their power will clash with the interests of key
American allies like Hungary and Romania, who will also be pressing their
inﬂuence eastward into the Ukraine and encountering Turkish inﬂuence all
along the northern shore of the Black Sea. There will be conﬂicts, from
guerrilla resistance to local conventional war, all around the Turkish pivot.
Turkey will enhance an already substantial armed force suitable for its
needs, including a sizeable ground force and formidable naval and air forces.
Projecting its power into the Black Sea, protecting the Bosporus, and mov­
ing into the Adriatic to help shape events in the Balkans all will require a
naval force. It also, in effect, will require a dominant position in the eastern
Mediterranean as far as Sicily. It is not only the Bosporus that will have to be
protected. The Straits of Otranto, the gateway to the Adriatic, will also need
to be controlled.
Turkey will wind up pushing against U.S. allies in southeastern Europe
and will make Italy feel extremely insecure with its growing power. The
breaking point will come when Egypt, inherently unstable, faces an internal
crisis and Turkey uses its position as the leading Muslim power to insert
troops to stabilize it. Suddenly Turkish peacekeepers will be in Egypt, con­
trolling the Suez Canal, and in a position to do what Turkey has tradition­
ally done: push westward in North Africa. If Turkey seizes this opportunity,
it will become the decisive power in Western Eurasia. Israel will remain a
powerful nation, of course, but Turkey’s ability to expand its power as a
Muslim nation will both block Israel and force Israel into an accommoda­
tion with Turkey, already seen as a friendly power.
Control of the Suez Canal will open up other possibilities for Turkey. It


will have already pushed southward into the Arabian Peninsula and will be
fighting Arab insurgents. Its overland supply lines will become strained, and
with control of the Suez Canal, Turkey will be in a position to supply its
forces through the Red Sea. This in turn will consolidate Turkish control
over the Arabian Peninsula and place Turkey in a much more threatening
position relative to Iran, enabling it to blockade Iran’s ports as well as strike
from the west. Neither of these will be things that Turkey wants to do. But
just the threat of such actions will quiet Iran, which will serve Turkish
interests.
It follows from this that Turkey will go beyond the Red Sea and enter the
Indian Ocean basin. Its focus will be on the Persian Gulf, where it will consolidate its control over the Arabian Peninsula and the region’s still valuable
oil supplies. By doing so, it will also become an important factor in Japan’s
security calculations. Japan has historically depended on oil supplies from
the Persian Gulf. With the Turks dominating that region, the Japanese will
have an interest in reaching an understanding with Turkey. Both countries
will be significant economic powers as well as emerging military powers.


Both countries also will have an interest in maintaining sea lanes from the
Strait of Hormuz to the Strait of Malacca. So there will be a comfortable
convergence of interests with few friction points.
Obviously the emergence of Turkey in the region and as a maritime
power will be alarming to the United States, particularly as it will happen at
the same time that Japan is surging. And the low-key cooperation between
Turkey and Japan in the Indian Ocean will be particularly disconcerting.
Turkish power will now be overwhelming in the Persian Gulf—as will be
Japanese naval power in the northwest Paciﬁc. The United States will still be
the dominant power in the Indian Ocean, but as with the Paciﬁc, the trend
won’t be moving in its direction.
Equally disturbing will be the way in which Turkey gathers up the rem­
nants of the previous generation’s Islamists, adding ideological and moral
weight to its emerging preeminence in the region. As its inﬂuence spreads, it
will be about more than military power. This obviously will be unsettling to
the United States, as well as to India.
The United States will have had a long relationship with India, dating
back to the U.S.–jihadist war of the early twenty-ﬁrst century. While India,
internally divided, will not have managed to become a global economic
power, it will be a regional power of some importance. India will be dis­
turbed by the entry of Muslim Turks into the Arabian Sea, and will fear fur­
ther Turkish expansion into the Indian Ocean itself. India’s interests will
align with those of the Americans, and so the United States will ﬁnd itself in
the same position in the Indian Ocean as in the Paciﬁc. It will be aligned
with a vast, populated country on the mainland, against smaller, more dy­
namic maritime powers.
As this process intensiﬁes, the power of Japan and Turkey—on opposite
ends of Asia—will become substantial. Each will be expanding its interests
in mainland Asia and therefore shifting its naval assets to support them. In
addition, each will be enhancing its space-based operations, launching
manned and unmanned systems. There will also be a degree of technical co­
operation in space; Japan will be ahead of Turkey in technology, but access
to Turkish launch facilities will give Japan added security against an Ameri­
can strike. This cooperation will be yet another source of discomfort for the
United States.


By the middle of the century, Turkey’s inﬂuence will extend deep into
Russia and the Balkans, where it will collide with Poland and the rest of the
Eastern European coalition. It will also become a major Mediterranean
power, controlling the Suez Canal and projecting its strength into the Per­
sian Gulf. Turkey will frighten the Poles, the Indians, the Israelis, and above
all the United States.

Poland

The Polish nightmare has always been to be simultaneously attacked by
both Russia and Germany. When that happens, as it did in 1939, Poland
has no hope. The collapse of Russia in the 2020s will therefore create an op­
portunity and necessity for Poland. Just as Russia will have no choice but to
move its buffers as far west as possible, so Poland will want to move its bor­
der as far east.
Historically, Poland has rarely had this opportunity, having been squeezed
and dominated by three empires—the Russian, the German, and the
Austro-Hungarian. But in the seventeenth century, Poland had the oppor­
tunity to expand, faced with a fragmented Germany and a Russia that had
not yet begun to be a powerful force in the West.
The Poles’ problem had been an unsecured southern ﬂank. In 2040, this
will not be an issue since the rest of the Eastern European countries that will
be facing the Russians will also be eagerly building buffers to the east, the
lessons of the past still fresh in their minds. But there will be another di­
mension to this eastern bloc: an economic one. Since reuniﬁcation in
1871, Germany has been the economic powerhouse of Europe. Even after
World War II, when Germany had lost its political will and conﬁdence, it
remained the most dynamic economic power on the continent.
After 2020 that will no longer be the case. The German economy will be
burdened by an aging population. The German proclivity for huge corpo­
rate megastructures will create long-term inefﬁciencies and will keep its
economy enormous but sluggish. A host of problems, common to much of
Central and Western Europe, will plague the Germans.
But the Eastern Europeans will have fought a second cold war (allied


with the leading technological power in the world, the United States). A
cold war is the best of all wars, as it stimulates your country dramatically but
doesn’t destroy it. Many of the technological capabilities from which the
United States gains its massive advantage will be generated out of the second cold war, and Poland will be flooded with American technology and expertise.
By itself, Germany will have neither the appetite nor the power to challenge the Polish bloc, as we will refer to it. But the Germans will be painfully aware of the trajectory being followed. In due course, the Polish bloc
will outstrip Central and Western Europe’s power, and will achieve precisely
what Germany had once dreamed of. It will assimilate and develop the


western portion of the former Russian empire and, in so doing, build an
economic bloc of substantial proportions.
The core weakness of the Polish bloc will be that it is relatively landlocked. It will have ports on the Baltic, but those could be readily blocked
by any country with even minimal naval capabilities. The Skagerrak will be
a dangerous choke point. If it is the only outlet Poland has, then Poland’s
maritime line of supply to the United States and the rest of the world will be
strikingly vulnerable. The only other alternative will be to seek a port on the
Adriatic. Croatia, historically close to the Hungarians, will control the port of
Rijeka. Although it is limited, it certainly will be usable.
There will be two problems with using that port, both having to do with
the Turks. First, the Turks will be deeply involved in the Balkans, as will the
Hungarians and Romanians. As with all Balkan situations, this one will be a
tangle, with religious ties complicated by national hostility. The Turks will
not want to see the Polish bloc moving toward the Mediterranean, and will
use Bosnian–Croatian tensions to maintain insecurity. But even if that is
not an issue, the use of the Adriatic and Mediterranean will not be based on
the Polish bloc simply having a merchant fleet there. It will depend on control 


of the Strait of Otranto. The only other alternatives will be for Den­
mark to seize the Skagerrak and Poland to invade Germany, and the Poles
will not be in a position to do that.
The Polish bloc will collide with the Turks in two places. One will be in
the Balkans, where the issue will be access to the Mediterranean. The other
will be in Russia itself, where Turkish inﬂuence will spread westward
through Ukraine while the bloc’s inﬂuence spreads eastward. This will not
be as explosive as the ﬁrst issue, as there will be plenty of room, but it will be
a secondary issue of some importance. No one will have deﬁned the spheres
of inﬂuence in Ukraine and southern Russia. And given Ukrainian hostility
to Poles—with whom they had a historical antagonism going back to the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries—and to the Turks as well, each might
manipulate the situation in ways uncomfortable to the other.
The Poles will need the Americans badly at this juncture. Only the
Americans will have the weight to resist the Turks in the Mediterranean.
And the Americans will be increasingly inclined to do so, as they will not
want to see a new Eurasian power establish itself. While Turkey will be far
from reaching that goal, it will be moving in that direction. America’s strate­
gies of disrupting Eurasian regional powers before they become too strong
and preventing the emergence of any other naval power will dictate that the
United States should try to block Turkey.
At the same time, U.S. policy will also require that, rather than take di­
rect action, the United States should underwrite regional powers also inter­
ested in resisting the Turks. The Polish bloc won’t be an immediate threat to
any American interests, unlike the Turks. The American strategy, therefore,
will be not to throw U.S. forces into the struggle, but to transfer technology
to the Polish bloc so that it can pursue the strategy on its own.
By around 2045 the Polish bloc will have secured Rijeka, absorbing both
Slovenia and Croatia. Both countries will seek protection from the bloc
against Balkan rivals like Serbia and Bosnia. The Polish bloc will have heav­
ily fortiﬁed the frontier with both of these countries. Serbia will be excluded
from the bloc because the Poles and the others will not want to get bogged
down in Serbian politics. And using American technological strength, Poland
will proceed to rapidly integrate and develop naval and space capabilities
needed to confront the Turks in the Adriatic and Mediterranean. The rate of


the Polish bloc’s development will be startling, and the Turks will begin to
realize that they face a challenge not only from the Polish bloc but from the
United States itself.
The Germans will watch this crisis anxiously from their nearby border,
obviously supporting the Turks. They won’t make a move on their own, but
the Germans will be sufﬁciently aware of the consequences if the Polish bloc
defeats Turkey. In that event, if they maintain their unity, the Polish bloc
will essentially be the reincarnation of the former Soviet Union, with most
of its European resources—added to which would be the Middle East. The
Germans will understand the Americans well enough to know that they
would move against the bloc in the event of victory of this magnitude, but
the Germans will also know that they would bear the brunt of the new con­
frontation. If the Polish bloc were in this dominant position, the United
States would have to keep it from also dominating Western Europe, and
that would mean that Germany would, once again, become a potential bat­
tleﬁeld. The success of the Polish bloc would present short- and long-range
threats to Germany.
It will therefore be in the German interest to help the Turks in any way
possible, short of war. But the help that the Turks will need would be help
in strangling the Polish bloc. The key to this would be isolating it from the
United States and global trade. If the Turks were to isolate the Polish bloc in
the Adriatic, and the Germans could contrive a way to obstruct the Baltic,
the Polish bloc would be in serious trouble. But for Germany to do this, it
will have to be sure that the Turks will succeed—and for this it will need to
be sure that the Americans won’t come in with their full weight. Since Ger­
many can’t be sure of either, it will play a waiting game.
The Americans will also play a waiting game around the globe. They will
arm the Polish bloc and encourage its confrontation with the Turks. They
will help increase the strength of the Indians in the Indian Ocean. They will
strengthen the Chinese and Koreans and build up American forces in the
Paciﬁc and the Mediterranean. They will do everything they can to strangle
both Japan and Turkey without acting directly against them. And they will
pursue the policy well—too well in fact. Both Turkey and Japan, well aware
of the United States’ historic ability to arm and support its allies, will be led


to the conclusion that they are facing disaster at the hands of American
proxies. And this will lead to massive escalation.

Pressures and alliances

The United States faced crises on multiple fronts a century before when, in
the 1940s, Germany and Japan simultaneously challenged American inter­
ests. In that case as well, the United States followed a strategy of strengthen­
ing regional allies, aiding Britain and Russia against Germany, and China
against Japan. Now, a century later, it will again be prepared to play a long
game. It will have no desire to occupy or destroy either Turkey or Japan,
much less Germany. The United States is playing a defensive game, block­
ing emerging power. It is not engaged in an offensive strategy, however it
might appear. American strategy will be to wear down any threats over an
extended period of time, causing potential opponents to bog down in con­
ﬂicts they cannot bring to a close and cannot easily abandon. In this strategy
the United States will always invoke the principles of self-determination and
democratic values, painting Japan and Turkey as aggressors undermining
national sovereignty while violating human rights.
Alongside the public diplomacy, there will also be a series of more direct
challenges.
The ﬁrst will be economic. The American market, still huge, will be an
enormous consumer of Japanese and, to a lesser extent, Turkish products,
and the United States will also remain the major source of new technolo­
gies. Getting cut out of the American market or technologies would be
painful, to say the least. The United States will use these levers against both
countries. It will stop the exportation of some technologies, particularly
those with potential military applications, and limit the importation of
some products from these countries.
At the same time, the United States will support a range of nationalist
movements in China, Korea, and India. Through the Polish bloc, the
United States will also support nationalist Russian and Ukrainian move­
ments within the Turkish sphere of inﬂuence. The major American focus in


this strategy, however, will be in the Balkans and North Africa, particularly
Egypt. In the Balkans, the Polish bloc (heavily dependent on Croatia) will
steer clear of aligning with Serbia, Croatia’s old enemy, thus creating some­
thing of a buffer with Turkey. The United States will begin an aggressive
program of supporting Serbian resistance against the Turks, and extending
it to Macedonia. The Greeks, historical enemies of the Turks, will become
close allies of the United States and support this effort, although they will
stay clear of formal alignment with the Polish bloc.
In many ways, from a geopolitical perspective, these alliances and ma­
neuvers are not difﬁcult to predict. As I have said, they follow well-established
patterns that have been ingrained in history for many centuries. What I am
doing is seeing how traditional patterns play themselves out in the context
of the twenty-ﬁrst century. In this particular region, after the United States
begins to support targeted resistance to the Turks, the Balkans will become
a tinderbox and the Turks will spend an inordinate amount of resources in
an area where their primary interest is defensive. They will be trying to pro­
tect the Bosporus and little else. If they retreat, their credibility (in their still
uncertain sphere of inﬂuence) will be badly hurt.
The United States also will try its hand at supporting Arab nationalism,
both in Egypt and in the Arabian Peninsula. The Turks will be careful not to
be excessively aggressive or greedy in asserting their power, but nevertheless
anti-Turkish feeling will be prevalent. This type of nationalist feeling will be
exploited by the United States, not because Americans genuinely want it to
go anywhere but in order to sap the strength of the Turks. Turkey will be
concerned about U.S. aid to the Polish bloc and northern Africa. The goal
of the United States will be to reshape and limit the behavior of the Turks,
but any meddling will be far short of what Turkey regards as challenging its
fundamental national interest.

Space and battle stars

The most threatening move the United States will make during this period
is at sea—and those moves won’t actually take place in the water, but in
space. During the 2030s, the United States will have begun a fairly low-key


program for the commercialization of space, focusing particularly on energy
production. By the mid-2040s, this development will have proceeded to
some extent but will still be heavily subsidized and in the research and de­
velopment phase. In the course of commercializing space, the United States
will increase its ability to work in space robotically, using humans only for
the most complex and exacting work. Substantial infrastructure will have
been created, giving the country even more of a head start.
Looking to leverage its advantage in space in order to improve its domi­
nance of the earth’s surface, the United States will begin building on that in­
frastructure. It will gradually abandon the costly and ineffective strategy of
sending heavily armed troops in petroleum-burning vehicles thousands of
miles away to exert its power. Instead, the United States will construct a sys­
tem of hypersonic unmanned aircraft that will be based on U.S. soil but
controlled from space-based command centers in geosynchronous orbit
over potential target regions—platforms that I will call “Battle Stars,” for no
other reason than that it’s a cool name. By mid-century, a hypersonic missile
based in Hawaii could hit a ship off the coast of Japan or a tank in
Manchuria in half an hour.
The United States will also create (quite secretly, since treaties from the
last century will still be in place) missiles that can be ﬁred from space with
devastating effect, at very high speeds, at targets on the surface. If the plat­
form were to be cut off from ground communication, it would be able to
conduct the battle from space automatically—if what was called for was a
quantity of explosives delivered to a precise point at an exact time based on
superb, space-based intelligence.
Combat in the twenty-ﬁrst century will require elegance of communica­
tion. Most important in the evolution of space warfare will be the transfer of
primary command and control facilities into space. Land-based control is
vulnerable. By the time an image is picked up in space and transmitted
through a series of satellites to earth, and a command is sent out to hyper­
sonic weapons systems, many seconds will have passed. Most important, the
more links there are, the higher the number of possible failure points, and
an enemy could disrupt that signal. An enemy could also attack the ground
control center, the receivers, and transmitters. There will be many low-tech
solutions for disruption, but placed in space, the command centers will be


seen as more secure and survivable, with unimpeded ability to communicate
with weapons and personnel.
Much of the science involved in these systems is in its infancy today. By
the middle of the century, though, it will be online. Now stick with me
here. I am telling you what the technological world is realistically going to
look like . . . I’m not writing Battlestar Galactica here. These forecasts are
based on real technology, reasonable extrapolations about future technol­
ogy, and reasonable war planning. Space-based platforms will have superb
sensing equipment as well as command and control systems. Battle Stars
will control unmanned subsidiary platforms which will support the Battle
Star system. They will see the surface of the earth with extraordinary preci­
sion, and will be able to order hypersonic aircraft strikes as needed—strikes
that will be able to frequently hit their targets in a matter of minutes. They
will be able to attack a group planting explosives by the roadside, or a ﬂeet
putting to sea. If they can see it, they will be able to hit it quickly.
Using lessons learned during space construction projects in the 2030s, I
believe the United States’ future plans will call for the creation of a system of
three Battle Stars. The main Battle Star will be located in geosynchronous
orbit over the equator near the coast of Peru. A second will be placed over
Papua New Guinea, and a third over Uganda. The three will be arrayed at
almost exact intervals, trisecting the earth.
Most countries won’t be happy about the Battle Star system, but the
Japanese and the Turks will be particularly alarmed. It just so happens that
one Battle Star will be due south of Turkey and the other will be due south
of Japan. Each will be able to use its onboard sensors, as well as remote sen­
sors that orbit the earth but can stop and loiter for extended periods of time,
to monitor those countries. They will be, essentially, guns pointed at the
heads of both countries. And perhaps most important, they will be capable
of imposing an unstoppable blockade on either country at a moment’s no­
tice. Battle Stars will not be able to occupy Turkey and Japan, but they will
be able to strangle them.
Although the new space-based systems will have been planned for years,
they will be put into place with breathtaking speed. With rapid deployment
ordered around 2040, the systems will be fully operational in the second
half of the decade . . . let’s say by 2047, for argument’s sake. This deployment


will be based on the assumption that the Battle Star is invulnerable, that no
other country has the ability to attack and destroy it. That assumption has
been made by the United States before—about battleships, aircraft carriers,
and stealth bombers. There is a built-in arrogance in American military
planning built on the belief that other countries cannot match American
technology. Assuming invulnerability, though, however risky, will make the
system easier to deploy quickly.

Escalating tension

Deployment of the Battle Stars, the introduction of new generations of
weapons managed from space, and aggressive political pressure coupled with
economic policies will all be intended to contain Japan and Turkey. And
from the Japanese and Turkish points of view, American demands will be so
extreme as to seem unreasonable. The Americans will demand that both
countries withdraw all forces to within their original borders, as well as
guaranteeing rights of passage in the Black Sea, the Sea of Japan, and the
Bosporus.
If the Japanese were to agree to these conditions, their entire economic
structure would be imperiled. For the Turks, economic upheaval will be a
consideration, but so will the political chaos that would then surround
them. Moreover, the United States will make no equivalent demands on the
Polish bloc. In effect, the United States will demand that Turkey turn over
the Balkans and Ukraine, as well as part of southern Russia, to the Poles,
and that it allow the Caucasus to fall back into chaos.
The United States will not actually expect Turkey or Japan to capitulate.
That will not be the American intent. These demands will simply be the
platform from which the Americans try to impose pressure on these coun­
tries, limiting their growth and increasing their insecurity. The Americans
won’t truly expect either country to return to its position of 2020, but it will
want to discourage further expansion.
The Japanese and the Turks, however, will not see things this way. From
their perspective, the best-case scenario will be that the United States is try­
ing to divert their attention from pressing issues by creating insoluble inter­national 


problems. Worst case will be that the United States is preparing the
way for their geopolitical collapse. In either case, both Turkey and Japan will
have no choice but to assume the worst, and prepare to resist.
Turkey and Japan won’t have the extensive experience of the Americans
in space. They may be able to construct manned space systems, and will
have created their own reconnaissance systems by this point. But the mili­
tary capabilities possessed by the United States will be outside their reach,
certainly within a time frame that might cause the United States to recon­
sider its policies. And neither the Japanese nor the Turks will be in a posi­
tion to reconsider theirs.
The United States will not plan to go to war with either Japan or Turkey.
Its intention will simply be to squeeze them until they decrease their dy­
namism and become more malleable to American demands. As a result,
Turkey and Japan will have an interest in limiting American power and will
therefore form a natural coalition. By the 2040s, technological shifts in war­
fare will have made a close alliance remarkably easy. Space will change the
global geopolitical equation.
In more traditional terms as well, the Turks and the Japanese will be able
to support each other. The United States is a North American power. Japan
and Turkey will both be Eurasian powers.
This sets up a very natural alliance, as well as a goal for these countries.
Japanese power hugs the Paciﬁc coast, but by 2045 it will have spread
throughout the Asian archipelago and on the mainland as well. The Turkish
sphere of inﬂuence will extend into Central Asia and even into Muslim
western China. The possibility will exist, therefore, that if Japan and Turkey
were to collaborate, they could create a pan-Eurasian power that would rival
the United States.
The ﬂy in the ointment, of course, will be Poland, and the fact that
Turkish inﬂuence won’t penetrate beyond the Balkans. But this won’t pre­
vent Turkey and Japan from seeking out an alliance. If just one European
power could be brought into the coalition, then Poland would have a seri­
ous problem. Its resources and attention would be diverted, giving Turkey a
freer hand in Ukraine and Russia, and giving the Turkish-Japanese alliance a
third leg. The European country they will have in mind is Germany. From
the Japanese and Turkish perspectives, if Germany could be persuaded that


the threat from a U.S.-backed Polish bloc would be sufﬁciently dangerous,
and the creation of a tripartite pact sufﬁciently threatening to force the
United States to act cautiously, then the possibility of securing Eurasia and
exploiting its resources jointly would be viable.
Germany will not believe for a moment that the United States would be
deterred. Indeed, it will fear that a tripartite coalition would trigger an im­
mediate American military response. Germany also will reason that if the
Polish bloc is eliminated, it will shortly be facing the Turks in the Danube
basin and it will have no appetite for that game. So although I see the Ger­
mans as the most likely choice to form a coalition with Turkey and Japan, I
also believe it will decline involvement—but with a caveat. If the United
States winds up in a war with Turkey and Japan and is allied with Poland,
Poland might well be severely weakened in that war. In that case, a later
German intervention would hold lower risk and higher reward. If the
United States won outright, Germany would be no worse off. If the United
States and Poland were both defeated—the least likely outcome—then Ger­
many would have an opportunity to move in quickly for the kill. Waiting to
see what happens to Poland will make sense for Germany, and that is the
game it will play in the middle of the twenty-ﬁrst century.
The only other possible member of the coalition might be Mexico, how­
ever unlikely. Recall that Mexico was invited into an alliance by Germany in
World War I, so this idea is hardly unprecedented. Mexico will be develop­
ing rapidly throughout the ﬁrst ﬁfty years of this new century and will be a
major economic power by the late 2040s, although still living in the shadow
of the United States. It will be experiencing a major outﬂow of Mexicans to
the southwestern borderlands after the new American immigration policy of
2030. This will be troubling to the United States in a number of ways, but
Mexico will hardly be in a position in the late 2040s to join an anti-American
coalition.
U.S. intelligence, of course, will pick up the diplomatic discussions be­
tween Tokyo and Istanbul (the capital will shift there from Ankara, return­
ing the capital of Turkey to its traditional city) and will be aware of the
feelers to Germany and Mexico. The United States will realize that the situ­
ation has become quite serious. It also will have knowledge of the joint
Japanese-Turkish strategic plans should war break out. No formal alliance


will be in place, but the United States will no longer be certain it is facing
two separate and manageable regional powers. It will start to appear that it
is facing a single coalition that could, in fact, dominate Eurasia—the pri­
mordial American fear. This goes back to the grand strategies I discussed in
the early sections of this book. If it controlled Eurasia, the Japanese–Turkish
coalition would be secure from attack and able to concentrate on challeng­
ing the United States in space and at sea.
The American response will be a policy it has executed numerous times
in history—it will squeeze each of the powers economically. Both countries
will depend to some extent on exports, difﬁcult in a world where popula­
tions will no longer be growing very fast. The United States will begin form­
ing an economic bloc that will bestow most-favored-nation status on exports
into the United States for countries that are prepared to shift their purchases
away from Turkey and Japan and toward third countries—not even neces­
sarily the United States—that could supply the same goods. In other words,
the United States will organize a not particularly subtle boycott of Japanese
and Turkish goods.
In addition, the United States will start limiting the export of tech­
nology to both of these countries. Given the American work being done in
robotics and genetics, this will hurt Turkish and Japanese high-tech capabil­
ities. Most important, there will be a surge in U.S. military aid to China, In­
dia, and Poland, as well as to forces resisting Turkey and Japan in Russia.
American policy will be simple: to create as many problems as possible for
these two countries in order to deter them from forming a coalition.
But the intense activity of the United States in space will be the most
troubling to Japan and Turkey. The establishment of the Battle Star constel­
lation will convince them that the United States will be prepared to wage an
aggressive war if necessary. By the late 2040s, given all the actions of the
Americans, the Japanese and Turks will have reached a conclusion about
American intentions. The conclusion they will draw, however, is that the
United States means to break them both. They will also conclude that only
the formation of an alliance will protect them, by serving as a deterrent—
or make it clear that the United States intends to go to war no matter what.
A formal alliance will therefore be created, and with its formation Muslims


throughout Asia will be energized at the thought of a coalition that will
place them at the crossroads of power.
The resurgence of Islamist fervor built around Turkey’s confrontation
with the United States will spill over into Southeast Asia. This will give
Japan, under the terms of the alliance treaty, access to Indonesia—which,
together with its long-term presence in the Paciﬁc Islands, will mean that
U.S. control of the Paciﬁc, and access to the Indian Ocean, can no longer be
assured. But the United States will remain convinced of one thing—that al­
though it might face challenges from the Japanese and the Turks within
their region and in Eurasia, they will never challenge America’s strategic
power, which will be in space.
Having put the Japanese and Turks in an impossible position, the Amer­
icans will now simultaneously panic at the result and yet remain complacent
about their ultimate capacity to manage the problem. The United States
will not view the outcome as a shooting war, but as another cold war, like
the one it had with Russia. The superpower will believe that no one would
challenge it in a real war.



CHAPTER 10

PREPARING F R WAR 


The war in the mid-twenty-ﬁrst century will have classic origins. One
country, the United States, will place tremendous pressure on a coali­
tion of two other countries. The United States will not intend to go
to war, or even to seriously damage Japan or Turkey. It simply will want
these two countries to change their behavior. The Japanese and Turks, to
the contrary, will feel that the United States is trying to destroy them. They
also will not want war, but fear will compel them to act. They will try to ne­
gotiate with the United States, but while the Americans will view their own
demands as modest, the Turks and Japanese will see them as existential
threats.
We will see the collision of three grand strategies. The Americans will
want to prevent major regional powers from developing in Eurasia and will
be concerned that these two regional powers would merge into a single
Eurasian hegemon. Japan will need a presence in Asia in order to deal with
its demographic problems and to get raw materials; for that it will have to
control the northwest Paciﬁc. And Turkey will be the pivot point of three
continents that are all in various degrees of chaos; it will have to stabilize the
region if it is to grow. While Japanese and Turkish actions will cause anxiety


for the United States, Japan and Turkey will feel they cannot survive unless
they act.
Accommodation will be impossible. Each concession made to the United
States will bring new demands. Each refusal by Japan and Turkey will in­
crease American fears. It will come down to submission or war, and war will
appear to be the more prudent option. Japan and Turkey will have no illu­
sion that they could destroy or occupy the United States. Rather, they will
simply want to create a set of circumstances in which the United States
would ﬁnd it in its interests to reach a negotiated settlement guaranteeing
Japan and Turkey their spheres of inﬂuence, which in their view will not af­
fect fundamental American interests.
Since they won’t be able to defeat the United States in a war, Turkey and
Japan’s goal will be to deal the United States a severe setback at the opening
of the conﬂict in order to put the United States at a temporary disadvan­
tage. This would be intended to generate a sense in the United States that
the prosecution of the war would be more costly and risky than accom­
modation. It will be Turkey and Japan’s hope that the Americans, enjoying a
period of prosperity, and vaguely uneasy about Mexico’s resurgence, will de­
cide to decline extended combat and accept a reasonable negotiated settle­
ment. Japan and Turkey will also understand the risks if the United States
doesn’t agree to settle, but will feel they have no choice.
It will be a replay of World War II in this sense: weaker countries trying
to redeﬁne the balance of power in the world will ﬁnd it necessary to launch
sudden, preemptive wars before the other side is ready. The war will be a
combination of surprise attack and exploitation of that surprise. In many
ways, war in the mid-twenty-ﬁrst century will be similar to war in the midtwentieth century. The principles will be the same. The practice, however,
will differ dramatically—and that is why this conﬂict will mark the dawn of
a new age in warfare.

A new kind of war

World War II was the last major war of the European Age. In that age there
were two kinds of wars, which sometimes occurred simultaneously. One was


global war, in which the world as a whole was the battleﬁeld. Europeans
waged wars on that scale as far back as the sixteenth century. The other was
total war, in which entire societies were mobilized. In World War II, a na­
tion’s entire society was mobilized to ﬁeld armies and to supply them. The
distinction between soldiers and civilians, always tenuous, completely col­
lapsed in the global and total wars of the twentieth century. War became an
extraordinary display of carnage, unlike anything yet seen—both global and
total.
The roots of total war are to be found in the nature of warfare since the
emergence of ballistic weapons—weapons that delivered bullets, artillery
shells, and bombs. A ballistic weapon is simply one that, once ﬁred or re­
leased, can’t change its course. That makes these weapons inherently inaccu­
rate. A bullet ﬁred from a riﬂe, or a bomb released by a bombardier, depends
on the hand–eye coordination of a soldier or airman trying to concentrate
while others try to kill him. In World War II, the probability of any one
projectile hitting its target was startlingly low.
When accuracy is low, the only solution is to saturate the battleﬁeld with
bullets and shells and bombs. That means that there have to be masses of
weapons, and that in turn requires masses of soldiers. Masses of soldiers re­
quire vast quantities of supplies, from food to munitions. That requires vast
numbers of men to deliver supplies, and masses of workers to produce
them. In World War II, gasoline was essential for virtually all weapons sys­
tems. Consider that the effort to drill oil, reﬁne it, and deliver it to the
battleﬁeld—and to the factories that supplied the battleﬁeld—was by itself
an undertaking far larger than the total effort that went into warfare in pre­
vious centuries.
By the twentieth century, the outcome of wars required such a level of
effort that nothing short of the total mobilization of society could achieve
victory. War consisted of one society hurling itself against another. Victory
depended on shattering the enemy’s society, damaging its population and
infrastructure so completely that it could no longer produce the masses of
weapons or ﬁeld the massive armies required.
But bombing a city with a thousand bombers is a vast and costly under­
taking. Imagine if you could achieve the same outcome with a single plane


and a single bomb. It would achieve the goal of total war at a fraction of the
cost and danger to one’s own nation. That was the logic behind the atomic
bomb. It was designed to destroy an enemy society so quickly and efﬁciently
that the enemy would capitulate rather than face the bomb. Technically the
atomic bomb was radically new. Militarily, it was simply a continuation of a
culture of war that had been developing in Europe for centuries.
The brute nature of nuclear weapons generated a technological revolu­
tion in warfare. Nuclear weapons were the reductio ad absurdum of global
and total war. In order to ﬁght nuclear wars, nations—the United States and
the Soviet Union—had to be able to see globally. The only way to do that
efﬁciently was to ﬂy over enemy territory, and the safest and most effective
way to do that was in space. While manned space projects were the public
side of space programs, the primary motive—and funding—was driven by
the need to know precisely where the other side had located its nuclear mis­
siles. Spy satellites evolved into real-time systems that could pinpoint enemy
launchers within meters, allowing them to be targeted precisely. And that
created the need for weapons that could hit those targets.

The american age: precision and the end of total wa r

The ability to see the target created the need for more accurate weapons.
Precision-guided munitions (PGMs), which could be guided to their target
after they were ﬁred, were ﬁrst deployed in the late 1960s and 1970s. This
might appear to be a minor innovation, but its impact was huge. It trans­
formed war. In the twentieth century, thousands of bombers and millions of
riﬂes were needed to ﬁght wars. In the twenty-ﬁrst century, the numbers
will be slashed to a small fraction—signaling an end to total war.
This change in scale will be of tremendous advantage to the United States,
which has always been at a demographic disadvantage in ﬁghting wars. The
primary battleﬁelds in the twentieth century were Europe and Asia. These
were heavily populated areas. The United States was thousands of miles
away. Its smaller population was needed not only to ﬁght but to build sup­plies 


and transport them great distances, siphoning off manpower and lim­
iting the size of the force available for direct combat.
The American way of war has thus always focused on multiplying the ef­
fectiveness of each soldier on the battleﬁeld. Historically it did this by using
both technology and masses of weapons. After World War II, however, the
emphasis was increasingly on technological multipliers rather than mass.
The United States had no choice in the matter. If it was going to be a global
power, it would need to maximize the effectiveness of each soldier by wed­
ding him to advanced weaponry. It has created a culture of war in which
smaller forces can defeat larger ones. As the use of technology increases, the
size of the force needed decreases until ultimately what is required is a re­
markably small number of extremely well-trained and sophisticated war­
riors. It is important to see how the weapons culture created by the United
States parallels its demographic shift. With an aging and contracting popu­
lation, the maintenance of mass forces becomes difﬁcult, if not impossible.
The key to warfare in the twenty-ﬁrst century, then, will be precision.
The more precise weapons are, the fewer have to be ﬁred. That means fewer
soldiers and fewer defense workers—but more scientists and technicians.
What will be needed in the coming decades is a weapon that can be based in
the United States, reach the other side of the world in under an hour, ma­
neuver with incredible agility to avoid surface-to-air missiles, strike with
absolute precision, and return to carry out another mission almost immedi­
ately. If the United States had such a system, it would never again need to
deliver a tank eight thousand miles away.
Such a weapon is called an unmanned hypersonic aircraft. The United
States is currently engaged in the development of hypersonic systems capa­
ble of traveling well in excess of ﬁve times the speed of sound. Powered by
what are called scramjet engines, the craft have air-breathing, not rocket,
engines. Their range currently is limited. But as scramjets develop during
the twenty-ﬁrst century—along with new materials that can withstand ex­
tremely high temperatures caused by friction with the air—both their range
and speed will increase.
Imagine: Traveling at eight thousand miles per hour, or Mach 10, a mis­
sile ﬁred from the east coast of the United States could hit a target in Europe
in under half an hour. Increase this to Mach 20, and a strike could be com­pleted 

in less than ﬁfteen minutes. The American geopolitical need to inter­
vene rapidly, with sufﬁcient strength to destroy enemy forces, would be met in
time to make a difference. Building enough hypersonic missiles to devastate
a potential enemy would be extremely expensive. But considering the sav­
ings on the current force structure, it would be manageable. I would also
note that this system would reduce the need for huge stockpiles of petro­
leum to fuel tanks, planes, and ships at a time when the hydrocarbon energy
system will be in decline.
The result of deploying hypersonic systems will be to reverse the trend in
warfare that has been under way since before Napoleon. The armies of the
twenty-ﬁrst century will be much smaller and more professional than previ­
ous forces, and highly technological. Precision will also allow the reintro­
duction of a separation between soldier and civilian: It will not be necessary
to devastate entire cities to destroy one building. Soldiers will increasingly
resemble highly trained medieval knights, rather than the GIs of World War
II. Courage will still be necessary, but it will be the ability to manage ex­
tremely complex weapons systems that will matter the most.
Speed, range, and accuracy—and a lot of unmanned aircraft—will sub­
stitute for the massed forces that were required to deliver explosives to the
battleﬁeld in the twentieth century. Yet these talents will not solve a core
problem of warfare, occupying hostile territory. Armies are designed to de­
stroy armies, and precision weapons will do that more effectively than ever
before. But the occupation of territory will remain a labor-intensive activity.
It is, in many ways, more akin to police work than to soldiering. A soldier’s
job is to kill an enemy, whereas a policeman’s job is to identify a lawbreaker
and arrest him. The ﬁrst requires courage, training, and weapons. The latter
requires all of these plus an understanding of a culture that allows you to
distinguish enemies from law-abiding civilians. That task will never become
easier and will always be the Achilles’ heel of any great power. Just as the Ro­
mans and British struggled with their occupation of Palestine, even as they
easily defeated enemy armies, so too the Americans will win wars and then
suffer through the aftermath.


Space war fare


Regardless of the changes taking place in warfare, there is one thing that re­
mains unchanged: the commander on a battleﬁeld must have knowledge of
that battleﬁeld. Even though the global battleﬁeld may be radically different
from the traditional battleﬁeld, the principle of the commander’s knowl­
edge remains in place. On a global battleﬁeld, command and control must
be tied together with knowledge of what the enemy is doing and how your
own forces are deployed. The only way to achieve this on a global battle­
ﬁeld, in real time, is from space. An essential principle of warfare has always
been to hold the high ground, on the theory that it provides visibility. The
same idea holds true in global war. The high ground permits visibility, and
here the high ground is space—the area in which reconnaissance platforms
can see the battleﬁeld on a continuous, global basis.
Global war will therefore become space war. This is not by any means a
radical change. Space is already ﬁlled with reconnaissance satellites designed
to provide a large number of countries intelligence on what is happening
around the world. For some, particularly the United States, space-based sen­
sors are already creating a global battleﬁeld, identifying tactical targets and
calling in air strikes or cruise missiles. The weapons systems have not yet
evolved, but the platforms are already there and moving into maturity.
Space provides line of sight and secure communications. It also provides
clear tracking of hostile objects. Battle management will therefore move
from earth to space as well. There will be space stations—command plat­
forms—at various distances out from the earth’s surface, tasked with com­
manding robotic and manned systems on land and at sea as they evade
enemy attack, conduct operations, and attack enemy platforms.
Blinding one’s enemy, then, would mean destroying the space-based sys­
tems that allow the enemy to select targets. In addition, there are naviga­
tional systems, communications systems, and other space-based systems that
must be destroyed if an enemy’s capability to wage war is to be crippled.
Therefore, the destruction of enemy satellites will become an essential goal
of twenty-ﬁrst-century warfare.
It naturally follows, then, that defending one’s own satellites will be crit­
ical. The simplest way to defend a satellite is to allow it to maneuver out of


harm’s way. But this is not as simple as it sounds. First, it requires fuel to
maneuver a satellite, which is heavy and expensive to send into orbit. Sec­
ond, maneuvering won’t save a satellite from an anti-satellite (ASAT) system
that can also maneuver, and certainly not from a laser beam. Finally, these
are orbital platforms, placed in a certain orbit in order to cover the necessary
terrain. Maneuvering shifts the orbit, degrading the satellites’ usefulness.
Satellites must be protected, whether by deﬂecting the attack or destroy­
ing the attacker. By the middle of the twenty-ﬁrst century this idea will have
evolved in the mode of other weapons systems in history, and the result will
be the satellite battle group. Like a carrier battle group, where the carrier is
protected by other vessels, the reconnaissance satellite will be protected by
auxiliary satellites with various capabilities and responsibilities, from block­
ing laser beams to attacking other satellites. The problem of defending
space-based systems will escalate rapidly, as each side increases the threat
and thereby increases defense measures.
Weapons will also be ﬁred from space to earth eventually, but it is more
complicated than it appears. A weapon in space is moving at many thou­
sands of miles an hour, and the earth is rotating as well. Hitting a target on
the surface of the earth from space is a capability that will develop more
slowly than surveillance from space, but it will undoubtedly come to
fruition eventually.
A satellite costs several billion dollars. A space-based battle group will
cost even more. Currently, except for relatively rare instances, a damaged
or failed satellite is a total loss—no part of it is ever recovered. The more ex­
tensively space is used, the more valuable platforms will become and the less
this total loss model will work. Particularly as space becomes a battleground,
the need to repair space platforms will become urgent. And, to repair com­
plex, damaged systems, humans will have to go physically into space.
Launching them into space each time a repair has to be done is inher­
ently inefﬁcient, and launching spacecraft from earth will cost more than
moving spacecraft already in orbit. At a certain point it will make more
sense and become more economical to station personnel permanently in
space to carry out repairs. Obviously, they will become targets themselves—
and will have to have the capabilities to defend themselves. They will also be
able to manage and oversee the space-based systems.


The task of efﬁciently managing warfare from space is not limited to re­
pairing multibillion-dollar satellites quickly. The communications link from
earth to space is complex, and subject to interference. Therefore, any enemy
will try the most logical, and economical, attack ﬁrst—disrupting commu­
nications between ground and space. This can be accomplished with lowtech maneuvers—the simplest method might be the destruction of
earth-based transmitters with car bombs, for example. Launch facilities
might also be attacked. Assume that the two major U.S. launch facilities,
Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base, came under attack
by enemy missiles, causing enough damage to shut down operations for
months. The United States would be unable to launch more equipment,
and whatever was already in space at the time of the attack would be all that
was available. Maintaining those systems could mean the difference be­
tween victory and defeat. Therefore, having repair teams deployed in space
will be critical.
As we can see, space warfare is a tricky subject. The deeper we explore it,
the greater the risk of sounding like science ﬁction, but there is no doubt
that humans really will experience all this in the coming century. The tech­
nology is there—as are the strategic and tactical advantages.
Space warfare, like naval warfare in the sixteenth century, will spread
outward. Geostationary orbit is strategic, and therefore it will be fought
over. But orbits will be only one strategic point of conﬂict. Another will be
the surface of the moon. As far-fetched as it sounds, bases on the moon will
provide a stable platform—not encumbered by an atmosphere—for observ­
ing both the surface of the earth and any conﬂicts occurring in space. It
would take too long for a weapon on the moon to reach earth—probably
days. But a signal would be able to reach a hunter-killer satellite moving in
to destroy a repair facility in seconds. Sustaining and defending a base on
the moon will actually be easier than doing the same for orbiting systems.
Battles will be fought for control of low-orbit space, geostationary space,
libration points (stable points between the earth and the moon), and the
surface of the moon. The purpose of any battles, like all earthbound battles
that preceded them, will be to deny an enemy the ability to utilize these ar­
eas, while guaranteeing a nation’s own military access to them. Treaties or


not, where humanity goes, war goes. And since humanity will be going into
space, there will be war in space.
Controlling the world’s oceans from space will be critical. Even today,
the U.S. Navy depends heavily on space-based surveillance for making the
ﬂeet effective. Building ﬂeets to challenge U.S. naval dominance is extraor­
dinarily difﬁcult, expensive, and time consuming. Mastering the technolo­
gies and operational principles of aircraft carriers can take generations. Most
navies have abandoned any attempt to do so, and few will be in a position
to attempt it in the future. But in the twenty-ﬁrst century, control of the sea
will be less dependent on oceangoing ﬂeets than on space-based systems that
can see enemy ships and target them. Therefore, whoever controls space will
control the sea.
Let’s turn our attention for a moment to robots. While I expect humans
in space to maintain and command space-based warﬁghting systems, these
will have to be augmented by robotic systems. Keeping a human being alive
in space is a complex and expensive undertaking, and will remain so through­
out the century. Autonomous systems, though, are already common, as are
remotely controlled systems. Unmanned space ﬂight is routine. In fact,
space is where much of the pioneering work on robotics has been done, and
will continue to be done. The technology is sufﬁciently developed that the
U.S. Department of Defense already has fairly advanced projects in this
area. We will see—or are already seeing—robotic aircraft, repair modules
for satellites, intelligent torpedoes at sea. Toward the end of the century a
robotic infantryman for relatively simple tasks, such as rushing fortiﬁed po­
sitions to avoid human casualties, is quite likely.
All of this leads to a vital change in warfare—actually, a reversion. Preci­
sion means there is no need to devastate.

War plans

By the middle of the century American power is going to rest in the global
reach of its unmanned hypersonic aircraft and space-based missiles. With
these systems the United States will be able to impose a naval blockade


around both Turkey and Japan, if necessary. It could also strike at any landbased facilities it might want to destroy. And it could strike devastating
blows against land forces.
American warﬁghting will consist of three stages. The ﬁrst will be an as­
sault on enemy aircraft that could strike at the United States, along with en­
emy air defenses, including space-based systems. The second will be a
systematic attack on the rest of an enemy’s military capability and key eco­
nomic facilities. The ﬁnal stage will be the insertion of limited ground
forces, consisting of infantrymen in armored, powered suits with tremen­
dous lethality, survivability, and mobility, accompanied by an array of ro­
botic systems.
The United States will depend overwhelmingly not only on its satellites
but on what I am calling its Battle Star management platforms. The Battle
Stars are going to be the eyes, ears, and ﬁsts of the United States. They will
command swarms of satellites and their own onboard systems, as well as or­
biting pods that will be able to ﬁre missiles at the ground and at other satel­
lites. They will provide targeting information to ground-based unmanned
hypersonic aircraft, and even be able to control such aircraft from space. If
Battle Stars are destroyed or isolated, the entire warﬁghting system of the
United States will be crippled. The country will be able to strike at unmov­
able facilities whose locations it knows, but as for anything mobile, it will be
blind.
By mid-century, humans will have been in space on military missions for
several decades. The pre-2020 process of launching multibillion-dollar
satellites into orbit and simply hoping they work will make no sense. Criti­
cal systems that fail will have to be ﬁxed. Today’s space shuttle is capable of
such repairs, but as space becomes more and more important, a permanent
cadre of space repairmen will be needed. The most expensive part of space is
the launch, and as I have said, constantly launching people into space will
not be economical. Basing them in space and giving them the ability to in­
tercept malfunctioning systems in orbit and repair them will become the
norm. By mid-century orbiting repair stations at various altitudes will have
been in space for twenty years, and over time they will take on more func­
tions in relation to reconnaissance and warﬁghting operations—like the de­
struction of enemy satellites.


The Battle Star will be designed to be survivable. It will be a large plat­
form, containing dozens or even hundreds of people to carry out its mission
and to maintain it. It will be constructed from advanced materials, and with
multiple hulls, so that laser and other high-energy beams will not be able to
destroy the platform. It will also be loaded with sensor systems that will be
able to see any approaching objects at extreme distances, and will be heavily
armed with projectiles and energy beams that could destroy anything that
might threaten it.
Security will be built around the assumption that anything launched
into orbit with the purpose of destroying a Battle Star could not be large
enough and robust enough to survive a Battle Star’s weapons. A Battle Star
itself will be constructed out of many components launched on thousands
of missions. In addition, it will be assumed that U.S. sensors on the ground
or in space will readily recognize any larger systems being constructed by
other countries. The Battle Star will be able to see any danger and deal with
any conceivable threat. The Americans will construct their systems ﬁrst, in­
creasing the risk to any other country trying to build one.
In light of this incredible advantage in the U.S. defense system, the
Turkish–Japanese Coalition will have to devise a war plan that will simulta­
neously reduce U.S. warﬁghting capability dramatically, allow a period in
which the Coalition can attack American interests worldwide without elic­
iting an effective counterattack, and set the stage for a negotiated settlement
that the United States will be able to live with better than it can live with be­
ing hammered. Some approaches will be impractical, including invasion
from the sea and naval surface warfare. Nuclear weapons, which the Japa­
nese as well as the Turks will have, will be out of the question. By then the
technology will be one hundred years old, and there won’t be any mystery to
how to build and deliver them. But as we have seen, nuclear weapons are
more frightening before they are used than after. Turkey and Japan will be
looking to secure their national interests, not commit national suicide. A
nuclear strike against the United States would devastate it, but a counterstrike would devastate Turkey and Japan even more, and given their relative
sizes, the risk would be greater for them than for the Americans.
The key will be to deny the United States its command of space. In or­
der to do that, the Coalition will have to achieve what the Americans will


believe is impossible—destroy the Battle Stars. Achieving that will open op­
portunities for the Coalition forces to redraw the map of the Paciﬁc and
East Asia, as well as of the vast region surrounding Turkey. It will all hinge
on the small problem of doing the impossible.
Launching a projectile large enough to destroy a Battle Star (and not to
be shot down by that Battle Star) will be an enormous challenge. It cannot
be launched from earth, since the United States would detect the launch
and destroy it immediately. But the Coalition will have one advantage: the
Battle Star will not be capable of maneuvering. Parked in geostationary or­
bit, the Battle Star will have enough propellant on board to keep it in orbit,
but it will not be able to execute substantial orbital shifts. That will require
too much fuel. Moreover, once it maneuvers it will lose its geostationary or­
bit and therefore the stability it needs to carry out its mission. This is one of
the corners that planners will cut. The U.S. Battle Star program will be a
crash program in the 2040s. Creating an orbiting space station housing
dozens of crewmen is one thing, but making it maneuverable will push the
timeline far beyond what will be needed. So the planners will bow to tech­
nical reality and rationalize. The Battle Star will be indestructible, they will
posit, so no capacity for maneuvering will be needed. Like the Titanic, it
will be billed as unsinkable.
The Japanese will consider the problem of how to take out a Battle Star
as early as the 2030s. They will develop a robust space program after 2020,
substantially ahead of the Turks, whose attention will be focused on events
closer to their border. Both will develop low earth-orbit reconnaissance
satellites and geostationary communications systems, but the Japanese will
be looking into the commercial uses of space as well and will be particularly
interested in energy generation in space. Hungry for energy at a rate that
new nuclear reactors would ﬁnd difﬁcult to keep up with, the Japanese will
have been investing for a generation in all varieties of alternative energy, in­
cluding space-based systems.
One of the research and development locations will be the surface of the
moon. As with Antarctica in the 1950s, it is likely that several nations will
have established research bases there, with the American and Japanese being
the most ambitious. By 2040 the Japanese will have a substantial colony op­
erating on the moon, and will have created large underground chambers for


their work. Trafﬁc back and forth to the moon will be common and unno­
ticed. The various nations working there will cooperate and will be con­
stantly exchanging personnel. Nothing that could be done from the surface
of the moon militarily could not be done more effectively from earth orbit,
or so will go the thinking.
The Japanese will, of course, be planning solutions to potential warfare
situations, as all militaries are supposed to do. The problem will be simple:
how to destroy the center of gravity of the American warﬁghting system—
the Battle Star. Launching an attack from earth, as noted, would be likely to
fail and, if it failed, would thrust the Japanese into war with the United
States under the worst possible circumstances.
The Japanese will have to come up with a new strategy. Think of 1941,
when Japan sought to initiate war by crippling the American military center
of gravity in the Paciﬁc—the ﬂeet at Pearl Harbor. Drawing out the Ameri­
can ﬂeet while it was still intact was too dangerous, and the Americans re­
garded their battleships at Pearl Harbor as invulnerable. So the Japanese
attacked using an unexpected means, an aircraft carrier–based attack with
torpedoes in a harbor believed too shallow for them, and they attacked from
an unexpected direction, the northwest, at a distance from home assumed
to be too far for safety. This is not just a Japanese way of making war, but
the application of universal principles of warfare by the Japanese.
In the mid-twenty-ﬁrst century, the Japanese will face the same problem
in a different context. They will need to destroy the Battle Stars. They must
attack from an unexpected direction with unexpected means. The unex­
pected direction would be from the rear, the equivalent of the northwest
Paciﬁc. That would mean the moon. They would have to use unexpected
means—weapons constructed in secret on the moon, since shipping weapons
there for later use could be detected. The equivalent of Pearl Harbor in the
twenty-ﬁrst century would have to involve the principles of surprise in di­
rection and means. There may well be alternatives to the scenario I am lay­
ing out, but this is certainly an extremely plausible scenario given the
geometry of space.
There is an underlying geopolitical principle shaping my thinking. In
World War II two emerging powers—Germany and Japan—wanted to re­
deﬁne the global order. In the mid-twenty-ﬁrst century, this continual cycle


of geopolitics will repeat itself. In World War II, Japan had to strike unex­
pectedly to cripple U.S. power in the Paciﬁc and, it hoped, open the door
for a negotiated settlement on its own terms. The geography of Japan put it
at a massive long-term disadvantage relative to the United States, so Japan
had to create a window of opportunity through a surprise blow at the heart
of American power. Japan will be in the same position relative to the United
States in the mid-twenty-ﬁrst century, only this time allied with Turkey in­
stead of Germany. Therefore, whatever the details of Japan’s military moves—
and obviously we can only speculate on those details—the nature of the
conﬂict is rooted in the same dynamics in both centuries, and therefore so is
the general strategy.
Earlier in this book I talked about history as a chess game in which there
are many fewer moves available than appears to be the case. The better a
player you are, the more you see the weaknesses of moves, and the number
of moves shrinks to a very few. We can apply this principle to the future. I
have tried to lay out the logic of how Japan and Turkey will become major
powers and how this will create friction with the United States. Looking at
both history and the likely conditions at the time, I’ve tried to imagine how
the Japanese will look at the board—what they will be worried about and
how they might respond. The details are obviously unknown. But I am try­
ing here to give a sense of how geopolitics, technology, and warfare might
play out. I can’t possibly know the details of this war, or even its timing. But
I can lay out some of the principles and imagine some of the details.
The Japanese will already have established multiple lunar bases, but one
of them will be designed for military uses with a civilian cover. In deep
caverns secretly hollowed out, the Japanese will create a series of projectiles
simply built out of lunar rock. Rocks are very heavy for their volume. Some­
thing the size of a compact car can weigh tons. At extremely high speeds, the
kinetic energy of a rock can be fantastic, tearing apart large structures it
might hit. In the airless moon, without friction or aerodynamic issues, it
can be very roughly shaped. Rockets and fuel tanks can be readily attached
to the rock and launched.
These projectiles will be designed to have two characteristics: heavy
enough to destroy any Battle Star with kinetic energy but small enough to
be boosted into orbit using rockets, taking advantage of the lower escape ve­locity
 

of the moon relative to the earth. Given the speeds at which the mis­
sile will impact the Battle Star, a few pounds will sufﬁce. But it also will have
to survive impacts with much smaller kinetic defensive missiles.
The Japanese will build another secret base, carefully camouﬂaged on
the far side of the moon, which they will use to test the system, ﬁring away
from earth and shielded from its view. The system will be perfected over
time, slowly so that trafﬁc to the base, if noticed, will not raise undue con­
cern. Underground launchers will be prepared and camouﬂaged. As the Bat­
tle Stars become operational, so will the Japanese countermeasures. The
Japanese know that any one missile could be destroyed, so they will prepare
dozens of missiles to be ﬁred at each Battle Star platform, in the hope that
one will get through. And they will prepare to ﬁre them in a wide range of
orbits, hoping not to be noticed. No matter how advanced technology be­
comes, there is never enough budget or personnel to keep watch on every­
thing.
Not being noticed will be important. It will take about three days for the
missiles launched from the moon to hit the Battle Stars. The time between
the detection of the attack and the destruction of the Battle Star will be the
period of greatest danger to Japanese plans. Once the missiles are detected,
even though the Battle Star might not survive itself, it could order strikes
against Japan with hypersonic systems and ﬁre its own projectiles in a dev­
astating attack on Japan and its space assets, while still leaving the Battle
Star crew time to abandon ship in escape craft. The key will thus be to take
out the Battle Star without any warning, blinding the United States.
That will not be something that can be guaranteed to succeed. The
Japanese will have to have a Plan B. Once they ﬁre their rockets successfully,
the destruction of the Battle Stars will be assured. But between the time of
discovery and destruction, disaster will be possible. The Japanese will have
one advantage. The Battle Stars will be focused on the earth and the area be­
tween the earth and geostationary orbit. Their primary mission will be of­
fensive, and they won’t see themselves in a defensive role. More important,
the Battle Stars will not expect a threat from behind. If the Battle Stars think
they are going to be hit, they will be expecting it from below. They won’t
conduct routine observations at higher altitudes.
The Americans will maintain a simple—and not particularly effective—


meteor watch, an obvious necessity for a manned space platform. Space is
vast and, contrary to what you might imagine, complete coverage of space is
impossible today and won’t be possible in 2050. There will be gaps, in both
technology and application. Knowing this, the Japanese will launch not a
tight cluster of missiles, but rather a spread, coming from all directions. The
watch radar might pick up one or two but would not interpret them as an
attack. In fact, the Japanese will select orbits that will not be aimed at any of
the Battle Stars; rather, the missiles will be equipped to do a terminal rocket
burn to shift orbits in the last hours of their journeys in order to impact the
stations—the fuel container and engine for the burn will be larger than the
actual missile, really no more than a small, shaped rock. Any computer de­
tecting a missile will read it as a meteorite that won’t threaten anything—
close but not a danger. The computerized systems might not even report the
missiles they see to human monitors on the Battle Star. The system will be
robotic, not given to subtlety.
There will be three dangers for the Japanese. The ﬁrst will be that the
United States will detect the launch from the lunar surface using technology
the Japanese didn’t know it had. Detection will also be possible in the period
after launch and before terminal adjustment of orbit, which will last several
days. And in the ﬁnal few hours before impact, the United States could still
retaliate. The later it detects the attack, the less time it will have to react, and
the more devastating the strike.
The Japanese Plan B in case of detection will be to speed up phase two of
the attack. If they take out the Battle Stars, the Japanese will then launch
immediate hypersonic attacks against U.S. air and missile bases around the
world, American submarines being tracked by the Japanese space-based sys­
tem, as well as against all ground-based communications. In the event of de­
tection, the Japanese would execute the follow-up plan before the Battle
Stars are destroyed, in a desperate shot from the hip, hoping the Americans
will be slow to respond. They will assume that they can tell if the Americans
have detected the attack because detection will dramatically increase com­
munication trafﬁc between Battle Stars, ground command, and other plat­
forms. The Japanese might not be able to break the codes, but they will see
the surge in trafﬁc. They will have orbited satellites for years with ofﬁcial
reasons from navigation to weather but with another, secret purpose: inter­cepting 

and gauging the quantity of communications among U.S. space­
based systems.
The Japanese will not share the details of their attack plans with the
Turks. The secret lunar bases will represent the crown jewels of the Japanese
military. The Turks will be allies, but not family. What they will be prepared
to tell the Turks is that on a certain date the Japanese will commence hostil­
ities, and that they will plan a devastating strike against the United States
with which they will need no direct assistance. They will, however, need
some indirect assistance.
The Japanese will want to tilt the table a bit more by giving U.S. intelli­
gence and reconnaissance something to look at—something to keep them
distracted. The Japanese will plan to attack over the American Thanksgiving
holiday, when the American political leadership will be scattered around the
country with family. This is in keeping with both the military principle of
strategic surprise and Japan’s application of this in prior wars: the attack at
Pearl Harbor happened at dawn on a Sunday, when the ﬂeet was in and the
crews had been out partying on Saturday night. Obviously, it doesn’t have to
be Thanksgiving, but it has to be an unexpected time when U.S. leadership
is not at its full strength. Just as North Korea attacked South Korea on a
summer Sunday in 1950, causing massive confusion, the Japanese might at­
tack on Thanksgiving, a very likely time to hit. The Japanese and Turks will
do everything they can to keep the weeks prior calm, making sure that the
American leadership disperses and the ground-based military is operating
on minimal stafﬁng.
The Japanese will know that the best way to accomplish this will be to
stage a crisis and quickly settle it. Without giving away the nature of the
Thanksgiving surprise, they will arrange for the Turks to generate a carefully
planned crisis between their forces in Bosnia and Polish forces in Croatia.
The crisis will begin in mid-October, with the claim that Croatian national­
ists have carried out terrorist strikes in Turkey. The Turks will even hint that
this was done with U.S. encouragement. Now, obviously we can’t know that
it will be this crisis in this place, but a system of deception is critical. The
Japanese kept negotiations going with the United States until the last
minute in 1941. The Vietnamese Tet Offensive occurred during a holiday
cease-ﬁre in 1968, and so on. Deception is the key.


A crisis will ensue, with the Polish bloc and the Turks coming to full alert.
With U.S. forces in Serbia and the United States allied with the Polish bloc,
the Balkan situation will directly impact the United States. The Turks will keep
bringing their air and missile systems outside the region to full alert, just short
of launch, and then bringing them down. They will deliberately try to trig­
ger a Polish strike. Knowing that the Polish and U.S. defense networks are
linked, and having mapped out American sensitivity to Turkish readiness over
the years, the Turks will push just past what appears to be the point of no re­
turn in the ﬁrst week of November. The Poles, receiving data indicating an
imminent launch, suddenly will conduct a limited air strike against a Turk­
ish base. The Turks will have succeeded in sucking in the Poles and will be­
gin to cycle up their entire system. Realizing that a Balkan war is about to
break out, the American president will call the Turkish and Polish prime min­
isters within moments of the strike and warn both to stand down. The
Turks will be particularly belligerent, having lost an air base and some peo­
ple, but will reluctantly agree to move back from the brink of war.
A peace conference will be organized in Geneva; where else would one
hold a peace conference? No settlement will be reached, but all sides will
agree to stand down and avoid provocative acts. The United States will
commit itself to monitoring the situation—a commitment it will take seri­
ously, as it won’t want the Poles or Hungarians dragging it into a Balkan
war. The national security advisor will order U.S. space surveillance to con­
centrate on the status of Turkish and Polish bloc forces. Things will calm
down by mid-November, and the situation will seem to be returning to nor­
mal, but the Battle Star over Uganda will remain heavily focused on the
Balkan situation, while the other two will be handling spillover work from
its collectors. The Turks will continue to maneuver their forces well behind
the lines, as will the Polish bloc. That will keep everyone busy.
The Japanese will have been cycling up their hypersonic forces and space
capabilities at least once a quarter for several years. The United States will be
watching these exercises regularly and therefore won’t be particularly
alarmed to see another exercise kicking off a few days before Thanksgiving.
It will be nothing out of the ordinary to see the Japanese go to full battle
alert. In fact, this time Japan will seem somewhat undermanned, with some
units not even cycling to alert.



CHAPTER 11

WORLD WAR
A Scenario

Thus far I’ve been doing geopolitical forecasting. I’ve been working
with the major themes that are unfolding in the twenty-ﬁrst century
and thinking about how they would affect international relations. In
this chapter, I will change my approach a bit. I want to describe a war that I
think will take place in the middle of the twenty-ﬁrst century. Obviously I
don’t know when it will happen with any precision, but I can provide a
sense of what a twenty-ﬁrst-century war might look like. You can’t imagine
the twentieth century without some idea of what World Wars I and II were
like, nor can you really get a sense of the twenty-ﬁrst century until you’ve
described war.
War is different from what I’ve been talking about so far because war is a
matter of detail. Without this, you miss its essence. To understand war, you
need to understand more than the reasons a war was fought. You need to
think about technology, culture, and other matters, all of them in detail. So,
for example, in talking about World War II we have to discuss Pearl Harbor.
Pearl Harbor was, geopolitically, an attempt to buy time while Japan seized
Southeast Asia and the Netherlands East Indies. But to really understand
the reality of Pearl Harbor, you have to understand the details—the use of


aircraft carriers, the invention of a torpedo that would work in the shallow
waters of Pearl Harbor, and the decision to attack on Sunday morning.
What I’ve tried to show in previous chapters is how the United States,
Poland, Turkey, and Japan will get entangled in the next century, and why
the Japanese and the Turks will feel so threatened that they will have no
choice but to launch a preemptive war. This is a book about my perception
of the events of the next hundred years, so I now want to talk about the war
itself. To do that, however, I have to pretend to know more than I do. I have
to pretend to know the times and dates of the battles and precisely how they
would be executed. I do think I understand the military technology that
will be used in this war. I think I have a rough idea of when in the century
the war will take place, and I think I have a good grasp of how it will play
out. But I don’t think you can grasp the nature of war in the mid-twenty­
ﬁrst century unless I go further and tell a story that in some sense I have no
right to. But if you will indulge me on this, I think I can give you a feel for
the warfare of the twenty-ﬁrst century—and this particular war—if I take
some license and give it real speciﬁcity.

Opening shots

The destruction of the three Battle Stars will be planned for November 24,
2050, at 5 p.m. At this time on Thanksgiving Day most people in the
United States would be watching football and napping after digesting a
massive meal. Some people will be driving home. No one in Washington
will be expecting a problem. That is the moment that the Japanese will in­
tend to strike. Final course corrections of the missiles targeting the Battle
Stars will begin to be executed at about noon, on the theory that even if they
were detected, getting hold of the Washington national security team would
eat up an hour or two, and that if the missiles were detected by 3 or 4 p.m.
it would be impossible to react in time. In order to do this, launches from
Japan’s lunar base will have to take place at various times on November 21,
depending on orbit. Hence, the November 20 alert will be Plan B cycling
up—the aforementioned shot from the hip.


The launches from the moon will go unnoticed. Many of the missiles
will actually be detected by automated systems on board the Battle Stars,
but none will have trajectories that indicate impact with the stations or
represent a signiﬁcant threat to earth. They will all be ﬁred at different
times in eccentric orbits. The data will not be passed on to human moni­
tors. One technician reading the daily summary on the second day will
note that there appears to be a large number of meteors in the area, with
several passing close to his station, but since this is not an extraordinary
event, he will ignore it.
On November 24 around noon, the rockets will reignite as planned,
shifting the missiles’ orbit. The collision-tracking radar on Battle Star–
Uganda will pick up a single warning at about 2 p.m. The computer will be
asked to reconﬁrm the trajectory. In the next hour all three stations will pick
up multiple projectiles on trajectory to strike each of them. The command­
ing general of the three platforms, on board Battle Star–Peru, will recognize
at about 3:15 that his platforms are under organized attack. He will then
notify Space Command Headquarters in Colorado Springs, which in turn
will notify the Joint Chiefs and the National Security Council.
Meanwhile, the commanding general on Battle Star–Peru will, on his
own authority, begin ﬁring lasers and kinetic missiles at the targets, hoping
to intercept them. But the number of incoming missiles will strain his ca­
pacity to engage, as the system won’t be designed to cope with ﬁfteen simul­
taneous incoming missiles. He will quickly realize that there will be leakage,
and that some of the missiles will hit.
The president will be notiﬁed, but, it being Thanksgiving Day, he won’t
be able to immediately gather most of his advisors. The questions the presi­
dent will ask are the crucial ones: Who launched the attack? Where was it
launched from? No one will be able to answer the questions immediately.
The assumption will be that it is the Turks, since they will have been en­
gaged in the most recent crisis, but U.S. intelligence will be certain that they
won’t have the ability to launch such an attack. The Japanese will be quiet—
and no one would have expected such a strike by Japan. As more advisors
gather, two things will be apparent: no one knows who launched the attack,
and the Battle Stars are about to be destroyed.


The Japanese will inform the Turks as to what has happened at approxi­
mately 4:30 p.m. The Turks are Japan’s allies, but the Japanese are not going
to give them detailed information until the last moment, as they won’t want
the Turks to double-cross them. But the Turks will know that something is
coming—the entire charade of early November will revolve around this,
and they will be standing by to act as soon as the Japanese get around to
alerting them.
Less than thirty minutes before impact, the president will authorize the
evacuation of the Battle Stars. With so little time, the evacuation won’t be
able to be fully executed. Hundreds of people will be left behind. More im­
portant, even though no one will know who ordered the attack, the presi­
dent’s advisors will convince him to order a dispersal of all ground-based
hypersonic aircraft from their primary bases to scattered locations. That or­
der will go out at the same time the evacuation order goes out. There will be
many glitches in the system. Controllers—skeleton staffs, really—will keep
asking for conﬁrmation. Some of the aircraft will disperse over the next
hour. Most will not.
At 5 p.m., all three Battle Stars will explode, killing all of the remaining
crew members and knocking out the rest of the U.S. space force—sensors
and satellites that are mostly hooked into the Battle Star–Peru command
center. They will be left uselessly orbiting in space. The Japanese will have
launched satellites years earlier whose only job is to monitor the Battle Stars.
They will note the disruption of communication from the stations, and
Japanese radar will note the destruction of the stations themselves.
The Japanese will activate phase two as soon as destruction is conﬁrmed.
They will launch thousands of unmanned hypersonic aircraft—small, fast,
and agile to evade interceptors—at the United States and its ships and bases
in the Paciﬁc. The targets will be U.S. hypersonic aircraft, ground-based
anti-aircraft missiles, and command and control centers. They won’t go af­
ter population centers. That would achieve nothing, plus the Japanese will
want to negotiate a settlement, which would be inconceivable after massive
civilian casualties. Nor will they want to destroy the president or his staff.
They will need someone with whom to negotiate.
At the same time, the Turks will launch their own attacks against targets
they will have been assigned in joint planning for war with the Japanese


over the years. Joint contingency plans will already have been developed
between the two countries. Given that the Turks are aware something is
coming, and are in near-crisis mode already, they won’t need extensive
preparation to execute the war plan. The Japanese will communicate what
they have done—and Turkish sensors will observe the events in geosynchro­
nous orbit. They will move to quickly take advantage of the situation. Many
targets will be in the United States, east of the Mississippi, but the Turks will
also launch a massive attack against the Polish bloc and against India, not a
major power but allied with the United States. The intention of the Coali­
tion will be to leave the United States and its allies militarily helpless.
Within a few minutes, the missiles from the unmanned aircraft will be­
gin to hit U.S. forces in Europe and Asia, but those targeted at the United
States proper will take nearly an hour to reach their targets. That hour will
bring the United States some valuable time. Most of its space-based sensors
will be off-line, but an old system, used to detect the heat of ICBM launches
and too old to be linked into the Battle Star system, will still be download­
ing to Colorado Springs. It will pick up a vast array of launches out of Japan
and Turkey, but little additional information will be provided. There will be
no way to tell where the planes and missiles are going. But the fact that the
two countries lit up with launches minutes after the Battle Stars are killed
will be relayed to the president, who now, at least, will know where the at­
tack is coming from.
The United States will maintain a database of military targets in Japan
and Turkey. The Japanese and Turkish aircraft will already have been
launched, and therefore hitting those targets will make no sense. But there
will be ﬁxed targets in both countries, primarily command and control cen­
ters, airﬁelds, fuel bunkers, and so on, that could be attacked. Plus the pres­
ident will want his hypersonic ﬂeet in the air and not on the tarmac. He will
order a preset war plan to be activated. However, by the time the orders are
transmitted and ﬂight controllers are in place, there will be less than ﬁfteen
minutes until Japan and Turkey hit their targets. Some ﬂights will take off
and strike those two countries, but much of the force will be destroyed on
the ground.
The devastation to the Polish bloc will be even more intense. The bloc
command center in Warsaw won’t be aware of the destruction of the Battle


Stars, so it won’t have the warning the United States will have before missiles
start hitting its bases. In fact, hypersonic aircraft will be dropping precisionguided munitions on bloc facilities with literally no warning at all. One mo­
ment they will be there, and suddenly the bloc’s strike capability will be
gone.
By 7 p.m., the U.S. space and hypersonic force will be devastated. The
United States will have lost command of space and have only a few hundred
aircraft left. Its allies in Europe will have had their forces overwhelmed. U.S.
warships around the world will have been attacked and sunk. The Indians
will have lost their assets as well. The American coalition will be militarily
devastated.

Counterstrike

At the same time, American society will be intact, as will be that of many
U.S. allies. This is the underlying weakness of the Coalition strategy. The
United States is a nuclear power—as, for that matter, will be Japan, Turkey,
Poland, and India. Attacks on military targets will not trigger a nuclear re­
sponse. However, if the Coalition would try to force capitulation by begin­
ning to go beyond military targets and move to trying to attack the American
population itself, the threshold at which the Americans, or their allies,
might go nuclear could be reached. Since the Coalition will be looking not
for mutual annihilation but for a political settlement that the Americans in
particular could live with, and since the Americans are often profoundly
unpredictable, using their hypersonic forces to start inﬂicting damage and
casualties on American civilians would be incredibly dangerous. The posses­
sion of nuclear weapons will shape war to this extent. It circumscribes the
degree of the conﬂict.
Nevertheless, the United States will be militarily damaged and won’t
know how far the Coalition will go. The Coalition’s hope will be that when
the degree of damage is recognized by the United States, together with the
unpredictability of the Coalition, it will opt for a political settlement that
would include accepting Turkish and Japanese spheres of inﬂuence, deﬁning
limits to America’s sphere of inﬂuence, and introducing a workable, veriﬁ­able 

framework for limiting conﬂict in space. In other words, the Coalition
will wager that the United States will realize that it is now one great power
among several instead of the only superpower, and accept a generous and se­
cure sphere of inﬂuence of its own. And it will hope that the suddenness
and effectiveness of the assault in space will cause the United States to over­
estimate the Coalition’s military power.
The United States will in fact overestimate the Coalition’s military power,
but that will generate the opposite response from what the Coalition hopes.
The Americans won’t see themselves as engaged in a limited war in which
the enemy has limited and deﬁnable political goals that the United States
can live with. Rather, the Americans will believe that the Coalition’s forces
are vastly greater than they really are, and that the United States faces the
possibility, if not of annihilation, then of a massive reduction of power
and heightened vulnerability to further attacks by the Coalition and other
powers. The United States will see this as an existential threat.
The United States will react viscerally and emotionally to the attack. If
it accepts the political settlement that has been transmitted to it on the
evening of November 24, the country’s long-term future becomes uncer­
tain. Turkey and Japan—countries unlikely to ﬁght each other—would be­
tween them dominate Eurasia. There would be two hegemons, not one, but
if they were to cooperate, Eurasia would be united and exploited systemati­
cally. The ultimate nightmare of American grand strategy would be real, and
over time the Coalition members—not easily manipulable into war with each
other—would usurp command of space and the sea. Agreeing to the Coali­
tion’s offer would end the immediate war but would also initiate a long
American decline. But this will not be carefully thought out that night. Just
as it did after the sinking of the Maine, the attack on Pearl Harbor, and the
shock of 9/11, the United States will go into a rage. It will reject the terms
and go to war.
The United States won’t make a move while Coalition reconnaissance
spacecraft are in place. The Coalition won’t have anything to equal the com­
plex American Battle Star system that has been destroyed, but it will have an
array of last-generation satellites that provide real-time intelligence on the
United States. While they are operational, the Coalition will be able to see
and counter any moves made by the Americans. The American recon­naissance 

system will quickly have to be re-architected so that remaining
satellites—of which there will be many—will downlink to earth rather than
to the destroyed Battle Stars. That will allow the United States to begin track­
ing enemy movements—and to strike back. When that happens, the ﬁrst
thing it will have to do is knock out any space launch facilities the Coalition
might have, so as to keep it from launching any new space systems.
Japanese intelligence on U.S. assets, while not perfect, will be superb.
The United States will have deliberately placed launch platforms for rockets
in a variety of secret locations, carefully camouﬂaged. It will be one of the
major black projects during the 2030s. By the time the Japanese begin sur­
veillance on the United States, the sites will have been constructed—and
hidden—for a long time. The secret launch facilities will not be manned
during peacetime. Moving personnel to the sites without detection will
take several days, during which time the United States will send diplomatic
feelers through the Germans, who will be neutral, about negotiations. The
United States will be trying to buy time. The negotiations will be a cover for
planning and implementing a counterstrike.
The United States will be trying to even the playing ﬁeld a bit with what
assets it still has. To do that, it will need to blind the Coalition, taking out
its space-based system (the United States will have stored hundreds of antisatellite missiles and high-energy lasers at its secret reserve sites). Crews will
move into place, carefully so as not to give away locations to reconnaissance
satellites. While the Coalition will be eagerly engaged in negotiations with
the United States, the sites will be readied. About seventy-two hours later,
the United States will destroy the bulk of the Coalition’s surveillance capa­
bility in a period of less than two hours. The Coalition won’t be blind, but
it will be close to it.
As soon as the satellites are destroyed, some of the United States’ surviv­
ing hypersonic aircraft will initiate attacks on Japanese and Turkish launch
facilities, hoping to make it impossible for them to launch new satellites or
attack the remaining U.S. satellites. Unlike the Japanese, the Americans will
have an excellent idea of the location of Japanese launches based on past re­
connaissance. The United States, following the end of the second cold war,
always had a massive advantage in reconnaissance capability. The United
States’ map of the Coalition will be much better than the Coalition’s map of


the United States. The aircraft will hit them all. Shortly thereafter, U.S.
satellite controllers will begin capturing signals from surviving American
satellites. The Coalition will now be the ones blinded. The Japanese intelli­
gence failure about America’s black anti-satellite capability will prove their
undoing.

New technologies, old war

The Coalition members will realize their original plan has failed. They will
not be certain how well the United States can see, but they will know that it
can’t see all that well. Most disturbing, their belief that the entire U.S. air
ﬂeet was annihilated will be proven wrong, and they will know that the
United States still has the capacity to strike them. They can’t know that
these are only the remnants of the force that was dispersed in the time be­
tween the detection of the attack on the Battle Stars and the Coalition air
strike. They won’t know how deep American reserves are, and they will have
no way to ﬁnd out. The fog of war will be as thick in the twenty-ﬁrst cen­
tury as in the past.
The United States will make one additional move. Engineers will ana­
lyze data to show the origination point of the missiles that took out the Bat­
tle Stars, and the military then will launch a missile at the site and the base
will be destroyed. The United States will also order military forces it will
have quietly built up at its own experimental stations on the moon to pre­
pare and execute attacks on all Japanese bases on the moon. The United
States will make sure it is not surprised again.
As frequently happens in war, once the initial attack, planned over years,
is executed, everyone starts to improvise, working from uncertainty. And
most war plans anticipate that a war will be over quickly. It rarely is. This
war will continue, divided into three parts.
First, having reestablished a tenuous command of space, the United
States will put in place a crash program to increase its hold and keep the
Coalition out. The United States will gradually, over the next year, increase
its surveillance capability until it equals preattack levels. The pace of re­
search, development, and deployment in a time of war is extraordinary


compared to peacetime. Within a year of Thanksgiving Day, the United
States will have technologically exceeded the space-based capabilities that
were destroyed.
Second, the United States will move to recover its hypersonic ﬂeet in the
face of continual air attacks on known ﬁxed production facilities by Coali­
tion aircraft. But the Coalition will not have the ability to maintain ade­
quate surveillance over the United States, and despite some setbacks the
plants will quickly be in operation, building new hypersonic aircraft.
Third, the Coalition will use the period before the United States recon­
structs its forces to impose a new reality on the ground. The Japanese will
try to seize other areas in China and Asia but will be far less aggressive than
Turkey, which will see the period of U.S. preoccupation as a chance to deal
with the Polish bloc and position itself as the decisive power in the region.
The war will have begun with a head fake toward the Polish bloc. Now it
will become a concerted assault by Turkey on the ground, supported by its
aerial capabilities. The elimination of the Polish bloc would give Turkey a
free hand everywhere. Therefore, rather than dissipating its strength in
North Africa or Russia, the Turks will bet it all on attacking north, out of
Bosnia into the Balkans.
The key weapon will be the armored infantryman—a single soldier, en­
cased in a powered suit that is able to lift substantial amounts of weight and
protects the soldier from harm. The suit will also allow him to move rapidly.
Think of him as a one-man tank, only more lethal. He will be supported by
many armored systems, carrying supplies and power packs. The power pack
will be critical. The systems will all be electrically powered and driven by ad­
vanced electrical storage units—batteries with a lot of power and life in them.
But however advanced, they need to be recharged. That means that access to
electrical grids will be the single most important thing in warfare—along
with the electrical power plants pushing electricity through the grids. Elec­
tricity will be to war in the twenty-ﬁrst century as petroleum was to war in
the twentieth century.
Turkey’s goal will be to draw the Polish bloc forces into a battle of anni­
hilation. Unlike the ﬁghting with the United States, this will be planned as
a combined arms operation, including armored infantrymen, robotic logis­tics 

and weapons platforms, and the now ubiquitous hypersonic aircraft
serving as precision artillery.
Following the devastating opening strikes, the Polish bloc will seek to
avoid concentrating its ground forces in order to evade air strikes. The Turks
will want to pressure them to concentrate their forces by attacking in a way
that will compel them to defend major targets or, alternatively, rip the bloc
apart when the Poles refuse to commit their forces for such defense.
The Turks will attack north out of Bosnia into the Croatian plains, and
into Hungary, where the country is open, flat, and lacking in natural barriers. 


They will drive on to Budapest, although their ultimate military goal
will be the Carpathian Mountains in Slovakia, Ukraine, and Romania. If
they take the Carpathians, Romania and Bulgaria will be isolated and col­
lapse, turning the Black Sea into a Turkish lake. Hungary will be occupied,
and Poland isolated and facing a threat from the south. If, however, the
Poles decide to concentrate on the Hungarian plain to protect Budapest,
and therefore attempt to hold the bloc together, Turkish airpower would
likely destroy the bloc’s forces.
The Poles will request American air support so they can engage Turkish
forces as they advance into Croatia, but the United States will have no airpower to give them. The Turks, as a result, will capture Hungary in a matter
of weeks and occupy the Carpathians soon after. The Romanians, isolated,
will ask for and receive an armistice. Southeastern Europe, to the Polish bor­
der and Ukraine, will be in Turkish hands. All that will remain will be Poland.
Turkish forces will proceed toward Krakow, with air strikes ripping apart
the Polish military. The United States will become concerned that the Poles
will be unable to resist and may be forced to sue for peace. The U.S. strategy
will be to buy time to rebuild its strategic assets and then launch a sudden
global strike on Turkey and Japan. The United States will not want to dissi­
pate its strength to support tactical combat in southern Poland. At the same
time, it will not be able to risk losing its Polish ally, as that will end the game
against Turkey. In order to get the Poles to carry on, the United States will
have to seriously harm the Turks.
In February 2051, the United States will launch a substantial portion of
its remaining air force, including some new aircraft with advanced capabili­
ties, striking at Turkish forces everywhere from southern Poland to logistics
centers back in Bosnia and farther south. It will take serious losses from the
Turkish air force, but the Turkish army will suffer serious losses as hundreds
of armored infantrymen are killed along with the destruction of large num­
bers of robotic systems and supplies. Turkey will be far from crippled, but it
will be hurt.
The Turks will soon realize that there is no chance of their winning the
war. Their inability to reenter space, plus the Americans’ ability to create a
new air force quickly, would, in time, defeat them. They also will realize
that the Japanese won’t be in a position to help them because they will be


tied down with their own problems in China. The great gamble will fail,
and with that failure it will be every man for himself. The United States will
be clearly focusing on Turkey before Japan, so Turkey will need to knock
Poland out of the war fast. But Turkish ground forces will by then be spread
around a vast empire. Concentrating on Poland will mean stripping forces
from elsewhere, and that will, in the long run, not be a viable option. The
Turks would be deeply exposed to rebellion from Egypt to Central Asia.
Before the beginning of the war, the Coalition will have wanted Ger­
many to join in the attack on Poland, but the Germans will have declined.
This time when the Turks approach them, they will offer quite a prize. In re­
turn for helping Turkey in Poland, Turkey will retreat into the Balkans after
the war, retaining only Romania and Ukraine. Turkey will build its power
around the Black Sea, the Adriatic, and the Mediterranean, and the Ger­
mans will have a free hand from Hungary north, including Poland, the
Baltics, and Belarus.
From the German point of view, what had been a Turkish pipe dream
before 2050 will now be a very practical proposal. The Turks would be a
Mediterranean and Black Sea power and would need the Balkans to secure
their hold. The Turks would have no interest north of there, as such involve­
ment would soak up forces needed in these areas. The Germans, like the
Poles and Russians, will be exposed on the northern European plain, and this
new arrangement would secure their eastern ﬂank. Most important, this
arrangement would reverse the trend that had been running against Ger­
many and Western Europe since the collapse of Russia. The Eastern Euro­
peans would ﬁnally be put back in their place.
The Germans will know that the Americans will eventually refocus on
the region, but it will take the Americans a while to come back. There will
be a genuine window of opportunity for the Germans to seize. Self-absorbed
and risk averse, they won’t be as adventurous as the Turks. But the alterna­
tive will be a Turkish force to their east or, worse, the defeat of the Turks and
an even more powerful Polish and American force facing them. The Ger­
mans will not be risk takers in general, but this is a risk they will have to
take. They will mobilize their forces, including their older but still capable
air force, and strike the Poles from the west in late spring of 2051, while the
Turks will relaunch their attack from the south. The Germans will recruit


the French and a handful of other countries into the exercise, but their par­
ticipation will be more political than military.
Britain, on the other hand, will be appalled at what is happening. Even
though there will be a giant game of global power politics going on, the
British will still be deeply concerned with the local balance of power. They
will once again be facing the possibility of a German-dominated continent,
however awkwardly achieved by Germany and however dependent on Turk­
ish underpinnings. The British will recognize that if this happens, any neglect
toward Europe on the part of the United States, any cyclical retreat into isola­
tion, could mean catastrophe. Britain will have had no intention of getting in­
volved in this war. But at this point it will have no choice, and it could bring
something valuable to the table: a small, intact air force that, when coupled
with U.S. intelligence, could seriously damage the Germans and the Turks. In
addition, its advanced air defenses to protect against Turkish and German air
strikes will make Britain a secure base of operations. Britain will appear to
hold back, while stealthily redeploying a substantial portion of its air force to
the United States, where air defenses and warning time will be even greater.
In the end, Poland will be attacked on two sides, from the west and
south. The attacking forces will advance geographically as invaders have be­
fore, but the technology will be quite different. It won’t be the massed in­
fantry of Napoleon or the armored formations of Hitler; the force that will
attack will be quite small in terms of actual troops. The human force will
consist of armored infantrymen, fanned out as infantrymen usually are, but
with clear and overlapping ﬁelds of ﬁre—and these ﬁelds now will measure
dozens of miles. Linked together by computer networks, they will com­
mand not only the weapons they carry but also robotic systems and hyper­
sonic aircraft thousands of miles away that they can call on as needed.
The robotic systems will live on data and power. Cut off either, and they
would be helpless. They need a constant stream of information and instruc­
tions. They also need a steady ﬂow of power to keep them going. Since the
space-based systems of the Turks are gone, the Turks will substitute un­
manned aerial vehicles hovering, swooping, and ﬂying around the battle
space to give them information. The information will always be incomplete,
as the UAVs will constantly be shot down. The United States will have
much better data but will lack the air force to decimate the attackers.


Providing enough power for the infantrymen’s armored suits and robots
will also be a problem. These suits will be electrically driven and will need to
be recharged or have their massive batteries swapped out every day or so.
Tremendous advances will have been made in the storage of electrical power,
but in the end the batteries will still run out. A key resource, therefore, will
be the electrical power grid tied to electrical generation plants. Destroy the
power generation plants, and the attackers will have to ship in massive,
charged batteries from wherever there is power and then distribute them
around the battleﬁeld. The farther the troops advance, the longer the supply
line will become. If the defenders are prepared to shut down their own
power grid and, when necessary, destroy their power plants—a scorchedearth strategy—the attack would be slowed by lack of power. Everything
will depend on the tactical delivery of electricity.
At a secret meeting of American, British, Chinese, and Polish com­
manders, a strategy will be worked out: the Poles will resist, and slowly re­
treat under the pressure of the Coalition forces. The two geographic thrusts,
one from the west and one from the south, will converge on Warsaw. It will
be agreed that the Poles will resist, fall back, and regroup endlessly, buying
as much time as possible for the allies to rebuild their air forces. The Poles
will be reinforced by several thousand American troops ﬂown over the
North Pole to St. Petersburg and deployed with the Polish troops in their
delaying action. As the situation becomes more desperate, in late 2051,
available airpower in Britain will begin to be released to further slow the ad­
vancing Turkish armies. The Herculean American industrial effort will be
under way, as thousands of advanced hypersonic aircraft are built, capable of
traveling twice as fast as prewar systems, and with a payload double in size.
By mid-2052, the American force will be available for a massed and devas­
tating strike that, when coupled with major improvements in space-based
systems, will devastate Coalition forces worldwide. Until then, the rule will
be hold, retreat, and buy time.
The Coalition will massively underestimate U.S. industrial capacity. It
will think it has several years to battle the Polish forces. At ﬁrst, the Coali­
tion will choose not to attack Polish electrical generation systems, not want­
ing to have to rebuild them after the war and needing their power to ﬁght
after they’ve captured them. The Poles, on the other hand, will destroy their


grids as they retreat, wanting to complicate the Coalition advance and forc­
ing the Germans and the Turks to divert resources to shipping heavy electri­
cal storage units to the battleﬁeld. Those lines of supply are exactly what will
be most vulnerable when the counterattack comes in the summer of 2052.
When the American armored infantrymen arrive on the battleﬁeld, with
their sophisticated, space-linked systems, the Coalition will realize that
Poland is not going to fall quickly. The Coalition will also see that the elec­
trical generation plants are the foundation of allied power and that unless
they are taken out—and the Americans reduced to shipping electrical stor­
age units to the battleﬁeld from their own country—the United States will
be victorious. Therefore, in the summer of 2051, the Coalition will begin to
destroy the Polish electrical system, hitting plants as far east as Belarus.
Poland will go black.
The Coalition will wait for two weeks, forcing the United States and its
allies (the Alliance) into continual combat to make them use up available
electricity. Then they will attack on all fronts simultaneously, expecting Pol­
ish and American troops to be out of power and out of luck. Instead, they
will not only meet intense resistance but also ﬁnd that the U.S. troops are
calling in air strikes that are devastating Coalition lines. Allied command
will send British air forces into combat, and the superbly coordinated spacebased reconnaissance systems—coupled with a new, more sophisticated Bat­
tle Star management system—will identify, target, and destroy the German
and Turkish armored infantry.
It will turn out the United States will have learned not to put all its eggs
in one basket militarily, particularly in terms of space-based systems. Before
the war begins, the United States will have another Battle Star—a nextgeneration system—built but not yet launched due to a lack of funds. Con­
gressional inaction will for once be a godsend. The station will be secret,
and on the ground. It will be launched into space just months after the sur­
prise attack and the destruction of Japan’s lunar base. The jury-rigged archi­
tecture created immediately after the war began will be replaced by one
centered around the new Battle Star, stationed near Uganda but capable of
rapid maneuver to new points along the equator as needed, as well as tacti­
cal maneuvering to avoid attacks such as those that destroyed its three pred­ecessors. 

The United States will restore its command of space—to a degree
that will far surpass its space dominance of several years before.
The Turks and Germans will be stunned by one thing. Having decided
to destroy Polish electrical generation and distribution, they will expect re­
sistance to weaken dramatically, as their own forces run out of juice. Yet the
Polish and American armored infantry will be going full blast. It will seem
impossible that the Americans are ﬂying in enough batteries to maintain the
troops. The question will be, where is the power coming from?
The Japanese won’t be the only ones experimenting with the commercial
uses of space. During the ﬁrst half of the century, a consortium of American
entrepreneurs will have spent a great deal of money both developing the in­
expensive, plentiful launchers the Americans will be using and trying their
hand at electrical generation in space, beaming energy to earth in micro­
wave form, then reconverting it to usable electricity. As the U.S. military
commanders game out the problem of defending Poland, they will under­
stand from endless war games that the problem will be maintaining electri­
cal power. When the Turks take only a few weeks to overrun southeastern
Europe, the United States will realize that defeating them depends on the
supply of electrical power to Alliance forces and the destruction of Coalition
electrical supplies. The key to victory will be keeping Poland supplied with
electricity.
The core technology will have been developed. The space launchers will
be able to be built quickly, as will the solar panels and microwave beaming
systems. The real challenge will be to get the receivers built and out to the
ﬁeld, but once again, with unlimited budget and motivation, the Americans
will be able to perform miracles. Unknown to the Coalition, the new Battle
Star will have been designed for two purposes: battle management and man­
aging the construction and operation of enormous arrays of solar panels and
their microwave radiation systems. Mobile receivers will have been delivered
to the battleﬁeld.
When the switch is ﬂipped, thousands of receivers on the Polish side of
the front will begin receiving microwave radiation from space and convert­
ing it to electricity. In a way this will be like cell phones replacing landlines.
The entire architecture of power will change. That will be important later.


For now, it will mean that the resistance facing the Turks will not decline, as
their enemies inexplicably will have far more electricity than Turkey expected.
The Coalition won’t be able to take out the power generation system in
space or identify the microwave receiving stations. There will be too many
solar panels in too many different places, and they will be moving around.
Even if they could be taken out, they would be replaced faster than they
could be destroyed, given the Coalition’s capabilities.
The Coalition won’t be able to break the Polish-American force through
logistics. The defenders will survive because the Coalition will have inade­
quate reconnaissance, having lost its satellites early. Now, its command of
the air will slip as well, as the smaller Allied air forces will have enormously
better intelligence—and will therefore be inﬁnitely more effective.

End game

There will be a stalemate on the ground until the summer of 2052, when
the United States ﬁnally will unleash its new, massive air forces. Combined
with Battle Star intelligence and weapons, the U.S. air forces will devastate
Coalition forces in Poland and smash their power generation system. The
Americans will do the same against Japanese troops ﬁghting in China. Fur­
ther, they will target Japanese surface vessels.
The counterstrike will stagger the Japanese and the Turks and leave the
Germans in a complete shambles. Their ground forces will nearly evaporate
on the battleﬁeld. But now the Americans will face the nuclear problem. If
the Coalition powers are pushed to the point where they believe that their
national sovereignty, let alone national survival, is at stake, they might well
consider the use of nuclear weapons.
The United States will not demand unconditional surrender any more
than it can give it. It will not threaten national survival, nor ultimately will
it have intended to. The United States will have learned over the past ﬁfty
years that the devastation of the enemy, no matter how satisfying, is not the
best strategy. Its goal will be to maintain the balance of power, to keep re­
gional powers focused on each other and not the United States.
The United States won’t want to destroy Japan. Rather, it will want to


maintain a balance of power between Japan, Korea, and China. Similarly, it
will want not to destroy Turkey or create chaos in the Islamic world, but
only to maintain a balance of power between the Polish bloc and Turkey.
The Poles and the Polish bloc will scream for Turkish blood, as will the Chi­
nese and Koreans for that of the Japanese. But the United States will pull a
Woodrow Wilson at Versailles. In the name of all that is humane, it will
make certain that Eurasia remains chaotic.
At a hastily organized peace conference, Turkey will be forced to retreat
south in the Balkans, leaving Croatia and Serbia as a buffer zone and pulling
back toward, but not into, the Caucasus. In Central Asia, Turkey will have
to accept a Chinese presence. The Japanese will have to pull all forces out of
China, and the United States will transfer defense technology to the Chi­
nese. The precise terms will be actually quite vague, which will be exactly
how the Americans want it. Lots of new nations will be carved out. Lots of
boundaries and spheres of inﬂuence will be ambiguous. The victors won’t
quite win and the losers won’t quite lose. The United States will have taken
a major step toward civilization.
In the meantime, the United States will have total command of space, an
economy booming as a result of defense spending, and a new, advanced
power generation system that will begin to transform the way humans re­
ceive power.
In the mid-twentieth century, World War II cost perhaps ﬁfty million
lives. A hundred years later, the ﬁrst space war will take perhaps 50,000
lives, the majority of these in Europe during the Turkish-German ground
offensive, and others in China. The United States itself will lose a few thou­
sand people, many in space, some during the initial air strikes on the United
States, and some in ﬁghting to support the Poles. It will be a world war in
the truest sense of the word, but given the technological advances in preci­
sion and speed, it won’t be total war—societies trying to annihilate societies.
This war will, however, have one thing in common with World War II.
In the end, the United States—having lost the least—will have gained the
most. Just as it roared out of World War II with a tremendous leap in tech­
nology, a revived economy, and a more dominant geopolitical position, so
too will it now emerge into what will be regarded as a golden age for Amer­
ica—and a new and growing maturity in handling its power.



CHAPTER 12

THE 2060s
A Golden Decade

The outcome of the war will unequivocally afﬁrm the position of the
United States as the world’s leading international power and of North
America as the center of gravity in the international system. It will al­
low the United States to consolidate its command of space, and with that,
its control of international sea lanes. It also will begin to create a pattern of
relationships the country will depend on in the coming decades.
The most important outcome of the war will be a treaty that formally
will cede to the United States exclusive rights to militarize space. Other pow­
ers will be able to use space for nonmilitary purposes subject to U.S. inspec­
tion. This will be, simply, the treaty recognition of a military reality. The
United States will have defeated Japan and Turkey in space, and it will not
let that power slip away. The treaty will also limit the number and type of
hypersonic aircraft that Turkey and Japan can have, though it will be well
understood that this will be unenforceable—merely a gratuitous humiliation
victors enjoy imposing on the vanquished. The treaty will serve American
interests and remain in force only so long as American power can enforce it.
Poland will have been the great victor, expanding its reach enormously,


although its losses will have been the most substantial of any major partici­
pant. The Chinese and Koreans will feel well rid of the Japanese, who will
have lost an empire but will retain their country, having suffered only a few
thousand casualties. Japan will still be facing its population problems, but
that will be the price of defeat. Turkey will remain the leader of the Islamic
world, governing an empire made restive by defeat.
But Poland will feel embittered in spite of its victory. Its territory will
have been directly invaded by Germany and Turkey, its allies occupied. Its
casualties will be in the tens of thousands, the result of civilian battle casual­
ties from ground combat—house-to-house ﬁghting in which armored in­
fantrymen are safer than civilians. Poland’s infrastructure will have been
shattered and, along with it, the nation’s economy. Though Poland will be
able to tilt the region’s economic table in its favor, exploiting its conquests to
quickly rebuild its economy, the victory will still be a painful one.
To the west, Poland’s traditional enemy, Germany, will be weakened,
subordinate, and sullen, while the Turks, beaten for the moment, will retain
their inﬂuence a few hundred miles south in the Balkans and in southern
Russia. The Poles will have taken the port of Rijeka and maintain bases in
western Greece to prevent Turkish aggression at the entrance to the Adriatic.
But the Turks will be still there, and Europeans have long memories. Per­
haps most stinging, Poland will be included among nations banned from
the military use of space. The United States will make no exception to that.
In fact, the United States will be most uneasy about Poland after the war.
Poland will have regained the empire it had in the seventeenth century, and
added to it.
Poland will create a confederated system of governance for its former al­
lies and will directly rule Belarus. It will be economically weak and badly
hurt by the war, but it will have the territory and time to recover.
The defeat of France and Germany by Poland will decisively shift power
in Europe to the east. In a sense, the eclipse of Atlantic Europe that began in
1945 will complete itself in the 2050s. The United States won’t relish the
long-term implications of a vigorous, self-conﬁdent Poland dominating
Europe. It therefore will encourage its closest ally, Britain, which will have
thrown its weight decisively into the war, to increase its own economic and


political inﬂuence on the continent. With Western Europe in demographic
and economic shambles, and fearing Polish power, England will willingly or­
ganize a bloc oddly resembling the twentieth-century NATO, whose task it
will be to rehabilitate Western Europe and block Polish movement west­
ward from Germany, Austria, or Italy. The United States won’t join, but it
will encourage the formation of this alliance.
Most interestingly, the Americans will move to improve their relations
with the Turks. Given the old British adage that nations have no permanent
friends and no permanent enemies but only permanent interests, the Amer­
ican interest will be to support the weaker power against the stronger, in or­
der to maintain the balance of power. Turkey, understanding the long-term
potential power of Poland, will happily accept closer ties with Washington
as a guarantee of its long-term survival.
Needless to say, the Poles will feel utterly betrayed by the Americans. But
the Americans will be learning. Rushing into battle may satisfy some urge,
but managing the situation so that battles either won’t occur or will be
fought by others is a much better solution. In supporting Britain and Turkey,
the United States will move to create a European balance of power matching
the one in Asia. No other country will represent a coherent threat to the
United States and, so long as it controls space, the United States will easily
be able to deal with any other issues that rise to a level requiring its atten­
tion.
One interesting facet of geopolitics is this: there are no permanent solu­
tions to geopolitical problems. But for the moment in the 2060s, as was the
case in the 1920s and 1990s, there will appear to be no serious challenges
facing the United States, or at least none that pose a direct threat. The
United States will have learned that security is illusory but for the moment
will luxuriate in that security nonetheless.
The American economic expansion of the 2040s won’t be interrupted by
the war. In fact, it will continue unchecked. As we have seen over the cen­
turies, the United States has historically proﬁted from major wars. It will be
fairly untouched by the war, and increases in government spending will
stimulate the economy. Since the United States ﬁghts its wars using tech­
nology, any war—or anticipation of war—against other nation-states will
increase government expenditures on research and development. As a result,


a range of new technologies will be available for commercial exploitation at
the end of the war. So we will see in the postwar world, until about 2070, a
period of dramatic economic growth, accompanied by social transforma­
tion.
The war will occur right in the middle of one of America’s ﬁfty-year cy­
cles, about twenty years into it. That will mean that the war occurs at the
point at which the country is its strongest internally. Its population prob­
lems, never as severe as the rest of the world’s, will be well managed through
immigration and the death of the boomers, relieving the pressure of a gray­
ing workforce. The balance between capital availability and demand for
products will be intact, and both will grow. America will be moving into a
period of dramatic economic, and therefore social, transformation. How­
ever, as with World War II, when a major war occurs in the early to middle
stages of the cycle, the cycle is kicked into overdrive as the economy adjusts
to the immediate aftereffects of war. That means that the mid- to late 2050s
will be a jackpot period, similar to the 1950s. In every sense of the term, the
ﬁfteen years after the war will be an economic and technological golden age
for the United States.
The United States will reduce its defense expenditures after the collapse
of the Russians in the 2030s but will raise them again dramatically as the
global cold war in the 2040s intensiﬁes. Then, during the mid-century war,
America will engage in extraordinary feats of research and development and
will apply its discoveries immediately. What would have taken years to do in
a peacetime economy will be done in months, and even weeks, due to the
urgency of war (especially following the annihilation of U.S. space forces).
The United States will have developed an obsession with space. In 1941
Pearl Harbor created a national belief, especially among the military, that a
devastating attack might come at any moment, and certainly when least ex­
pected. That mind-set governed U.S. nuclear strategy for the next ﬁfty
years. An unrelenting fear of surprise attack permeated military thinking
and planning. That sensibility subsided after the fall of the Soviet Union,
but the attack in the 2050s will revive the terror of Pearl Harbor, and fear of
surprise attack will become a national obsession again, this time focused on
space.
The threat will be very real. Control of space means the same thing


strategically as control of the sea. Pearl Harbor nearly cost the United States
control of the sea in 1941. Conversely, the war in the 2050s will almost cost
the United States control of space. The resulting obsessive fear of the unex­
pected, combined with an obsessive focus on space, means that enormous
amounts of both military and commercial money will be spent on space.
The United States is therefore going to construct a massive amount of
infrastructure in space, ranging from satellites in low earth orbit to manned
space stations in geostationary orbit, to installations on the moon and satel­
lites orbiting the moon. Many of these systems will be robotically main­
tained, or will be robots themselves. The disparate advances in robotics in
the previous half century will now come together—in space.
One key development is that there will now be a steady deployment of
troops in space. Their job will be to oversee the systems, since robotics, no
matter how good, are far from perfect, and in the 2050s and 2060s this ef­
fort will be a matter of national survival. U.S. Space Forces, a new branch of
the military separate from the air force, will become the biggest service in
terms of budget, if not troop size. A range of low-cost launch vehicles, many
derived from commercial versions developed by entrepreneurs, will be con­
stantly shuttling from earth to space and between the space-based plat­
forms.
The goal of all this activity will be threefold. First, the United States will
want to guarantee enough robustness, redundancy, and depth in defense so
that no power will ever again be able to disrupt U.S. space capabilities. Sec­
ond, it will want to be in a position where it can shut down any attempt by
another country to gain a toehold in space against American wishes. Finally,
it will want to have massive resources—including space-based weapons, from
missiles to new high-energy beams—to control events on the surface of the
earth. The United States will understand that it won’t be able to control
every threat (such as terrorism or the formation of coalitions) from space.
But it will make sure that no other nation can mount an effective operation
against it.
The cost of building this kind of capability will be enormous. It will
have almost no political opposition, will generate huge deﬁcits, and will
stimulate the American economy dramatically. As with the end of World
War II, fear will override caution. Critics, marginal and without inﬂuence,


will say that this military spending is unnecessary and that it will bankrupt
America, leading to a depression. In fact, it will cause the economy to surge
dramatically, as deﬁcits normally have in American history, particularly dur­
ing the centers of the ﬁfty-year cycles, when the economy is robust.

Revolution in energy

The American obsession with space will intersect another intensifying prob­
lem: energy. During the war, the United States will invest huge amounts of
money to solve the problem of delivering power to the battleﬁeld from
space. It will be uneconomical, primitive, and wasteful, but it will work. It
will power Allied forces in Poland in the face of the Turkish-German inva­
sion. The military will see space-based power generation as a solution to its
massive logistical problem on the battleﬁeld. In particular, the delivery of
energy to power new weapons involving intense energy beams will be a crit­
ical problem. The military will be prepared, therefore, to underwrite the de­
velopment of space-based power generation, as a military necessity, and
Congress will be prepared to pay for it. It will be one of the lessons learned
from the war—and it will instill a sense of urgency into the project.
There are two other episodes in American history that are instructive
here. In 1956, the United States undertook to construct the interstate high­
way system. Dwight Eisenhower favored it for military reasons. As a junior
ofﬁcer he had tried to lead a convoy across the United States—it took
months. In World War II he saw how the Germans had moved entire armies
from the eastern front to the west to launch the Battle of the Bulge using
their autobahns. He was struck by the contrast.
The military reasons for the interstate system were compelling. But the
civilian impacts were both unexpected and unintended. With the time and
cost of transportation reduced, land outside of cities became usable. A mas­
sive decentralization of cities took place, leading to suburbs and the distri­
bution of industry outside of urban areas. The interstate system reshaped
the United States, and without the military justiﬁcations it might not have
been built or seen as economically feasible.
A second example can be drawn from the 1970s, when the military was


heavily engaged in research. It needed the means to move information
around among different research centers more quickly than it could by
courier or the mails—there was no FedEx. The Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA) funded an experiment designed to create a net­
work of computers that could communicate data and ﬁles to each other at a
distance. The creation was called ARPANET. It was developed at some cost
and effort for a highly specialized use. ARPANET, of course, evolved into
the Internet, and its essential architecture and protocols were designed and
administered by the Department of Defense and its contractors until well
into the 1990s.
As with the automobile superhighways, the information superhighway
might have come about on its own, but it did not. The basic cost of creating
it was a military undertaking designed to solve a problem the military was
experiencing. To push this analogy a bit, the energy superhighway will have
its origins in the same kinds of necessities. It will be built for the military,
and therefore its economics will make it more competitive than other en­
ergy sources. Since the military will absorb the basic capital cost and will de­
ploy the systems, the commercial cost of this energy will be enormously
lower than it might be otherwise. Cheap energy in the civilian sector will
be critical, particularly as robots become more and more prevalent in the
economy.
Military space programs will, quite literally, reduce the cost of commer­
cial endeavors by piggybacking them. Advances in commercial launches
into space will reduce the cost of lifting payload but will never have the ca­
pacity to handle a massive project such as the development of space-based
solar power generation. The military program of the 2050s and 2060s will
solve this problem in two ways. First, one of the important parts of the proj­
ect will be reducing the cost per pound of payloads. The United States will
be putting a lot of stuff into space and will need to dramatically lower the
price of a launch. Partly through new technology and partly through the
sheer volume being launched, cost will begin to decline dramatically, even
over that of commercial vehicles developed earlier.
Second, there will be surplus capacity built into the system. One of the
lessons of the war will be that not having spare space-lift capacity left the


United States scrambling to deal with the initial attack. That will not be al­
lowed to happen again. So the nation will have a huge surplus of usable lift
capacity. Private sector utilization of the project will be essential to reduce
costs.
The period when the interstate highway system and the Internet came
into being was a period of explosive economic growth. The interstate high­
way system stimulated the economy by employing armies of construction
crews and civil engineers, but it was the entrepreneurial spin-offs that really
drove the boom. McDonald’s was as much a creature of the interstate high­
way system as was the suburban mall. The Internet’s construction involved
a lot of Cisco servers and PC sales. But the real boom came with Amazon
and iTunes. Both had massive entrepreneurial consequences.
NASA has been involved in research on space-based energy since the
1970s, in the form space solar power (SSP). In the war of the 2050s the
United States will really start using this new system. And in the space-based
energy project of the 2060s, it will become a feature of everyday life. Vast
numbers of photovoltaic cells, designed to convert solar energy into electric­
ity, will be placed in geostationary orbit or on the surface of the moon. The
electricity will be converted into microwaves, transmitted to the earth, re­
converted to electricity, and distributed through the existing and expanded
electric grid. The number of cells needed could be reduced by concentrating
sunlight using mirrors, thus reducing the cost of launching the photovoltaic
arrays. Obviously, the receivers would have to be installed in isolated areas
on earth, since the localized microwave radiation would be intense, but the
risks would be far less than that from nuclear reactors or from the environ­
mental effects of hydrocarbons. One thing that space has available is space.
What would be unbearably intrusive on earth (say, covering an area the size
of New Mexico with solar panels) is swallowed up by the limitlessness of
space. Plus there are no clouds, and collectors can be positioned to receive
continual sunlight.
These advances will lead to reduced energy costs on earth, and thus
many more energy-intensive activities will become feasible. The entrepre­
neurial possibilities that emerge will be astounding. Who could have drawn
a line between ARPANET and the iPod? All that can be said is that this sec­ond 

wave of innovations will transform things at least as much as the inter­
state highway and the Internet did—and bring as much prosperity in the
2060s as the interstate brought in the 1960s, and the Internet in the 2000s.
The United States will also have created another foundation for its geo­
political power—it will become the largest energy producer in the world,
with its energy ﬁelds protected from attack. Japan and China and most
other countries are going to be energy importers. As the economics of en­
ergy shifts, other sources of energy, including hydrocarbons, will become
less attractive. Other countries will not be able to launch their own spacebased systems. For one thing, they will not have a military making the down
payment on the system. Nor will any country have the appetite to challenge
the United States at that moment. An attack on American facilities will be
unthinkable given the now vast imbalance of power. The ability of the
United States to provide much cheaper solar energy will create an additional
lever for the superpower to increase its international dominance.
We will see here a fundamental paradigm shift in geopolitical realities.
Since the start of the industrial revolution, industry has guzzled energy,
which was accidentally and haphazardly distributed around the world. The
Arabian Peninsula, which otherwise had little importance, became crucially
important because of its oil ﬁelds. With the shift to space-based systems, in­
dustry will produce energy instead of simply consuming it. Space travel will
be the result of industrialization, and an industrialized nation will produce
energy at the same time as it fuels its industry. Space will become more im­
portant than Saudi Arabia ever was, and the United States will control it.
A new wave of American-generated culture will sweep the world. Re­
member that we deﬁne culture not simply as art, but in the broader sense of
how people live their lives. The computer was the most effective introduc­
tion to American culture, far more profound than movies or TV. The robot
will represent the computer’s logical and dramatic conclusion. In a world
that needs economic growth but no longer has a surging population, robots
will become the driver of productivity, and with space-based solar systems
there will be ample electricity to power them. Robots, still primitive but de­
veloping rapidly, are going to sweep the world, and will be particularly em­
braced by the population-constrained advanced industrial world, and by


countries that will be closing in on the ﬁrst tier and nearing or passing pop­
ulation peaks.
Genetics science will continue to extend life expectancy, and will eradi­
cate or bring under control a series of genetic diseases. This will lead to in­
creasing social instability. The radical shifts that have wracked Europe and
the United States, transforming the role of women and the structure of the
family, will become a worldwide phenomenon. Deep tensions—between
supporters of traditional values and new social realities—will become in­
tense throughout the second-tier countries, and all major religions will be
wracked by them. Catholicism, Confucianism, and Islam will all be arrayed
with traditional understandings of family, sexuality, and the relations be­
tween generations. But the traditional values are going to collapse in Europe
and the United States, and they will then collapse throughout most of the
rest of the world.
Politically, this will mean intense internal tensions. The late twenty-ﬁrst
century will become a period in which tradition tries to contain a medically
and technologically driven upheaval. And since the United States will be the
originator of much of the controversial technology, and its model of internal
social chaos will be becoming the norm, it will become the enemy of tradi­
tionalists everywhere. To the rest of the world, America will be seen as dan­
gerous, brutish, and treacherous, but it will be treated with caution—and
envied. It will be a time of international stability, regional stress, and inter­
nal unrest.
Outside the United States two powers will be thinking about space. One
will be Poland, which will be busy consolidating its land empire and still
smarting at its treatment under the peace treaty of the 2050s. But Poland
will also still be recovering from the war and surrounded by American allies.
It will not be ready for a challenge. The other country thinking about space
will be Mexico, which into the late 2060s will be emerging as one of the top
economic powers in the world. Mexico will see itself as a rival of the United
States, and will be stepping onto the continental and world stage, but it will
not yet have deﬁned a coherent national strategy (and will be afraid of going
too far in challenging American power).
There will be other emerging powers whose economies begin to surge as


population growth pressures decline. Brazil will be a particularly important
emerging power, a generation behind Mexico in population stability but
moving rapidly in that direction. Brazil will be considering a regional eco­
nomic alliance with Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay, all of whom will be mak­
ing major strides. Brazil will be thinking in terms of peaceful confederation
but, as is often the case, will in due course entertain more aggressive ideas.
The Brazilians will certainly have a space program by the 2060s, but not a
comprehensive one, and not one linked to immediate geopolitical need.
Countries like Israel, India, Korea, and Iran all will have limited space
programs, but none of them is going to have the resources or the motivation
to make a play for substantial space presence, let alone try to deny the
United States space hegemony. Therefore, as happens at the end of global
wars, the United States will have a wide-open shot—and will take it. The
United States will be living in a golden moment, lasting at least until around
2070.



CHAPTER 13
2080
The United States , Mexico , and the Struggle for the Global Heartland


From the beginning of this book, I’ve talked about North America be­
ing the center of gravity of the international system. Until now I’ve
basically equated North America with the United States, simply be­
cause U.S. power in North America is so overwhelming that no one is in a
position to challenge it. The great global war of the twenty-ﬁrst century will
make clear that no Eurasian power is going to emerge to challenge the
United States for quite a while. In addition, a crucial geopolitical principle
will be tested, and modernized: whoever controls the Atlantic and Paciﬁc
oceans will control global trade—and whoever controls space will control
the world’s oceans. The United States will emerge in unchallenged control
of space, and therefore in control of the world’s oceans.
Reality, however, is more complex than appearances. The United States
will have an underlying weakness in the second half of the twenty-ﬁrst cen­
tury, one that it will not have confronted for two hundred years. The ﬁrst
geopolitical imperative of the United States—the one that all others rest
upon—is that the United States dominate North America. Since the
Mexican-American War and the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo that


concluded it in 1848, the United States has been in practical control of the
continent. It has simply seemed to be a foregone conclusion.
By the end of the twenty-ﬁrst century, this will no longer be the case.
The question of Mexico’s power relative to the United States will be raised
again in the most complex and difﬁcult way imaginable. Mexico, after two
hundred years, will be in a position to challenge the territorial integrity of
the United States, and the entire balance of power of North America. If this
sounds far-fetched, go back to my introductory chapter and think about the
way the world changes in just twenty years, remembering that we are talking
about nearly a century here.
The Mexican challenge will be rooted in the economic crisis of the
2020s, which will be solved by the immigration laws that will be passed in
the early 2030s. These laws will aggressively encourage immigration to the
United States in order to solve America’s labor shortages. There will be a
massive inﬂux of immigrants from all countries, and this will obviously in­
clude Mexico. The other immigrant groups will behave much as previous
immigrants did. But the Mexicans will behave differently for a single reason,
having nothing to do with culture or character, but having to do with geog­
raphy. And that, coupled with the growing strength of Mexico as a nation,
will shift the North American balance of power.
Historically, other immigrant groups have had what we might call a
lumpy distribution in the United States. They have lived in ethnic enclaves,
and while they might have dominated in those neighborhoods and inﬂu­
enced surrounding politics, no one group simply overwhelmed any region
or state since the late nineteenth century. As the second generation reached
adulthood, they became culturally assimilated and distributed themselves
around the country as they pursued economic opportunities. The life of the
ethnic enclave was simply not as attractive as the opportunities available in
the wider society. In the United States, minority populations were never an
indigestible mass—with the major exceptions of the one ethnic group that
did not come here voluntarily (African Americans) and those who were here
when Europeans arrived (American Indians). The rest all came, clustered
and dispersed, and added new cultural layers to the general society.
This has always been the strength of the United States. In much of Eu­
rope, for example, Muslims have retained religious and national identities


distinct from the general population, and the general population has given
them little encouragement to blend. The strength of their own culture has
therefore been overwhelming. In the United States, Islamic immigrants, like
other immigrant groups, were transformed over generations into a popula­
tion that bought into basic American principles while retaining religiosity
almost as a cultural link to the past. This both bound the immigrants to the
United States and created a chasm between the ﬁrst generation and later
ones (as well as between the American Muslim community and Muslims
elsewhere in the world). This has been a well-worn path for immigrants to
the United States.
Immigrants from Mexico will behave differently starting in the 2030s.
They will distribute themselves around the country, as they have in the past,
and many will enter the mainstream of American society. But unlike other
immigrant groups, Mexicans are not separated from their homelands by
oceans and many thousands of miles. They can move across the border a few
miles into the United States but still maintain their social and economic
links to their homeland. Proximity to the homeland creates a very different
dynamic. Rather than a diaspora, at least part of Mexican migration is sim­
ply a movement into a borderland between two nations, like Alsace-Lorraine
between France and Germany—a place where two cultures intermingle
even when the border is stable.
Consider the map on page 226, drawn from U.S. census bureau data, of
Hispanic population concentration in the United States in 2000.
In 2000, looking at Hispanic residents as percentages of counties in the
United States, we can already see the concentration. Along the border from
the Paciﬁc to the Gulf of Mexico there is an obvious concentration of peo­
ple of Mexican origin. The counties range from about one-ﬁfth Mexican
(we will use that term to apply here to ethnicity, not citizenship) to over
two-thirds Mexican. In Texas, this concentration goes deep into the state, as
it does in California. But the border counties tend to be the most heavily
Mexican, as would be expected.
I’ve superimposed the outline of the territory that used to be part of
Mexico and became part of the United States: Texas and the Mexican Ces­
sion. Notice how the Mexican community in 2000 is concentrated in
these formerly Mexican territories. There are pockets of Mexicans outside


this area, of course, but they are just that, pockets, behaving more like
other ethnic groups. In the borderland, Mexicans are not isolated from
their homeland. In many ways they represent an extension of their homeland into the United States. The United States occupied Mexican territory in the nineteenth century, and the region maintained some of the
characteristics of occupied territory. As populations shift, the border is increasingly seen as arbitrary or illegitimate, and migration from the poorer
to the richer country takes place, but not the reverse. The cultural border
of Mexico shifts northward even though the political border remains
static.
That’s the picture in 2000. By 2060, after thirty years of policies encouraging immigration, the map we saw in 2000 will have evolved so that areas
that had been around 50 percent Mexican will become almost completely
Mexican and areas that had been about 25 percent Mexican will move to


over half. The entire map will have turned one to two shades darker. The
borderland, extending far into the United States, will become predomi­
nantly Mexican. Mexico will have solved its ﬁnal phase of population
growth by extending its nonpolitical boundaries into the Mexican Ces­
sion—with the encouragement of the United States.

Population,technology, and the crisis of 2080

Surging immigration into the United States and the aftereffects of the war
will kick off an economic boom from about 2040 to 2060. The availability
of land and capital in the United States, coupled with one of the most dy­
namic labor pools in the advanced industrial world, will stoke the economic
ﬁres. The relative ease with which the United States absorbs immigrants will
give it a massive advantage over other industrialized countries. But there will
be another dimension to this boom that we must acknowledge: technology.
Let’s consider this and then return to our discussion of Mexico.
During the crisis of 2030, the United States will look for ways to com­
pensate for labor shortages, particularly in developing technologies that can
take the place of humans.
One of the dominant patterns in technology development in the United
States has been:
1. Basic science or designs are developed at universities or by individual
inventors, frequently resulting in conceptual breakthroughs, modest
implementations, and some commercial exploitation.
2. In the context of a military need, the United States infuses large
amounts of money into the project to speed development toward spe­
ciﬁc, military ends.
3. The private sector takes advantage of commercial applications of this
technology to build entire industries.
The same is happening with robotics. At end of the twentieth century
basic development in robotics had already been undertaken. Core theoreti­cal 


breakthroughs had taken place and there were some commercial appli­
cations, but robots have not become staples of the American economy.
The military, however, has been pumping money into both basic robot­
ics theory and its applications for years. The U.S. military, through DARPA
and other sources, has been actively funding robotics development. Build­
ing a robotic mule to carry infantry equipment and creating a robotic air­
craft that would not need a pilot are but two examples of work in robotics.
Deploying in space intelligent robotic systems that don’t need to be con­
trolled from earth is another goal. Ultimately, it is a matter of demograph­
ics. Fewer young people means fewer soldiers. However, U.S. strategic
commitments will increase, not decrease. The United States, more than any
other nation, will need robotic support for soldiers as a matter of national
interest.
By the time the social and political crisis of 2030 occurs, robotics appli­
cations will have been ﬁeld-tested and proven by the military and thus ready
for commercial application. Obviously, robots won’t be ready for mass de­
ployment by 2030. And in no way will robots eliminate the need for immi­
gration. This situation will sound familiar to many of us, as we’ve been here
before. Computing was at this stage in 1975; the military had paid for the
development of the silicon microchip, and many military applications could
be found. Commercialization processes were just beginning, and it would
take several decades to transform the civilian economy. So the mass deploy­
ment of robotics technologies will not be taking place until the 2040s, and
the full transformative power of robotics will not be felt until about 2060.
Ironically, immigrant technologists will be critical in developing robotics
technology, a technology that will undercut the need for mass immigration.
In fact, as robotics enters the mainstream of society, it will undercut the eco­
nomic position of those migrants engaged in unskilled labor at the bottom
of the economic pyramid.
Once again, the solution to one problem will be the catalyst for the next
one. This situation will set the stage for the crisis of 2080. The system for
encouraging immigration will be embedded into American culture and pol­
itics. Recruiters will continue offering incentives for immigrants to come to
the United States. An emergency measure will have become a routine part of
government. The problem is that by 2060 or so, the crisis will have passed,


both because of migration and due to new technologies like robotics. The
last boomers will be gone and buried, and America’s demographic structure
will look more like a pyramid—which is what it should look like. Advances
in robotics will eliminate the need for an entire segment of immigrants.
Technology has frequently promised to eliminate jobs. The exact oppo­
site has always happened. More jobs have been created in order to maintain
the technology. What has happened is a shift from unskilled to skilled labor.
That will certainly be one result of robotics. Someone will have to design
and maintain the systems. But robotics differs from all prior technologies in
a fundamental way. Prior technologies have had labor displacement as a byproduct. Robotics is designed explicitly for labor displacement. The entire
point of this class of technology is replacing scarce human labor with
cheaper technology. The ﬁrst goal will be replacing labor that is no longer
available. The second will be to shift available labor to support robotics. The
third—and this is where the problem starts—will be the direct displace­
ment of workers. In other words, while robotics will be designed to replace
disappearing workers, it will also create unemployment among workers who
are displaced but don’t have the skills to move into robotics.
As a result, unemployment will begin rising, beginning around 2060
and accelerating throughout the next two decades. There will be a tempo­
rary but painful population surplus. Whereas the problem of 2030 will be
coping with a population shortage, the problem by the 2060s to the 2080s
will be coping with a surplus population driven by excessive immigration
and structural unemployment. This will be compounded by advances in ge­
netics. Human life may not be extended dramatically, but Americans will
remain productive longer. We shouldn’t discount, either, the possibility of
massive increases in longevity as a wild card.
Robotics, coupled with genetics and attendant technologies, will simul­
taneously replace labor and increase the labor pool by making humans more
efﬁcient. It will be a time of increasing turmoil. It will also be a time of tur­
moil in terms of energy use. Robots, which will both move and process in­
formation, will be even more ubiquitous energy hogs than automobiles.
This will kick off the energy crisis discussed in previous chapters and the
end of hydrocarbon technology rooted in the European Age. The United
States will be forced to look to space for energy.


Developments in space-sourced energy systems will have been under
way well before 2080. In fact, the Defense Department is already thinking
about such a system. The National Security Space Ofﬁce released a study
in October 2007 entitled “Space-Based Solar Power as an Opportunity for
Strategic Security.” It states:
The magnitude of the looming energy and environmental problems is sig­
niﬁcant enough to warrant consideration of all options, to revisit a concept
called Space Based Solar Power (SBSP) ﬁrst invented in the United States
almost 40 years ago. The basic idea is very straightforward: place very large
solar arrays into continuously and intensely sunlit Earth orbit, collect gi­
gawatts of electrical energy, electromagnetically beam it to Earth, and re­
ceive it on the surface for use either as baseload power via direct connection
to the existing electrical grid, conversion into manufactured synthetic hy­
drocarbon fuels or as low-intensity broadcast power beamed directly to con­
sumers. A single kilometer-wide band of geosynchronous earth orbit
experiences enough solar ﬂux in one year to nearly equal the amount of en­
ergy contained within all known recoverable conventional oil resources on
earth today.

By 2050 early installations of this new solar technology should be in
place, and the crisis of 2080 will propel development forward. A signiﬁcant
drop in energy costs will be essential to the implementation of the robotics
strategy, which is, in turn, essential to maintaining economic productivity
during a period of long-term population constraints. When population
doesn’t grow, technology must compensate, and for this technology to work,
energy costs must come down.
So in the United States after 2080 we will see a massive effort to extract
energy from space-based systems. Obviously, this will have begun decades
before, but not with the intensity required to make it the primary source of
power. The intensifying crisis of 2070 will move the project forward dra­
matically. As with any government effort, the cost will be high, but by the
end of the twenty-ﬁrst century, when private industry starts taking advan­
tage of the vast public investment in space, the cost of energy will drop sub­stantially. 

Robotics will be evolving quickly and dramatically. Think of the
evolution of home computers between 1990, when most homes and ofﬁces
still did not even have e-mail, and 2005, when literally billions of e-mails
were sent daily around the planet.
The United States will be one of the few advanced industrial countries
experiencing a temporary surplus in its population. The economic impera­
tive of the previous ﬁfty years—encouraging immigration by all means
possible—will have run its course, and it will have become the problem
rather than the solution. So the ﬁrst step toward solving the crisis will be
limiting immigration, a massive and traumatizing reversal that will cause a
crisis, just as the shift toward attracting and increasing immigration had
ﬁfty years before.
Once immigration has been halted, the United States will have to man­
age the economic imbalance caused by its population surplus. Layoffs and
unemployment will strike disproportionately at the working poor—and
particularly the Mexican population in the borderlands. Serious foreign pol­
icy issues will then arise. Add to this picture soaring energy prices, and all of
the catalysts for the crisis of the 2080s are in place.

Mexico’s economic development

Mexico’s economy is currently ranked ﬁfteenth in the world. Since its eco­
nomic meltdown in 1994, it has recovered dramatically. Mexico’s per capita
GDP, measured in terms of purchasing power, is a little over $12,000 a year,
which makes it the wealthiest major country in Latin America, and places
Mexico in the ranks of developed, if not advanced, economies. And we have
to remember that Mexico is not a small country. It has a population of
about 110 million, making it larger than most European nations.
Will Mexico’s economic strength increase substantially over the next
sixty or seventy years? If it does, considering its starting point, Mexico would
then become one of the world’s leading economies. Given Mexico’s internal
political instability, outﬂows of population, and history of economic prob­
lems, it is difﬁcult to imagine Mexico in the top tier of nations. But it is


equally difﬁcult for most people to understand how it has already risen as
high as it has.
There are several things working in Mexico’s favor economically. The
ﬁrst is oil. Mexico has been a major oil producer and exporter over the last
century. For many, that is an argument against Mexico becoming a major
power. Oil exports frequently undermine the ability—or appetite—of a na­
tion to develop other industries. It’s therefore important to understand one
other fact about Mexico: despite the surge in global oil prices since 2003, its
energy sector actually represents a declining portion of Mexico’s overall
economy. Oil constituted about 60 percent of Mexico’s exports in 1980, but
by 2000 it was only about 7 percent. Mexico has oil reserves, but it doesn’t
depend on oil exports to grow.
The second factor in Mexico’s economic growth has to do with its prox­
imity to the United States—the same thing that will later pose a geopolitical
challenge. Mexico—with or without NAFTA—will be able to export efﬁ­
ciently into the world’s largest and most dynamic market. While NAFTA
cut the cost of exports and increased the institutional efﬁciency of the rela­
tionship, the fundamental reality is that Mexico’s proximity to the United
States has always given it an economic advantage, despite the geopolitical
disadvantage that goes with it.
Third, there are massive amounts of cash ﬂowing back to Mexico from
the United States in the form of remittances from legal and illegal immi­
grants. Remittances to Mexico have surged and are now its second-largest
source of foreign income. In most countries, foreign investment is the pri­
mary means for developing the economy. In Mexico, investment by foreign­
ers is being matched by foreign remittances. This remittance system has two
effects. It leverages other sources of investment when it is banked. And it
serves as a social safety net for the lower classes, to whom most remittances
ﬂow.
The inﬂow of money into Mexico has meant a growth in technologically
based industry and services. Services now account for 70 percent of Mex­
ico’s GDP, and agriculture for only about 4 percent. The rest is made up of
industry, oil, and mining. The proportion of services centered around
tourism is relatively high, but the mix as a whole is not typical of a develop­ing country.


There is an interesting measure, created by the United Nations, called
the human development index (HDI), which charts global standards of living, including factors like life expectancy and literacy rates. The HDI divides the world into three classes. On the map that follows, black represents
the advanced industrial world, medium gray indicates the middle-tier and
developed countries, and light gray shows the developing world. As the map
shows, Mexico already ranks with Europe and the United States on the human development scale. That doesn’t mean it is the equal of the United
States, but it does mean that Mexico cannot simply be viewed as a developing country.
When we drill deeper into the HDI, we see something else interesting
about Mexico. Mexico as a whole has an index of 0.70, which puts it in the
same class as the United States or Europe. But there are enormous regional
inequalities within Mexico. The darker areas on the map below have rankings equal to some European countries, while the lightest areas are the equivalent of poorer, North African countries.
This tremendous inequality is exactly what you would expect to see in a
country in the process of rapid development. Consider the descriptions of
Europe written by Charles Dickens or Victor Hugo. They captured the
essence of nineteenth-century Europe—tremendous growth amid intensifying 

inequality. In Mexico, one can find that contrast in Mexico City
or Guadalajara. But one can also see it regionally, contrasting the relative
wealth of Mexico’s north with the poverty of the south. Inequality does not
mean lack of development. Instead, it is the inevitable by-product of development.
It is interesting to note in this map, of course, that the areas bordering
the United States and the tourist regions in the south—as well as Mexico
City—are at the highest levels of development. As one moves away from the
U.S. frontier, the HDI declines. This indicates the importance of the
United States in Mexican development. It also reveals the real danger facing
Mexico—which is an insurgency in the south fueled by its inequality. This
inequality will intensify as Mexico develops.
There is one other important factor driving Mexico’s growth: organized
crime and the drug trade. In general, there are two types of crime. One is
simply distributive and consumptive—someone steals your television and
sells it. The other creates large pools of capital. The American Mafia that


dominated bootlegging used that money to move into legitimate business,
until, at a certain point, the original money had been merged into the gen­
eral ﬂow of capital such that its origin in criminality was no longer relevant.
When this happens inside a country, it stimulates growth. When the trans­
fer is between two countries, it really stimulates growth. The key is that the
cost of the product is artiﬁcially inﬂated by its illegality. This encourages the
emergence of cartels that suppress competition, maintain high prices, and
facilitate the transfer of funds.
In the case of the contemporary drug trade, the sale of drugs at artiﬁ­
cially high prices to American drug consumers creates huge pools of money
available for investment in Mexico. The amount of money is so large that it
must be invested. Complex money-laundering operations are designed to
allocate the funds legally. The next generation becomes heir to a fairly legit­
imate pool of money. The third generation becomes economic aristocrats.
This obviously oversimpliﬁes the situation. It also neglects the fact that
in many cases, dealers located in Mexico will not repatriate the money to
Mexico but will instead invest it in the United States or elsewhere. But if
Mexico is becoming increasingly productive, and if the government can be
corrupted to provide a degree of protection while the money is being laun­
dered, then reinvesting drug money in Mexico makes a great deal of sense.
Listen closely: the giant sucking sound you hear is investment capital leav­
ing the United States and going to Mexico via the drug cartels.
The problem with this process is that it is politically destabilizing. Be­
cause the authorities are complicit in the process, and the courts and police
ineffective, the situation creates instability from the street to the highest
reaches of government. A society can rip itself apart when this much money
is involved. Yet societies that are sufﬁciently large and complex, and in
which the amount of money represents a relatively small fraction of avail­
able capital, can eventually stabilize themselves. The United States, where
organized crime has played a critical role since the 1920s and did destabilize
entire regions, ultimately rechanneled criminal money into legal activities.
It is my view that this is the most likely path for Mexico and that this activ­
ity will ultimately contribute to Mexican economic growth.
This is not to say that there will not be a fearsome period of instability in
Mexico. During the coming years, the ability of the state to control the car­tels 


will be challenged and Mexico will face extensive internal crises. But
in the long term, viewed in terms of the century, Mexico will both weather
the crises and beneﬁt from the massive inﬂows of money from the United
States.
Finally, when we look at Mexico’s population, we see not only continued
growth during a time when labor will be needed to fuel it but also a soft
landing in population growth by mid-century, indicating social stabilization
as well as easing demographic pressures on society. The population pattern
also allows for increased migration to the United States during the 2030s,
resulting in increased remittances and therefore enhanced capital formation
without the burden of the overpopulation within Mexico’s boundaries. Al­
though not critical for Mexico’s development, this migration will certainly
be something that supports it.
Thus, we can see Mexico, which has joined Europe in some measures of
its standard of living, passing through an inevitable period of turbulence
and growth on the way to order and stability. Then, around the middle of
the twenty-ﬁrst century, while the world is at war, Mexico will emerge as a
mature, balanced economy with a stable population—and will rank among
the top six or seven economic powers in the world, with a growing military
power to boot. Mexico will be the leading economic power of Latin Amer­
ica and, perhaps allied loosely with Brazil, will pose a challenge to U.S.
domination of North America.

Mexico’s geopolitics

During the 1830s and 1840s, Mexico lost its northern regions to the United
States, following the Texas rebellion and the Mexican-American War. Essen­
tially, all of the lands north of the Rio Grande and the Sonoran Desert were
taken by the United States. The United States did not carry out ethnic
cleansing: the existing population remained in place, gradually being over­
lain by the arrival of non-Hispanic American settlers. The border was his­
torically porous, and both U.S. and Mexican citizens were able to move
readily across it. As I said before, a classic borderland was created, with clear
political boundaries but complex and murky cultural boundaries.


Mexico has never been in a position to attempt to reverse the American
conquests. It adopted the view that it had no choice but to live with the loss
of its northern land. Even during the American Civil War, when the South­
west was relatively unprotected, the Mexicans made no move. Under the
emperor Maximilian, Mexico remained weak and divided. It couldn’t gener­
ate the will or power to act. When Mexico was approached by the Germans
in World War I with the offer of an alliance against the United States and
the return of northern Mexico, the Mexicans declined the offer. When the
Soviets and Cubans tried to generate a pro-communist movement in Mex­
ico to threaten America’s southern frontier, they failed completely. Mexico
couldn’t move against the United States, nor could it be manipulated by for­
eign powers to do so, because Mexico couldn’t mobilize.
This was not because anti-American sentiment wasn’t present in Mexico.
Such sentiment is in fact deeply rooted, as one might expect given the history
of Mexican–American relations. However, as we have seen, sentiment has
little to do with power. The Mexicans were absorbed by their own fractious
regionalism and complex politics. They also understood the futility of chal­
lenging the United States.
Mexico’s grand strategy was simple after 1848. First, it needed to main­
tain its own internal cohesion against regionalism and insurrection. Second,
it needed to secure itself against any foreign intervention, particularly by the
United States. Third, it needed to reclaim the lands lost to the United States
in the 1840s. Finally, it needed to supplant the United States as the domi­
nant power in North America.
Mexico never really got past the ﬁrst rung in its geopolitical goals. It has,
since the Mexican-American War, simply been trying to maintain internal
cohesion. Mexico lost its balance after its defeat by the United States and
never regained it. In part this was due to American policies that helped
destabilize it, but mostly Mexico was weakened by living next to a dynamic
giant. The force ﬁeld created by the United States always shaped Mexican
realities more than Mexico City did.
In the twenty-ﬁrst century, the destabilizing proximity of the United
States will instead become a stabilizing force. Mexico will still be affected by
the United States, but the relationship will be managed to increase Mexican
power. By the middle of the twenty-ﬁrst century, as Mexican economic power


rises, there will inevitably be a rise in Mexican nationalism, which, given geo­
political reality, will manifest itself not only in pride but in anti-Americanism.
Given U.S. programs designed to entice Mexicans to immigrate to the
United States at a time when the Mexican birthrate is falling, the United
States will be blamed for pursuing policies designed to harm Mexican eco­
nomic interests.
U.S.–Mexican tensions are permanent. The difference in the 2040s will
be a rise in Mexican power and therefore a greater conﬁdence and assertive­
ness on its part. The relative power of the two countries, however, will re­
main staggeringly in favor of the United States—just not as staggeringly as
ﬁfty years earlier. But even that will change between 2040 and 2070. Mex­
ico will cease being a national basket case and become a major regional
power. For its part, the United States will not notice. During the mid-century
war, Washington will think of Mexico only as a potential ally of the Coali­
tion. Having maneuvered Mexico out of any such considerations, Washing­
ton will lose interest. In the euphoria and economic expansion following the
war, the United States will maintain its traditional indifference to Mexican
concerns.
Once the United States realizes that Mexico has become a threat, it will
at once be extremely alarmed at what is happening in Mexico and among
Mexicans, and calmly certain that it can impose any solution it wants on the
situation. U.S.–Mexican tensions, always present under the surface, will fes­
ter as Mexico becomes stronger. The United States will view the strengthen­
ing of the Mexican economy as a benign stabilizing force for both Mexico
and its relations with the United States, and will therefore further support
the rapid rate of Mexican economic development. The American view of
Mexico as ultimately a client state will remain unchanged.
By 2080, the United States will still be the most overwhelmingly power­
ful nation-state in North America. But as Americans will learn repeatedly,
enormously powerful does not mean omnipotent, and behaving as if it does
can readily sap a nation’s power. By 2080, the Americans will again face a
challenge—but this one will be much more complex and subtle than what
they faced in the war of the 2050s.
The confrontation will not be planned, since the United States will not
have ambitions in Mexico and the Mexicans will be under no illusion about


their power relative to the United States. It will be a confrontation that
grows organically out of the geopolitical reality of the two countries. But
unlike most such regional conﬂicts, this will involve a confrontation be­
tween the world hegemon and an upstart neighbor, and the prize will be the
center of gravity of the international system, North America. Three factors
will drive the confrontation:
1. Mexico will emerge as a major global economic power. Ranked four­
teenth or ﬁfteenth early in the century, it will be ﬁrmly within the top
ten by 2080. With a population of 100 million, it will be a power to
be reckoned with anywhere in the world—except on the southern
border of the United States.
2. The United States will face a cyclical crisis in the 2070s, culminating
in the 2080 elections. New technology coupled with the rationaliza­
tion of the demographic curve will reduce the need for new immi­
grants. Indeed, pressure will grow to return temporary immigrants,
even those here for ﬁfty years with children and grandchildren born
here, to Mexico. Many of these will still be menial laborers. The
United States will begin forcing long-term residents back across the
border, loading down the Mexican economy with the least desirable
workers, workers who had been American residents for many decades.
3. In spite of this, the massive shift in the population of the borderlands
cannot be reversed. The basic predominance of Mexicans—both U.S.
citizens and not—will be permanent. The parts of Mexico occupied
by the United States in the 1840s will again become Mexican cultur­
ally, socially, and in many senses, politically. The policy of repatriating
temporary workers will appear to be a legal process from the Ameri­
can point of view, but will look like ethnic cleansing to the Mexicans.
In the past, Mexico would have been fairly passive in the face of these
shifts in American policy. However, as immigration becomes the dominant
issue in the United States during the 2070s and the pivot around which the
2080 elections will turn, Mexico will begin to behave in unprecedented
ways. The crisis in the United States and the maturation of the Mexican
economy and society will coincide, creating unique tensions. A major social


and economic shift in the United States (that will disproportionately hurt
Mexicans living here) and a dramatic redeﬁnition of the population of the
American Southwest will combine to create a crisis that will not be easily
solved by American technology and power.
The crisis will begin as an internal American matter. The United States
is a democratic society, and in large regions of the country, the Englishspeaking culture will no longer be dominant. The United States will have
become a bicultural country, like Canada or Belgium. The second culture
will not be formally recognized, but it will be real and it will be not merely
a cultural phenomenon but a clearly deﬁned geographic reality.
Biculturalism tends to become a problem when it is simply ignored—
when the dominant culture rejects the idea of formalizing it and instead at­
tempts to maintain the status quo. It particularly becomes a problem when
the dominant culture begins to take steps that appear designed to destroy
the minority culture. And if this minority culture is essentially an extension
of a neighboring country that sees its citizens as inhabiting territory stolen
from it, the situation can become explosive.
By the 2070s, Mexicans and those of Mexican origin will constitute the
dominant population along a line running at least two hundred miles from
the U.S.–Mexican border through California, Arizona, New Mexico, and
Texas and throughout vast areas of the Mexican Cession. The region will not
behave as other immigrant-heavy areas have. Rather, as happens in border­
lands, it will be culturally—and in many ways economically—a northward
extension of Mexico. In every sense but legally, the border will have moved
north.
These immigrants won’t be disenfranchised peons. The economic expan­
sion in Mexico, coupled with the surging American economy in the 2050s
and 2060s, will make these settlers relatively well-to-do. In fact, they will be
the facilitators of U.S.–Mexican trade, one of the most lucrative activities
in the world in the late twenty-ﬁrst century. This group will dominate not
only local politics but the politics of two whole states—Arizona and New
Mexico—and much of the politics of California and Texas. Only the sheer
size of the latter two will prevent immigrants from controlling them out­
right as well. A subnational bloc, on the order of Quebec in Canada, will be
in place in the United States.


At a certain critical mass, a geographically contiguous group becomes
conscious of itself as a distinct entity within a country. More exactly, it be­
gins to see the region it dominates as distinct, and begins to ask for a range
of special concessions based on its status. When it has a natural afﬁnity to a
neighboring country, a portion of the group will see itself as native to that
country but living under foreign domination. And across the border, in the
neighboring country, an annexation movement can arise.
This issue will divide the Mexican-American bloc. Some inhabitants will
see themselves as primarily Americans. Others will accept that Americanism
but see themselves as having a unique relationship to America and ask for le­
gal recognition of that status. A third group, the smallest, will be secession­
ist. There will be an equal division within Mexico. One thing to remember
is that illegal immigration will have generally disappeared after 2030, when
migration to the United States will be encouraged as American national pol­
icy. Some on each side of the border will see the problem as solely American
and will want to have nothing to do with it lest it interfere with peaceful
economic relations with Mexico. Others, though, will see the demographic
problems in the United States as a means for redeﬁning Mexico’s relations
with the United States. In exchange for a hands-off policy regarding migra­
tion, some will want the United States to make concessions to Mexico on
other issues. And a minority will advocate annexation. A complex political
battle will develop between Washington and Mexico City, each manipulat­
ing the situation on the other side of the border.
Large numbers of senators and representatives of Mexican origin will be
elected to serve in Washington. Many will not see themselves as legislators
who just happen to be of Mexican origin, representing their states. Rather,
they will see themselves as representatives of the Mexican community living
in the United States. As with the Parti Québécois in Canada, their regional
representation will also be seen as the representation of a distinct nation liv­
ing in the United States. The regional political process will be beginning to
reﬂect this new reality. A Partido Mexicano will come into existence and
send representatives to Washington as a separate bloc.
This state of affairs will help drive the reversal on immigration policy
that is going to deﬁne the 2070s and the election of 2080. Beyond the de­
mographic need to redeﬁne the immigration policies of the 2030s, the very


process of redeﬁning them will radicalize the Southwest. That radicalization
will, in turn, frighten the rest of the American public. Anti-Mexican feeling
will be growing. A primal fear that the outcome of the Texan Revolution
and the Mexican-American War, in place for more than two centuries, could
be reversed will whip up hostility toward Mexican Americans and Mexico in
the United States.
This fear will not be irrational. The American Southwest is occupied ter­
ritory into which American settlers streamed from the mid-1800s to the
early twenty-ﬁrst century. Starting in the early twenty-ﬁrst century, Mexican
settlers will be streaming back in, joining others who never left. Population
movement will thus reverse the social reality that was imposed militarily in
the nineteenth century. Americans imposed a politico-military reality and
then created a demographic reality to match it. Mexicans, more through
American policy than anything else, will create a new demographic reality,
and will be discussing several options: whether to attempt to reverse the
politico-military reality created by the Americans; create a new, unique real­
ity; or just accept the existing realities. Americans will be discussing whether
to reverse the demographic shift and realign population with borders.
However, any discussion will take place in a context of immobility of
borders. The borders are not going to change simply because Mexicans on
both sides are discussing it, nor will the demographic reality change because
Americans want it to. The border will have an overwhelming political and
military force enforcing it—the United States Army. The Mexican popula­
tion in the Mexican Cession will be deeply embedded in the economic life
of the United States. Removing the Mexicans would create massive instability.
There will be powerful forces maintaining the status quo and powerful
forces resisting it.
A major backlash in the rest of the United States will lock down the bor­
der and exacerbate tensions. As Mexican rhetoric becomes more heated, so
will American. Splits in the Mexican American community will become less
and less visible in the rest of the country, and the most radical ﬁgures will
dominate the American perception of the community and of Mexico. More
radical ﬁgures in Washington will dominate the Mexican perception of the
United States. Attempts will be made at moderate compromise, many of
them quite reasonable and well intentioned, but all will be seen as a be­trayal 

of the fundamental interests of one side or the other and sometimes
both. Fundamental geopolitical disputes are rarely amenable to reasonable
compromise—simply consider the Arab–Israeli conﬂict.
While all of this is going on, Mexican citizens who are living in the
United States on temporary visas granted decades before will be forced to
return to Mexico, regardless of how long they have been in America. The
United States will have placed increased controls on the Mexican border,
not to keep out immigrants—no one at this point will be clamoring to get
in—but to drive a wedge between Mexico and ethnic Mexicans in the United
States. It will be portrayed as a security measure, but what it will really be is
an effort to reinforce the reality created in 1848. These and similar actions
will be merely irritating to most Mexicans on either side of the border, but
will provide fuel for the radicals and pose a threat to the vital trade between
the two countries.
Within Mexico political pressure will grow for the Mexican government
to assert itself. One faction will emerge that will want to annex the occupied
region, reversing the American conquest of 1848. This won’t be a marginal
group but a substantial, if not yet dominant, faction. Others will be de­
manding that the United States retain control of the regions within the
Mexican Cession and protect the rights of its residents—especially by halt­
ing the expulsion of Mexicans regardless of visa status. The group that sim­
ply wants to maintain the status quo, driven by businesses that want stability,
not conﬂict, will become weaker and weaker. Calls for annexation will com­
pete with demands for regional autonomy.
Anti-Mexican elements in the United States will use the radicalization
of Mexican politics to argue that Mexico intends to interfere with internal
American affairs, and even to invade the Southwest—something the most
radical Mexicans will, in fact, be calling for. This, in turn, will justify the
American extremists’ demand for even more draconian measures, includ­
ing the deportation of all ethnic Mexicans, regardless of citizenship status,
and the invasion of Mexico if the Mexican government resists. The rhetoric
on the fringes will feed on itself, driving the process.
Let’s play this forward, imagining what the conﬂict might look like,
bearing in mind that we can’t possibly do more than imagine the details.
In the 2080s, anti-American demonstrations will begin taking place


in Mexico City—and in Los Angeles, San Diego, Houston, San Antonio,
Phoenix, and other cities in the borderland that will have become predomi­
nantly Mexican. The dominant theme will be ethnic Mexicans’ rights as
American citizens. But some will demonstrate for annexation by Mexico. A
small radical faction of Mexicans in the United States will begin carrying
out acts of sabotage and minor terrorism against federal government facili­
ties in the region. While not supported by either the Mexican government,
the state governments dominated by Mexicans, or most Mexicans on either
side of the border, the terrorist acts will be seen as the ﬁrst steps in a planned
insurrection and secession by the region. The American president, under in­
tense pressure to bring the situation under control, will move to federalize
the National Guard in these states to protect federal property.
In New Mexico and Arizona, the governors will argue that the National
Guard reports to them—and will refuse the order to nationalize. Instead
they will order the Guard to protect federal facilities but will insist that the
forces remain under state control. The Guard units, predominantly Mexi­
can in these states, will obey the governor. Some in Congress will argue that
a state of insurrection be declared. The president will resist but will instead
ask Congress to permit the mobilization of U.S. troops in these states, lead­
ing to a direct confrontation between National Guard and U.S. Army units.
As the situation gets out of hand, the problem will be compounded
when the Mexican president, unable to resist pressure to do something deci­
sive, mobilizes the Mexican army and sends it north to the border. His jus­
tiﬁcation will be that the U.S. Army has mobilized along the Mexican
frontier and he wants to prevent any incursions and to coordinate with
Washington. In reality, there will be a deeper reason. The Mexican president
will be afraid that the U.S. Army will uproot Mexicans in this area—citi­
zens, green card holders, and visa holders alike—and force them back over
the Mexican border. Mexico will not want a surge of refugees. Moreover, the
Mexican president will not want to see Mexicans in the United States
stripped of their valuable property.
When the Mexican army mobilizes, the U.S. military will be placed on
full alert. The U.S. military is not very good at policing hostile populations,
particularly not those that include U.S. citizens. On the other hand, it is
very good at attacking and destroying enemy armies. U.S. space forces and


ground troops will therefore begin focusing on the possibility of confronta­
tion with the massed forces along the Mexican border.
A meeting between the two presidents will defuse the situation, as it will
be clear that no one really wants a war. In fact, no one in power will have
wanted the crisis in the Southwest. But the problem is this: during these ne­
gotiations, however much both sides want a return to the status quo ante,
the Mexican president will, in effect, be negotiating on behalf of American
citizens of Mexican origin who are living in the United States. To the extent
the crisis is defused, the status of Mexicans in the Mexican Cession is being
discussed. From the moment the discussion turns to defusing the crisis, the
question of who speaks for the Mexicans in the Mexican Cession will be de­
cided: it is the president of Mexico.
While the crisis of the 2080s will subside, the underlying issue will not.
The borderland will be in play, and while the Mexicans will not have the
power to impose a military solution, the American government will not
have the ability to impose a social and political solution. The insertion of
American troops into the region, patrolling it as if it were a foreign country,
will have changed the status of the region in the mind of the public. Mexi­
can negotiations on behalf of the people of the region will have extended
that change. A radical secessionist movement in the region, heavily funded
by Mexican nationalists, will continually irritate the situation, especially
when splinter terrorist groups begin carrying out occasional bombings and
kidnappings—not only within the Mexican Cession but throughout the
United States. The question of the Mexican conquest will be opened up yet
again. The region will still be part of the United States, but its loyalty will be
loudly questioned by many.
Expelling tens of millions of people will not be an option, as it would be
logistically impossible and would have devastating consequences for the
United States. At the same time, however, the idea that in the region those
who are of Mexican origin are simply citizens of the United States will break
down. Many will no longer see themselves that way, and neither will the rest
of the United States. The political situation will become increasingly radi­
calized.
By about 2090, radicals in Mexico will have created a new crisis. In a
change to the Mexican constitution, Mexicans (deﬁned by parentage and


culture) who live outside of Mexico, regardless of citizenship, will be now
permitted to vote in Mexican elections. More important, Mexican congres­
sional districts will be established outside of Mexico, so that Mexicans living
in Argentina, for example, can vote for a representative in the Mexican con­
gress, representing Mexicans living in Argentina.
Since so many voters will qualify in the United States—the whole point
of the change after all—the Mexican Cession will be divided into Mexican
congressional districts, so that there might be twenty congressmen from Los
Angeles and ﬁve from San Antonio elected to Congress in Mexico City.
Since the Mexican communities will pay for the elections out of private
funds, it is unclear whether this will violate any American law. Certainly,
while there will be rage in the rest of the country, the federal government
will be afraid to interfere. So the election to Congress will go forward in
2090—with Mexicans in the United States voting for both the Congress in
Washington and the Congress in Mexico City. In a few cases, the same per­
son will be elected to both congresses. It will be a clever move, putting the
United States on the defensive, with no equivalent countermeasure avail­
able.
By the 2090s, the United States will be facing a difﬁcult internal situa­
tion, as well as a confrontation with a Mexico that will be arming itself furi­
ously, afraid that the United States will try to solve the problem by taking
military measures against it. The Americans will have a tremendous advan­
tage in space, but the Mexicans will have an advantage on the ground. The
United States Army won’t be particularly large, and controlling a city like
Los Angeles still will require the basic grunt infantryman.
Groups of Mexican paramilitaries will spring up throughout the region
in response to the U.S. occupation, and will remain in place after the troops
withdraw. With the border heavily militarized on both sides, the possibility
of lines of supply being cut by these paramilitaries, isolating U.S. forces
along the border, won’t be a trivial matter. The United States will be able to
destroy the Mexican army, but that doesn’t mean it could pacify its own
Southwest, or Mexico for that matter. And at the same time, Mexico will
begin to launch its own satellites and build its own unmanned aircraft.
As for the international reaction to this situation, the world will stand
aside and watch. The Mexicans will hope for foreign support, and the


Brazilians, who will have become a substantial power in their own right, will
make some gestures of solidarity with Mexico. But, while the rest of the
world will secretly hope that Mexico will bloody its neighbor’s nose, no one
is going to get involved in a matter so fundamentally critical to the United
States. Mexico will be alone. Its strategic solution will be to pose a problem
on the American border while other powers challenge the United States
elsewhere. The Poles will have developed serious grievances against the
Americans, while emerging powers like Brazil will be stiﬂed by the limits
placed on them by the United States in space.
The Mexicans won’t be able to ﬁght the United States until they can
reach military parity. Mexico will need a coalition—and building a coalition
will take time. But Mexico will have one enormous advantage: the United
States will be facing internal unrest, which, while not rising to the level of
insurrection, will certainly focus U.S. energies and limit U.S. options. In­
vading and defeating Mexico would not solve this problem. It might actu­
ally exacerbate it. America’s inability to solve this problem will be Mexico’s
major advantage, and the one that will buy it time.
The U.S. border with Mexico will now run through Mexico itself; its
real, social border will be hundreds of miles north of the legal border. In­
deed, even if the United States could defeat Mexico in war, it would not
solve the basic dilemma. The situation will settle into a giant stalemate.
Underneath all of this will be the question that the United States has had
to address almost since its founding: what should be the capital of North
America—Washington or Mexico City? It had appeared likely at ﬁrst that it
would be the latter. Then centuries later it appeared obvious that it would
be the former. The question will be on the table once again. It can be post­
poned, but it can’t be avoided.
It is the same question that faced Spain and France in the seventeenth
century. Spain had reigned supreme for a hundred years, dominating At­
lantic Europe and the world until a new power challenged it. Would Spain
or France be supreme? Five hundred years later, at the end of the twentyﬁrst century, the United States will have dominated for a hundred years.
Now Mexico will be rising. Who will be supreme? The United States will
rule the skies and the seas, but the challenge from Mexico will be on the
ground, and—a challenge only Mexico will be positioned to make—inside


the borders of the United States. It is the kind of challenge that U.S. mili­
tary power will be least suited to ﬁght. Therefore, as the twenty-ﬁrst century
draws to a close, the question will be: North America is the center of gravity
of the international system, but who will control North America?
That is a question that will have to wait until the twenty-second century.



EPILOGUE


It might seem far-fetched to speculate that a rising Mexico will ultimately
challenge American power, but I suspect that the world we are living in
today would have seemed far-fetched to someone living at the beginning
of the twentieth century. As I said in the introduction to this book, when we
try to predict the future, common sense almost always betrays us—just look
at the startling changes that took place throughout the twentieth century
and try to imagine using common sense to anticipate those things. The
most practical way to imagine the future is to question the expected.
There are people being born today who will live in the twenty-second
century. When I was growing up in the 1950s, the twenty-ﬁrst century was
an idea associated with science ﬁction, not a reality in which I would live.
Practical people focus on the next moment and leave the centuries to
dreamers. But the truth is that the twenty-ﬁrst century has turned out to be
a very practical concern to me. I will spend a good deal of my life in it. And
on the way here, history—its wars, its technological changes, its social trans­
formations—has reshaped my life in startling ways. I did not die in a nu­
clear war with the Soviets, though I did witness many wars, most of them
unforeseen. The Jetsons did not deﬁne life in 1999, but I write these words


on a computer that I can hold in one hand and that can access information
on a global basis in seconds—and without wires connecting it to anything.
The United Nations did not solve the problems of mankind, yet the status
of blacks and women underwent breathtaking changes. What I expected
and what happened were two very different things.
In looking back on the twentieth century, there were things we could be
certain of, things that were likely, and things that were unknown. We could
be certain that nation-states would continue to be the way in which humans
organized the world. We could know that wars would become more deadly.
Alfred Nobel knew that his invention would turn warfare into endless hor­
ror, and it did. We could see the revolutions in communications and
travel—radio, automobiles, airplanes already existed. It took only imagina­
tion, and a will to believe, to see what they would mean to the world. It
took the suspension of common sense.
Knowing that wars were inevitable and that they would grow worse, it
did not take a great leap to imagine who would ﬁght whom. The newly
united European powers—Germany and Italy—and newly industrialized
Japan would try to redeﬁne the international system, controlled by the At­
lantic European powers, Britain and France chief among them. And as these
wars ripped apart Europe and Asia, it was not hard to forecast—indeed
many did forecast—that Russia and America would emerge as the great
global powers. What followed was murkier, but not beyond imagination.
Early in the century H. G. Wells, the science ﬁction writer, described the
weapons that would ﬁght wars in the coming generations. All that was re­
quired was that he look at what was already being imagined and what could
already be built, and tie it to the warfare of the future. But it was not only
the technology that could be imagined. War gamers at the U.S. Naval War
College and on the Japanese defense staff both could describe the outlines of
a U.S.–Japanese war. The German general staff, before the two world wars,
laid out the likely course of the wars and the risks. Winston Churchill could
see the consequences of the war, both the loss of Britain’s empire and the fu­
ture cold war. No one could imagine the precise details, but the general out­
line of the twentieth century could be sensed.
That is what I have tried to do in this book—to sense the twenty-ﬁrst


century with geopolitics as my primary guide. I began with the permanent:
the persistence of the human condition, suspended between heaven and
hell. I then looked for the long-term trend, which I found in the decline and
fall of Europe as the centerpiece of global civilization and its replacement by
North America and the dominant North American power, the United
States. With that profound shift of the international system, it was easy to
discern both the character of the United States—headstrong, immature,
and brilliant—and the world’s response to it: fear, envy, and resistance.
I then focused on two issues. First, who would resist; second, how the
United States would respond to their resistance. The resistance would come
in waves, continuing the short, shifting eras of the twentieth century. First
there is Islam, then Russia, and then a coalition of new powers (Turkey,
Poland, and Japan), and ﬁnally Mexico. To understand American responses,
I looked at what seemed to me a ﬁfty-year cycle in American society over the
past several hundred years and tried to imagine what 2030 and 2080 would
look like. That allowed me to think of the dramatic social change that is al­
ready under way—the end of the population explosion—and consider what
it would mean for the future. I could also think about how technologies that
already exist will respond to social crises, charting a path between robots
and space-based solar power.
The closer one gets to details, the more likely one is to be wrong. Obvi­
ously I know that. But my mission, as I see it, is to provide you with a sense
of what the twenty-ﬁrst century will look and feel like. I will be wrong
about many details. Indeed, I may be wrong about which countries will be
great powers and how they will resist the United States. But what I am con­
ﬁdent about is that the position of the United States in the international sys­
tem will be the key issue of the twenty-ﬁrst century and that other countries
will be grappling with its rise. In the end, if there is a single point I have to
make in this book, it is that the United States—far from being on the verge
of decline—has actually just begun its ascent.
This book is emphatically not meant to be a celebration of the United
States. I am a partisan of the American regime, but it is not the Constitu­
tion or the Federalist Papers that gave the United States its power. It was
Jackson’s stand at New Orleans, the defeat of Santa Anna at San Jacinto, the


annexation of Hawaii, and the surrender of British naval bases in the West­
ern Hemisphere to the United States in 1940—along with the unique geo­
graphical traits I have spent much time analyzing in these pages.
There is one point I have not touched upon. Any reader will have no­
ticed that I do not deal with the question of global warming in this book.
This should be a glaring omission. I do believe the environment is warming,
and since we have been told by scientists that the debate is over, I easily con­
cede that global warming was caused by human beings. As Karl Marx, of all
people, put it: “Mankind does not pose problems for itself for which it does
not already have a solution.” I don’t know if this is universally true, but it
does seem to be true in this case.
Two forces are emerging that will moot global warming. First, the end of
the population explosion will, over the decades, reduce the increases in de­
mand for just about everything. Second, the increase in the cost of both
ﬁnding and using hydrocarbons will increase the hunger for alternatives.
The obvious alternative is solar energy, but it is clear to me that earth-based
solar collection has too many hurdles to overcome, most of which are not
present in space-based solar energy generation. By the second half of the
twenty-ﬁrst century, we will be seeing demographic and technological trans­
formations that, together, will deal with the issue. In other words, popula­
tion decline and the domination of space for global power will combine to
solve the problem. The solution is already imaginable, and it will be the un­
intended consequence of other processes.
The unintended consequence is what this book is all about. If human
beings can simply decide on what they want to do and then do it, then fore­
casting is impossible. Free will is beyond forecasting. But what is most in­
teresting about humans is how unfree they are. It is possible for people
today to have ten children, but hardly anyone does. We are deeply con­
strained in what we do by the time and place in which we live. And those
actions we do take are ﬁlled with consequences we didn’t intend. When
NASA engineers used a microchip to build an onboard computer on a
spacecraft, they did not intend to create the iPod.
The core of the method I have used in this book has been to look at the
constraints placed on individuals and nations, to see how they are generally
forced to behave because of these constraints, and then to try to understand


the unintended consequences those actions will have. There are endless un­
knowns, and no forecast of a century can be either complete or utterly cor­
rect. But if I have provided here an understanding of some of the most
important constraints, the likely responses to those constraints, and the out­
come of those actions on the broadest level, I will be content.
As for me, it is extraordinarily odd to write a book whose general truth
or falsehood I will never be in a position to know. I therefore write this book
for my children, but even more for my grandchildren, who will be in a po­
sition to know. If this book can guide them in any way, I will have been of
service.

