Fuzzy Sapiens
H. Beam Piper

VICTOR GREGO FINISHED the chilled fruit juice and pushed the glass
aside, then lit a cigarette and poured hot coffee into the half-filled cup
that had been cooling. This was going to be another Nifflheim of a day,
and the night’s sleep had barely rested him from the last one and the
ones before that. He sipped the coffee, and began to feel himself
rejoining the human race.
Staff conferences, all day, of course, with everybody bickering and
recriminating. He hoped, not too optimistically, that this would be the
end of it. By this evening all the division chiefs ought to know what had
to be done. If only they wouldn’t come running back to him for decisions
they ought to make themselves, or bother him with a lot of nit-picking
details. Great God, wasn’t a staff supposed to handle staff work?
The trouble was that for the last fifteen years, twelve at least, all the
decisions had been made in advance, and the staff work had all been
routine, but that had been when Zarathustra had been a Class-III planet
and the Company had owned it outright. In the Chartered Zarathustra
Company, emergencies had simply not been permitted to arise. Not,


that was, until old Jack Holloway had met a small person whom he had
named Little Fuzzy.
Then everybody had lost their heads. He’d lost his own a few times,
and done some things he now wished he hadn’t done. Most of his
subordinates hadn’t recovered theirs, yet, and the Charterless Zarathustra Company was operating, if that was the word for it, in a
state of total and permanent emergency.
The cup was half empty, again; he filled it to the top and lit a fresh
cigarette from the old one before crushing it out. Might as well get it
started. He reached to the switch and flicked on the communication
screen across the breakfast table.
In a moment, Myra Fallada appeared in it. She had elaborately
curled white hair, faintly yellowish, a round face, protuberant blue eyes,
and a lower lip of the sort associated with the ancient Hapsburg family.
She had been his secretary ever since he had come to Zarathustra, and
she thought that what had happened a week ago in Judge Pendarvis’s
court had been the end of the world.
“Good morning, Mr. Grego.” She was eyeing his dressing gown and
counting the cigarette butts in the ashtray, trying to estimate how soon


he’d be down at his desk. “An awful lot of business has come in this
morning.”
“Good morning, Myra. What kind of business?”
“Well, things are getting much worse in the cattle country. The
veldbeest herders are all quitting their jobs; just flying off and leaving
the herds... ”
“Are they flying off in company aircars? If they are, have Harry
Steefer put out wants for them on stolen-vehicle charges.”
“And the City of Malverton; she’s spacing out from Darius today.”
She went on to tell him about that.
“I know. That was all decided yesterday. Just tell them to carry on
with it. Now, is there anything I really have to attend to personally?
If there is, bundle it up and send it to the staff conference room; I’ll
handle it there with the people concerned. Rubber-stamp the rest
and send it back where it belongs, which is not on my desk. I won’t
be in; I’m going straight to the conference room. That will be in half
an hour. Tell the houseboy he can come in to clean up then, and tell
the chef I won’t be eating here at all. I’ll have lunch off a tray
somewhere, and dinner with Mr. Coombes in the Executive Room.”


Then he waited, mentally counting to a hundred. As he had
expected, before he reached fifty Myra was getting into a flutter.
“Mr. Grego, I almost forgot!” She usually did. “Mr. Evins wants inside
the gem-reserve vault; he’s down there now.”
“Yes, I told him to make inventory and appraisal today. I’d forgotten
about that myself. Well, we can’t keep him waiting. I’ll go down
directly.”
He blanked the screen, gulped what was left of the coffee and rose,
leaving the kitchenette-breakfast room and crossing the short hall to his
bedroom, taking off his dressing gown as he went. That he should not
have forgotten: the problem represented by the contents of the gem
reserve vault was of greater importance, though of less immediacy, than
what was going on in the cattle country.
Up to a week ago, when Chief Justice Pendarvis had smashed the
company’s charter with a few taps of his gavel, sunstones had been a
company monopoly. It had been illegal for anybody but the company to
buy sunstones, or for anybody to sell one except to a company gem
buyer, but that had been company law, and the Pendarvis decisions had
wiped out the company’s law-making powers. Sunstone deposits were
always too scattered for profitable large-scale mining. They were found


by free-lance prospectors, who sold them to the company at the
company’s prices. Jack Holloway, who had started the whole trouble,
had been one of the most successful of prospectors.
Now sunstones were in the open competitive market on Zarathustra,
and something would have to be done about establishing a new gembuying policy. Before he could do that, he wanted to know just how
many of them the company had in reserve.
So he had to go down and open the vault, before Conrad Evins, the
chief gem buyer, could get in to find out. He knew the combination.
So—in case anything happened to him—did Leslie Coombes, the head of
the legal division, and, against the possibility that both he and Coombes
were killed or incapacitated, there was a copy of it neatly typed on a slip
of paper in a special security box at the Bank of Mallorysport, which
could only be gotten out by the Colonial Marshal with a court order. It
was a bother, but too many people couldn’t be trusted with that
combination.
The gem rooms were on the fifteenth level down; they were
surrounded by the company police headquarters, and there was only
one way in, through a door barred by a heavy steel portcullis. The guard
who controlled this sat in a small cubicle fronted by two inches of armor


glass; several other guards, with submachine guns, sat or stood behind
a low counter in front of it. Harry Steefer, the chief of company police,
was there, and so was Conrad Evins, the gem buyer, a small man with
graying hair and a bulging brow and narrow chin. With them were two
gray-smocked assistants.
“Sorry to keep you gentlemen waiting,” he greeted them. “Ready,
Mr. Evins?”
Evins was. Steefer nodded to the men inside the armor-glass
cubicle; the portcullis rose silently. They entered a bare hallway, covered
by viewscreen pickups at either end and with sleep-gas release nozzles
on the ceiling. The door at the other end opened, and in the small
anteroom beyond they all showed their identity cards to a guard: Evins
and his two assistants, the sergeant and the two guards accompanying
them, Grego, even Chief Steefer. The guard spoke into a phone;
somebody completely out of sight and reach pressed a button or flipped
a switch and the door beyond opened. Grego went through alone, and
down a short flight of steps to another door, brightly iridescent with a
plating of collapsium, like a spaceship’s hull or a nuclear reactor.


There was a keyboard, like the keyboard of a linotype machine. He
went to it, punching out the letters of a short sentence, then waited ten
seconds. The huge door receded slowly, then slid aside.
“All right, gentlemen,” he called out. “The vault’s open.”
Then he walked through, into a circular room beyond. In the middle
of it was a round table, its top covered with black velvet, with a wide
circular light-shade above it. The wall was lined by a steel cabinet with
many shallow drawers. The Chief, a sergeant with a submachine gun,
Evins, and his two assistants followed him in. He lit a cigarette, watching
the smoke draw up around the light-shade and vanish out the ventilator
above. Evins’s two assistants began getting out paraphernalia and
putting things on the table; the gem buyer felt the black velvet and
nodded. Grego put his hand on it, too. It was warm, almost hot.
One of the assistants brought a drawer from the cabinet and
emptied it on the table—several hundred smooth, translucent pebbles.
For a moment they looked like so much gravel. Then, slowly, they began
to glow, until they were blazing like burning coals.
Some fifty million years ago, when Zarathustra had been almost
completely covered by seas, there had been a marine life-form, not
unlike a big jellyfish, and for a million or so years the seas had


abounded with them, and as they died they had sunk into the ooze and
been covered by sand. Ages of pressure had reduced them to hard little
beans of stone, and the ooze to gray flint. Most of them were just
pebbles, but by some ancient biochemical quirk, a few were intensely
thermofluorescent. Worn as gems, they would glow from the body heat
of the wearer, as they were glowing now on the electrically heated
tabletop. They were found nowhere in the galaxy but on Zarathustra,
and even a modest one was worth a small fortune.
“Just for a quick estimate, in round figures, how much money have
we in this room?” he asked Evins.
Evins looked pained. He had the sort of mind which detested
expressions like “quick estimate,” and “round figures.”
“Well, of course, the Terra market quotation, as of six months ago,
was eleven hundred and twenty-five sols a carat, but that’s just the
average price. There are premium-value stones... ”
He saw one of those, and picked it up; an almost perfect sphere, an
inch in diameter, deep blood-red. It lay burning in his palm; it was
beautiful. He wished he owned it himself, but none of this belonged to
him. It belonged to an abstraction called the Chartered—no, Charterless
Zarathustra Company, which represented thousands of stockholders,


including a number of other abstractions called Terra-Baldur-Marduk
Spacelines, and Interstellar Explorations, Ltd., and the Banking Cartel.
He wondered how Conrad Evins felt, working with these beautiful things,
knowing how much each of them was worth, and not owning any of
them.
“But I can tell you how little they are worth,” Evins was saying, at
the end of a lecture on the Terra gem market. “The stones in this vault
are worth not one millisol less than one hundred million sols.”
That sounded like a lot of money, if you said it quickly and didn’t
think. The Chartered, even the Charterless, Zarathustra Company was a
lot of company, too, and all its operations were fantastically expensive.
That wouldn’t be six months’ gross business for the company. They
couldn’t let the sunstone business live on its reserve.
“This is new, isn’t it?” he asked, laying the red globe of light back on
the heated tabletop.
“Yes, Mr. Grego. We bought that less than two months ago. Shortly
before the Trial.” He captitalized the word; the day Pendarvis beat the
company down with his gavel would be First Day, Year Zero, on
Zarathustra from now on. “It was bought,” he added, “from Jack
Holloway.”



CHAPTER TWO
SNAPPING OFF THE shiny new stenomemophone, Jack Holloway relit his
pipe and pushed back his chair, looking around what had been the living
room of his camp before it had become the office of the Commissioner
of Native Affairs for the Class-IV Colonial Planet of Zarathustra. It had
been a pleasant room, a place where a man could spread out by
himself, or entertain the infrequent visitors who came this far into the
wilderness. The hardwood floor was scattered with rugs made from the
skins of animals he had shot; the deep armchairs and the couch were
covered with smaller pelts. Like the big table at which he worked, he
had built them himself. There was a reading screen, a metal-cased
library of microbooks; the gunrack reflected soft gleams from polished
stocks and barrels. And now look at the damn place!
Two extra viewscreens, another communication screen, a vocowriter,
a teleprint machine, all jammed together. An improvised table on
trestles at right angles to the one at which he sat, its top littered with
plans and blueprints and things; mostly things. And this red-upholstered
swivel chair; he hated that worst of all. Forty years ago, he’d left Terra
to get the seat of his pants off the seat of a chair like that, and here he


was in the evening of life—well, late afternoon, call it around second
cocktail time—trapped in one.
It wasn’t just this room, either. Through the open door he could hear
what was happening outside. The thud of axes, and the howl of chainsaws; he was going to miss all those big feathered trees from around
the house. The machine-gun banging of power-hammers, the clanking
and grunting of bulldozers. A sudden warning cry, followed by a falling
crash and a multivoiced burst of blasphemy. He hoped none of the
Fuzzies had been close enough to whatever had happened to get hurt.
Something tugged gently at his trouser-leg, and a small voice said,
“Yeek?” His hands went to his throat, snapping on the ultrasonic
hearing-aid and inserting the earplug. Immediately, he began to hear a
number of small sounds that had been previously inaudible, and the
voice was saying, “Pappy Jack?”
He looked down at the Zarathustran native whose affairs he had been
commissioned to administer. He was an erect biped, two feet tall, with a
wide-eyed humanoid face, his body covered with soft golden fur. He
wore a green canvas pouch lettered TFMC, and a two-inch silver disc on
a chain about his neck, and nothing else. The disc was lettered LITTLE
FUZZY, and Jack Holloway, Cold Creek Valley, Beta Continent, and the


numeral 1. He was the first Zarathustra aborigine he or any other Terran
human had ever seen.
He reached down and stroked his small friend’s head.
“Hello, Little Fuzzy. You want to visit with Pappy Jack for a while?”
Little Fuzzy pointed to the open door. Five other Fuzzies were
peeping bashfully into the room, making comments among themselves.
“Fuzzee no shu do-bizzo do-mitto zat-hakko,” Little Fuzzy informed
him. “Heeva so si domitto.”
Some Fuzzies who hadn’t been here before had just come; they
wanted to stay. At least, that was what he thought Little Fuzzy was
saying; it had only been ten days since he had known that Fuzzies could
talk at all. He pressed a button to start the audiovisual recorder; it was
adjusted to transform their ultrasonic voices to audible frequencies.
“Make talk.” He picked his way through his hundred-word Fuzzy
vocabulary. “Pappy Jack friend. Not hurt, be good to them. Give good
things.”
“Josso shoddabag?” Little Fuzzy asked. “Josso shoppo-diggo? Josso
t’heet? Estee-fee?”
“Yes. Give shoulder-bags and chopper-diggers and treats,” he said.
“Give Extee-Three.”


Friendly natives; distribution of presents to. Function of the
Commissioner of Native Affairs. Little Fuzzy began a speech. This was
Pappy Jack, the greatest and wisest of all the Big Ones, the Hagga, the
friend of all the People, the Gashta, only the Big Ones called the Gashta
Fuzzies. He would give wonderful things. Shoddabag, in which things
could be carried, leaving the hands free. He displayed his own. And
weapons so hard that they never wore out. He ran to the jumbled pile of
bedding under the gunrack and came back with a six-inch leaf shaped
blade on a twelve-inch shaft. And Pappy Jack would give the HoksuFusso, the Wonderful Food, Estee-fee.
Rising, he went out to what had been his kitchen before it had been
crammed with supplies. There were plenty of chopper-diggers; he’d had
a couple of hundred made up before he left Mallorysport. Shoulder-bags
were in shorter supply. They were all either Navy black or Marine Corps
green, first-aid pouches and tool-kit pouches and belt pouches for
submachine gun and auto-rifle magazines, all fitted with shoulder straps.
He hung five of them over his arm, then unlocked a cupboard and got
out two rectangular tins with blue labels marked
EXTRATERRESTRIAL SERVICE TYPE THREE.

EMERGENCY FIELD RATION. All Fuzzies were crazy about Extee-Three, which demonstrated that, while sapient beings, they were


definitely not human. Only a completely starving human would eat the
damn stuff.
When he returned, the five newcomers were squatting in a circle
inside the door with Little Fuzzy, examining his steel weapon and
comparing it with the paddle-shaped hardwood sticks they had made for
themselves. The word zatku was being frequently used.
It was an important word to Fuzzies, their name for a big pseudocrustacean Terrans called a land-prawn. Fuzzies hunted zatku avidly,
and, until they had tasted Extee-Three, preferred them to any other
food. If it hadn’t been for the zatku, the Fuzzies would have stayed in
the unexplored country of northern Beta Continent, and it would have
been years before any Terran would have seen one.
Quite a few Terrans, especially Victor Grego, the Zarathustra
Company manager-in-chief, were wishing the Fuzzies had stayed
permanently undiscovered. Zarathustra had been listed as a Class-III
planet, inhabitable by Terran humans but uninhabited by any native race
of sapient beings, and on that misunderstanding the Zarathustra
Company had been chartered to colonize and exploit it and had been
granted outright ownership of the planet and one of the two moons,
Darius. The other moon, Xerxes, had been retained as a Federation


Navy base, which had been fortunate, because suddenly Zarathustra
had turned into a Class-IV planet, with a native population.
The members of the native population here present looked up
expectantly as he opened one of the tins and cut the gingerbreadcolored cake into six equal portions. The five newcomers sniffed at
theirs and waited until Little Fuzzy began to eat. Then, after a tentative
nibble, they gobbled avidly, with full-mouthed sounds of delight.
From the first, he had suspected that they weren’t just cute little
animals, but people—sapient beings, like himself and like the eight other
sapient races discovered since Terrans had gone out to the stars. When
Bennett Rainsford, then a field naturalist for the Institute of XenoSciences, had seen them, he had agreed, and had named the species
Fuzzy fuzzy holloway. They had both been excited, and very proud of
the discovery, and neither of them had thought, until it was brought
forcibly to their attention, of the effect on the Zarathustra Company’s
charter.
Victor Grego had thought of that at once; he had fought desperately,
viciously, and with all the resources of the company, to prevent the
recognition of the Fuzzies as sapient beings and the invalidation of the
company’s charter. The battle had ended in court, with Jack Holloway


charged with murder for shooting a company gunman and a company
executive name Leonard Kellogg similarly charged for kicking to death a
Fuzzy named Goldilocks. The two cases, tried as one, had hinged on the
question of the sapience of the Fuzzies. On the docket, it had been
People of the Colony of Zarathustra versus Holloway and Kellogg. His
lawyer, Gus Brannhard, had insisted on referring to it as Friends of Little
Fuzzy versus The Chartered Zarathustra Company.
Little Fuzzy and his friends had won, and with their sapience
recognized, the company’s charter was out the airlock, and so was the
old Class-III Colonial Government, and Space Commodore Napier, the
commandant of Xerxes Base, had been compelled, since Zarathustra
was without legal government, to proclaim martial rule and supervise
the establishment of a new Class-IV Government. He had appointed
Bennett Rainsford Governor.
And just who do you suppose Ben Rainsford appointed as
Commissioner of Native Affairs?
Well, somebody had to take it, and who’d started all this Fuzzy
business, anyhow?
The five newcomers had finished their Extee-Three, and been given
their shoulder-bags and their steel chopper-diggers, and were trying the


balance of the latter and beheading imaginary land-prawns with them.
He opened the other tin of Extee-Three and divided it. This time, they
nibbled slowly, with appreciative comments. Little Fuzzy gathered up the
two empty tins and put them in the wastebasket.
“How you come this place?” he asked, when Little Fuzzy had rejoined
the circle.
They all began talking at once; with Little Fuzzy’s help, he got the
general sense of it. They had heard strange noises and had come to the
edge of the woods, and seen frightening things. But Fuzzies were
people; they investigated, even if they were frightened. Then they had
seen other people. Hagga-gashta, big people, and shi-mosh-gashta,
people like us.
Little Fuzzy instantly corrected the speaker. Hagga-gashta were just
Hagga, Big Ones, and shi-mosh-gashta were Fuzzies. Why were the
Gashta called Fuzzies? Because Pappy Jack said so, that was why. That
seemed to settle it.
“But why come this place? You come from another place, far away.
Why come here?”
More argument. Little Fuzzy was explaining what he meant, and the
newcomers were answering.


“Tell them here are many-many zatku. They come, many lights and
darks. Many-many.”
Fuzzies could count up to five, the fingers of one hand. The other
hand had to be used to count with. They could count in multiples of five
to a hand of hands, and after that it was many, and then many-many.
Somewhere in the mass of Fuzzy study notes that were piling up was a
suggestion to see what Fuzzies could do with an abacus.
So, maybe three months ago and six or eight hundred miles north of
here, this gang had heard that the country to the south was teeming
with zatku, and they had joined the volkerwanderung. Little Fuzzy and
his family had been in the advance-guard; the big rush was still coming.
He tried to find out how they had learned of it. Other Fuzzies had told
them: that was as far as he could get.
Anyhow, they had gotten into the pass to the north and come down
into Cold Creek Valley, and here they were. They had come to the edge
of the woods, seen the activity at the camp, and decided, from the
presence of other Fuzzies, that there was nothing to hurt them, and had
come in.
“Many things to hurt!” Little Fuzzy contradicted, instantly and
vehemently. “Must watch all-time. Not go in front of things that move.


Not go under things that go up off ground. Not touch strange things.
Ask Big Ones what will hurt. Big Ones try not to hurt Fuzzies, Fuzzies
must help.”
He continued at length; the newcomers exchanged apprehensive
glances and low-voiced comments. Finally, he picked up his chopperdigger and rose.
“Bizzo,” he said. “Aki-pokko-so.”
Come; I show you. He got that easily enough. “First, show police
place,” he advised. “Make marks with fingers; get bright things for
necks.”
“Hokay,” Little Fuzzy agreed. “Go polis, make fin-gap’int, get ideedisko.”
About the time Terrans had mastered classical native Fuzzy, the
Fuzzies would all be talking pidgin-Fuzzy. The newcomers made way for
Little Fuzzy, and trooped outside after him, like tourists following a
guide. He watched them cross the open space in front of the house and
turn left toward the bridge over the little stream. Then he went back to
his desk and made a screen-call to prod up the tentmaker in Red Hill on
the order of shoulder-bags—“Maybe tomorrow, Mr. Holloway; we’re
doing all we can.”—and then made a stenomemo about finding more


Extee-Three. Then he went back to doodling and scribbling notes on the
table of organization and operation-scheme for the Commission of
Native Affairs, on which he seemed to be getting nowhere at a terrific
speed.
“Hello, Jack. Another gang joined up?”
He raised his head. The speaker was coming in the door, a stocky,
square-faced man in blue. There was a lighter oval on the side of his
beret, where something had been removed, and the collar of his tunic
showed that his major’s single star had quite recently replaced a first
lieutenant’s double bars. He wore a band on his left arm hand-lettered
ZNPF, otherwise his uniform was Colonial Constabulary.
“Hello, George. Come in and rest your feet. You look as though they
need it.”
Major George Lunt, Commandant, Zarathustra Native Protection
Force, agreed wearily and profanely, taking off his beret and his pistolbelt and dropping them on the makeshift table. Then, looking around,
he went to a chair and lifted from it four loose-leaf books and a
fiberboard carton full of papers, marked

OLD ATOMIC-BOMB BOURBON, and set them on the floor. Then he unzipped his tunic, sat down, and got out
his cigarettes.


“Office hut’s all up, now,” he reported. “They’re waiting on a scowload of flooring for it.”
“I was talking on screen about that an hour ago. It’ll be here by this
evening.” By this time tomorrow, all this junk could be moved out, and
the place would be home again. “Any men coming out on the afternoon
boat?”
“Three. They only got the recruiting office opened yesterday, and
there isn’t any big rush of recruits. Captain Casagra says he’ll lend us
fifty Marines and some vehicles, temporarily. How many Fuzzies have
we, now, with this new bunch?”
He counted mentally. His own family: Little Fuzzy and Mamma Fuzzy
and Baby Fuzzy and Mike and Mitzi and Ko-Ko and Cinderella. George
Lunt’s Fuzzies. Dr. Crippen and Dillinger and Ned Kelly and Lizzie Borden
and Calamity Jane. The nine whom they had found at the camp when
they returned from Mallorysport after the trial, and the six who came in
day before yesterday, and four yesterday morning, and the two last
evening, and now this gang.
“Thirty-eight, counting Baby. That’s a lot of Fuzzies,” he observed.


“You just think it is,” Lunt told him. “The patrols we’ve had out north
of here say they’re still coming. This time next week, we’ll have a couple
of hundred.”
And before then, the ones who were here would begin to feel
overcrowded, and lot of nice new shoppo-diggo would get bloodied. He
said so, adding:
“You have a tactical plan for dealing with a native uprising, Major?”
“I’ve been worrying about it. You know, we could get rid of a lot of
them,” Lunt said. “Just mention on telecast that we have more Fuzzies
than we know what to do with, and we’d have to start rationing them.”
They’d have to do that, anyhow. With all the publicity since the trial,
everybody was Fuzzy crazy. Everybody wanted Fuzzies of their own, and
where there’s a demand, there are suppliers, legitimate or otherwise. It
was a wonder the woods weren’t full of people catching Fuzzies to sell
now. For all he knew, maybe they were.
And a lot of people shouldn’t be allowed to have Fuzzies. Not just
sadists and perverts, either. People who’d want Fuzzies because the
Joneses had them, and then neglect them. People who would get tired
of them after a while and dump them outside town. People who couldn’t


get it through their moronic heads that Fuzzies were people too. So
they’d have to set up some regular system of Fuzzy adoption.
He’d thought, at first, of Ruth Ortheris, Ruth van Riebeek she was,
now, for that, but she and her husband were needed too urgently here
at the camp on the Fuzzy-study program. There were just too many
things about Fuzzies neither he nor anybody else knew, yet, and he’d
have to find out what was good for them and what wasn’t.
He looked at the clock; 0935; that would be 0635 in Mallorysport.
After lunch, which would be mid-morning there, he’d call her and find
out how soon she’d be coming out.



CHAPTER THREE
RUTH VAN RIEBEEK—she had resigned both her Navy commission and
her maiden name simultaneously five days ago—ought, she told herself,
to be happy and excited. She was clear out of the Navy Intelligence and
its dark corridors of deceit and suspicion, and she and Gerd were
married, and any scientific worker in the Federation would give anything
to be in her place. A whole new science, the study of a new race of
sapient beings; why, it was only the ninth time that had happened in the
five centuries since the first Terran starship left the Sol System. A tiny
spot of light—what they really knew about the Fuzzies—surrounded by a
twilight zone of what they thought they knew, mostly erroneous. And
beyond that, the dark of ignorance, full of strange surprises, waiting to
be conquered. And she was in on the very beginning of it. It was a
wonderful opportunity.
But wasn’t it just one Nifflheim of a way to spend a honeymoon?
When she and Gerd were married, everything was going to be so
wonderful. They would spend a lazy week here in the city, just being
happy together and making plans and gathering things for their new
home. Then they would go back to Beta Continent, and Gerd would


work the sunstone diggings in partnership with Jack Holloway while she
kept house, and they would spend the rest of their lives being happy
together in the woods, with their four Fuzzies, Id and Superego and
Complex and Syndrome.
The honeymoon, as such, had lasted one night, here at the Hotel
Mallory. The next morning, before they were through breakfast, Jack
Holloway was screening them. Space Commodore Napier had appointed
Ben Rainsford Governor, and Ben had immediately appointed Jack
Commissioner of Native Affairs, and now Jack was appointing Gerd to
head his study and research bureau, taking it for granted that Gerd
would accept. Gerd had, taking it for granted that she would agree, as,
after a rebellious moment, she had.
After all, weren’t they all responsible for what had happened? The
Fuzzies certainly weren’t; they hadn’t gone to law to be declared
sapient. All a Fuzzy wanted was to have fun. And they were responsible
to the Fuzzies for what would happen to them hereafter, all of them
together, Ben Rainsford and Jack Holloway and she and Gerd, and
Pancho Ybarra. And now, Lynne Andrews.
Through the open front of the room, on the balcony, she could hear
Lynne’s voice, half amused and half exasperated:


“You little devils! Bring that back here! Do-bizzo. So josso-aki!”
A Fuzzy—one of the two males, Superego—dashed inside with a
lighted cigarette, the other male, Id, and one of the girls, Syndrome,
pursuing. She put in her earplug and turned on her hearing-aid, wishing
for the millionth time that Fuzzies had humanly audible voices. Id was
clamoring that it was his turn and trying to take the cigarette away from
Superego, who pushed him off with his free hand, took a quick puff, and
handed it to Syndrome, who began puffing hastily on it. Id started to
grab it, then saw the cigarette she was smoking and ran to climb on her
lap, pleading:
“Mummy Woof, josso-aki smokko.”
Lynne Andrews, slender and blonde, followed them into the room,
the earplug wire of her hearing-aid leading down from under the green
bandeau around her head. She carried Complex, squirming in her arms.
Complex was complaining that Auntie Lynne wouldn’t give her smokko.
“That’s one Terran word they picked up soon enough,” Lynne was
commenting.
“Let her have one; it won’t hurt her.” With scientific caution, she
added, “It doesn’t seem to hurt them.”


She knew what Lynne was thinking. She had been recruited—
shanghaied would probably be a better word—from Mallorysport General
Hospital because they wanted somebody whose M.D. was a little less a
matter of form than hers or Pancho Ybarra’s. Lynne was a pediatrician,
which had seemed appropriate because Fuzzies were about the size of
year-old human children and because a pediatrician, like a veterinarian,
has to be able to get along with a minimum of cooperation from the
patient. Unfortunately, she was carrying it beyond analogy and equating
Fuzzies with human children. A year-old human oughtn’t to be allowed
to smoke, so neither should a Fuzzy, who might be fifty for all anybody
knew to the contrary.
She gave Id her cigarette. Lynne, apparently much against her better
judgment, sat down on a couch and lit one for Complex, and one for
herself, and then lit a third for Superego. Now all the Fuzzies had
smokko. Syndrome ran to one of the low cocktail tables and came back
with an ashtray, which she put on the floor. The others sat down with
her around it, all but Id, who stayed on Mummy Woof’s lap.
“Lynne, they won’t take anything that hurts them,” she argued.
“Alcohol, for instance.”


Lynne had to agree. Any Fuzzy would take a drink, just to do what
the Big Ones were doing—once. The smallest quantity affected a Fuzzy
instantly, and a tipsy Fuzzy was really something to see, and then the
Fuzzy would have a sick hangover, and never took a second drink. That
was one of the things she’d found out while working with Ernst Mallin,
the Company psychologist, and doublecrossing him and the company for
Navy Intelligence.
“Well, some of them don’t like smokko.”
“Some human-type people don’t, either. Some human-type people
have allergies. What kind of allergies do Fuzzies have? That’s something
else for you to find out.”
She set Id on the table and pulled one of the loose-leaf books toward
her, picking up a pen and writing the word at the top of the blank page.
Id picked up another pen and began making a series of little circles on
the notepad.
The door from the hallway opened into the next room; she heard
Pancho Ybarra’s voice and her husband laughing. The three on the floor
put their cigarettes in the ashtray and jumped to their feet, shrieking,
“Pappy Ge’hd! Unka Panko!” and dashed through the door into the next
room. Id, dropping the pen, jumped down and ran after them. In a


moment, they were all back. Syndrome had a Navy officer’s cap on her
head, holding it up with both hands to see from under it. Id followed,
with Gerd’s floppy gray sombrero, and Complex and Superego came in
carrying a bulky briefcase between them. Gerd and Pancho followed.
Gerd’s suit, freshly pressed that morning, already rumpled, but the Navy
psychologist was still miraculously handbox-neat. She rose and greeted
them, kissing Gerd; Pancho crossed the couch and sat down with Lynne.
“Well, what’s new?” Gerd asked.
“Jack called me, about an hour ago. They have the lab hut up, and all
the equipment they have for it moved in. They have some bungalows
up, a double one for us. Jack showed me a view of it; it’s nice. And I
was bullying people about the computer and the rest of the stuff. We
can all go out as soon as we have everything here together.”
“This evening, if we want to run ourselves ragged and get in in the
middle of the night,” Gerd said. “After lunch tomorrow, if we want to
take our time. Ben Rainsford wants us for dinner this evening.”
Lynne thought that sounded a trifle cannibalistic, and voted for
tomorrow. “How did you make out at the hospital?” she asked.
“They gave us everything we asked for, no argument at all,” Gerd
said. “And the same at Science Center. I was surprised.”


“I wasn’t,” Pancho said. “There’s a lot of scuttlebutt about the
Government taking both over. In a couple of weeks, we may be their
bosses. What are we going to do about lunch; go out or have it sent in?”
“Let’s have it sent in,” she said. “We can check over these equipment
lists, and you two can chase up anything that’s left out this afternoon.”
Pancho got out his cigarette case, and discovered that it was empty.
“Hey, Lynne; so-josso-aki-smokko,” he said.
Well, it would be a honeymoon. Sort of crowded, but fun. And
Pancho and Lynne were beginning to take an interest in each other. She
was glad of that.

CHIEF JUSTICE FREDERIC Pendarvis leaned his elbows on the bench
and considered the three black coated lawyers before him in the action
of John Doe, Richard Roe, et alii, An Unincorporated Voluntary
Association, versus The Colonial Government of Zarathustra.
One, at the defendants’ lectern, was a giant; well over six feet and
two hundred pounds, his big-nosed face masked by a fluffy gray-brown
beard, an unruly mop of gray-brown hair suggesting, incongruously, a
halo. His name was Gustavus Adolphus Brannhard, and until he had
been rocketed to prominence in what everybody was calling the Fuzzy


Trial, he had been chiefly noted for his ability to secure the acquittal of
obviously guilty clients, his prowess as a big-game hunter, and his
capacity, without visible effect, for whisky. For the past five days, he
had been Attorney-General of the Colony of Zarathustra.
The man standing beside and slightly behind him would have seemed
tall, too, in the proximity of anybody but Gus Brannhard. He was slender
and suavely elegant, and his thin, aristocratic features wore an
habitually half-bored, half-amused expression, as though life were a joke
he had heard too many times before. His name was Leslie Coombes, he
was the Zarathustra Company’s chief attorney, and from the position he
had taken it looked as though he were here to support his erstwhile
antagonist in People versus Holloway and Kellogg.
The third, at the plaintiff’s lectern, was Hugo Ingermann; Judge
Pendarvis was making a determined effort not to let that prejudice him
against his clients. To his positive knowledge, Ingermann had been in
court at least seven times in the last six years representing completely
honest and respectable people, and it was possible, though scarcely
probable, that this might be the eighth occasion. He was, of course, a
member of the Bar, due to lack of evidence to support disbarment
proceedings, so he had a right to stand here and be heard.


“This is an action, is it not, to require the Colonial Government to
make available for settlement and exploitation lands now in the public
domain, and to set up offices where claims to such lands may be filed?”
he asked.
“It is, your Honor. I represent the plaintiffs,” Ingermann said. He was
shorter than either of the others; plump, with a smooth, pink-cheeked
face, and beginning to lose his hair in front. There was an expression of
complete and utter sincerity in his round blue eyes which might have
deceived anybody who had not been on Zarathustra long enough to
have heard of him. He would have continued had Pendarvis not turned
to Brannhard.
“I represent the Colonial Government, your Honor; we are contesting
the plaintiff’s action.”
“And you, Mr. Coombes?”
“I represent the Charterless Zarathustra Company,” Coombes said.
“We are not a party to this action. I am here merely as observer and
amicus curiae.”
“The... Charterless,did you say,Mr. Coombes?... Zarathustra Company had a right to be so represented here, they have a substantial


interest.” He wondered whose idea “Charterless” was; it sounded like a
typical piece of Grego gallows-humor. “Mr. Ingermann?”
“Your Honor, it is the contention of the plaintiffs whom I here
represent that since approximately eighty percent of the land surface of
this planet is now public domain, by virtue of a recent ruling of the
Honorable Supreme Court, it is now obligatory upon the Colonial
Government to make this land available to the public. This, your Honor,
is plainly stated in Federation Law... ”
He began citing acts, sections, paragraphs; precedents; relevant
decisions of Federation Courts on other planets. He was talking entirely
for the record; all this had been included in the brief he had submitted.
It should be heard, but enough was enough.
“Yes, Mr. Ingermann; the Court is aware of the law, and takes notice
that it has been upheld in other cases,” he said. “The Government
doesn’t dispute this, Mr. Brannhard?”
“Not at all, your Honor. Far from it. Governor Rainsford is, himself,
most anxious to transfer unseated land to private ownership...”
“Yes, but when?” Ingermann demanded. “How long is Governor
Rainsford going to drag his feet...”


“I question the justice of Mr. Ingermann’s so characterizing the
situation,” Brannhard interrupted. “It must be remembered that it is less
than a week since there was any public land at all on this planet.”
“Or since the Government Mr. Ingermann’s clients are suing has
existed,” Coombes added. “And I could endure knowing who these
Messieurs Doe and Roe are. The names sound faintly familiar, but...”
“Your Honor, my clients are an association of individuals interested in
acquiring land,” Ingermann said. “Prospectors, woodsmen, tenant
farmers, small veldbeest ranchers...”
“Loan-sharks, shylocks, percentage grubstakers, speculators, wouldbe claim brokers,” Brannhard continued.
“They are the common people of this planet!” Ingermann declared.
“The workers, the sturdy and honest farmers, the frontiersmen, all of
whom the Zarathustra Company has held in peonage until liberated by
the great and historic decisions which bear your Honor’s name.”
“Just a moment,” Coombes almost drawled. “Your Honor, the word
‘peonage’ has a specific meaning at law. I must deny most vehemently
that it has ever described the relationship between the Zarathustra
Company and anybody on this planet.”


“The word was ill-chosen, Mr. Ingermann. It will be deleted from the
record.”
“We still haven’t found out who Mr. Ingermann’s clients are, your
Honor,” Brannhard said. “May I suggest that Mr. Ingermann be placed
on the stand and asked to name them?”
Ingermann shot a quick, involuntary glance at the witness stand: a
heavy chair, with electrode attachments and a bright metal helmet over
it, and a translucent globe on a standard. Then he began clamoring
protests. So far, Hugo Ingermann had always managed to avoid having
to testify to anything under veridication. That was probably why he was
still a member of the Bar, instead of a convict.
“No, Mr. Brannhard,” he said, with real sadness. “Mr. Ingermann is
not compelled to divulge the names of his clients. Mr. Ingermann would
be within his rights in bringing this action on his own responsibility, out
of his deep love of justice and well-known zeal for the public welfare.”
Brannhard shrugged massively. Nobody could blame him for not
trying. Coombes spoke:
“Your Honor, we are all agreed about the Government’s obligation,
but has it occurred, either to Mr. Ingermann or to the Court, that the
present Government is merely a fiat-government set up by military


authority? Commodore Napier acted, as he was obliged to, as the
ranking officer of the Terran Federation Armed Forces present, to
constitute civil government to replace the former one, declared illegal by
your Honor. Until elections can be held and a popularly elected Colonial
Legislature can be convened, there may be grave doubts as to the
validity of some of Governor Rainsford’s acts, especially in granting titles
to land. Your Honor, do we want to see the courts of this planet vexed,
for years to come, with litigation over such titles?”
“That’s the Government’s attitude precisely,” Brannhard agreed.
“We’re required by law to hold such elections with a year; to do that
we’ll have to hold an election for delegates to a constitutional
convention and get a planetary constitution adopted. That will take six
to eight months. Until this can be done, we petition the Court to
withhold action on this matter.”
“That’s quite reasonable, Mr. Brannhard. The Court recognizes the
Government’s legal obligation, but the Court does not recognize any
immediacy in fulfilling it. If, within a year, the Government can open the
public lands and establish land-claims offices, the Court will be quite
satisfied.” He tapped lightly with his gavel. “Next case, if you please,” he
told the crier.


“Now I see it!” Ingermann almost shouted. “The Zarathustra
Company’s taken over this new Class-IV Government, and the courts
along with it!”
He hit the bench again with his gavel; this time it cracked like a rifle
shot.
“Mr. Ingermann! You are not deliberately placing yourself in
contempt, are you?” he asked. “No? I’d hoped not. Next case, please.”

LESLIE COOMBES ACCEPTED the cocktail with a word of absentminded
thanks, tasted it, and set it down on the low table. It was cool and quiet
up here on the garden-terrace around Victor Grego’s penthouse at the
top of Company House; the western sky was a conflagration of sunset
reds and oranges and yellows.
“No, Victor; Gus Brannhard is not our friend. He’s not our enemy, but
as

Attorney-General he is Ben Rainsford’s lawyer, and the Government’s—at the moment, it’s hard to distinguish between the
two—and Ben Rainsford hates all of us vindictively.”
Victor Grego looked up from the drink he was pouring for himself. He
had a broad-cheeked, wide-mouthed face. A few threads of gray were


visible in the sunset glow among the black at his temples; they hadn’t
been there before the Fuzzy Trial.
“I don’t see why,” he said, “It’s all over now. They made their point
about the Fuzzies; that was all they were interested in, wasn’t it?”
He was being quite honest about it, too, Coombes thought. Grego
was simply incapable of animosity about something that was over and
done with.
“It was all Jack Holloway and Gerd van Riebeek were interested in.
Brannhard was their lawyer; he’d have fought just as hard to prove that
bush-goblins were sapient beings. But Rainsford is taking this personally.
The Fuzzies were his great scientific discovery, and we tried to discredit
it, and that makes us Bad Guys. And in the last


CHAPTER, the Bad Guys should all be killed or sent to jail.”
Grego stoppered the cocktail jug and picked up his glass.
“We haven’t come to thelast


CHAPTER yet,” he said. “I don’t want any more battles; we haven’t
patched up the combat damage from the last one. But if Ben Rainsford
wants one, I’m not bugging out on it. You know, we could make things
damned nasty for him.” He sipped slowly and set the glass down. “This
so-called Government of his is broke; you know that, don’t you? And it’ll
take from six to eight months to get a Colonial Legislature organized and
in session, and he can’t levy taxes by executive decree; that’s purely a
legislative function. In the meantime, he’ll have to borrow, and the only
place he can borrow is from the bank we control.”
That was the trouble with Victor. If anybody or anything challenged
him, his first instinct was to hit back. Following that instinct when he
had first heard of the Fuzzies had gotten the Company back of the
eightball in the first place.
“Well, don’t do any fighting with planet busters at twenty paces,” he
advised. “Gus Brannhard and Alex Napier, between them, talked him out
of prosecuting us for what we did before the trial, and convinced him
he’d wreck the whole planetary economy if he damaged the company
too badly. We’re in the same spot; we can’t afford to have a bankrupt
Government on top of everything else. Let him borrow all the money he
wants.”


“And then tax it away from us to pay it back?”
“Not if we get control of the Legislature and write the tax laws
ourselves. This is a political battle; let’s use political weapons.”
“You mean organize a Zarathustra Company Party?” Grego laughed.
“You have any idea how unpopular the Company is, right now?”
“No, no. Let the citizens and voters organize the parties. We’ll just
pick out the best one and take it over. All we’ll need to organize will be a
political organization.”
Grego smiled slowly over the rim of his glass and swallowed.
“Yes, Leslie. I don’t think I need to tell you what to do. You know it
better than I do. Have you anybody in mind to head it? They shouldn’t
be associated with the Company at all; at least, not where the public
can see it.”
He named a few names—independent business men, freeholding
planters, professional people, a clergyman or so. Grego nodded
approvingly at each.
“Hugo Ingermann,” he said.
“Good God!” Coombes doubted his ears for a moment. Then he was
shocked. “We want nothing whatever to do with that fellow. Why, there
isn’t a crooked operation in Mallorysport, criminal or just plain dishonest,


that he isn’t mixed up in. And I told you how he was talking in court
today.”
Grego nodded again. “Precisely. Well, we won’t have anything to do
with him. We’ll just let Hugo go his malodorous way, and cash in on any
scandals he creates. You say Rainsford thinks in terms of Good Guys
and Bad Guys? Well, Hugo Ingermann is the baddest Bad Guy on the
planet, and if Rainsford doesn’t know that, and he probably doesn’t, Gus
Brannhard’ll tell him. I just hope Hugo Ingermann goes on attacking the
Company every time he opens his mouth.” He finished what was in his
glass and unstoppered the jug. “Still with me, Leslie? It’s a half hour yet
to dinner.”

AS GUS BRANNHARD started across the lawn on the south side of
Government House, two Fuzzies came dashing to meet him. Their
names were Flora and Fauna, and as usual he had to pause and
remember that fauns were male and that Flora was a regular feminine
name. The names some people gave Fuzzies. Of course, Ben was a
naturalist. If he had a pair of Fuzzies of his own, he’d probably have
called them Felony and Misdemeanor, or Misfeasance and Malfeasance.
He put in his earphone and squatted to get down to their level.


“Hello, sapient being. Now keep your hands out of Uncle Gus’s
whiskers.” He glanced up and saw the small man with the red beard
approaching. “Hello, Ben. They pull yours much?”
“Sometimes. I haven’t so much to pull. Yours is more fun. Jack
Holloway says they think you’re a Big Fuzzy.” The Fuzzies were pointing
across the lawn, clamoring for him to come and see something. “Oh,
sure; their new home. I’ll bet there isn’t a Fuzzy anywhere had a nicer
home. Hokay, kids; bizzo.”
The new home was a Marine Corps pup-tent, pitched in an open
glade beside a fountain; it would be a lot roomier for two Fuzzies than
for two Marines. There were Fuzzy treasures scattered around it, things
from toy shops, and odds and ends of bright or colored or oddly shaped
junk they had scavenged for themselves. He noticed, and commented
on, a stout toy wheelbarrow.
“Oh, yes; we have discovered the wheel,” Ben said. “They were
explaining it to me yesterday; very intelligently, as far as I could follow.
They give each other rides, and they are very good about taking turns.
And they use it to collect loot. Very good about that, too; always ask if
they can have anything they find.”


“Well, this is just wonderful,” he told them, and then repeated it in
Fuzzy. Ben complimented him on his progress in the language.
“I damn well better learn it. Pendarvis is going to set up a Native
Cases Court, like the ones on Loki and Gimli and Thor. Be anybody’s
guess how soon I’ll have to listen to a flock of Fuzzy witnesses.”
He looked inside the tent. The blankets and cushions were all piled at
one end; bed-making, it seemed, wasn’t a Fuzzy accomplishment. A bed
was to sleep in, and no Fuzzy could see the sense in making a bed and
then having to unmake it before he could use it. He looked at some of
their things, and picked up a little knife, trying the edge on his thumb.
Immediately, Flora cried out:
“Keffu, Unka Gus! Sha’ap; kuttsu!”
“Muhgawd, Ben; you hear what she said? She speaks Lingua Terra!”
“That’s right. That was one of the first things I taught them. And you
don’t have to teach them anything more than once, either.” He looked at
his watch, and spoke to the Fuzzies. They seemed disappointed, but
Fauna said, “Hokay,” and ran into the tent, bringing out his shoulderbag
and chopper-digger, and Flora’s. “Told them we have to make Big One
talk, to go hunt land-prawns. I had a bunch brought in, this morning,
and turned loose for them.”


Fauna piled into the wheelbarrow; Flora got between the shafts and
picked it up, starting off at a run, the passenger whooping loudly. Ben
watched them vanish among the shrubbery, and got out his pipe and
tobacco.
“Gus, why in Nifflheim did Leslie Coombes show up in court today
and back you against this fellow Ingermann?” he demanded. “I thought
Grego put Ingermann up to that himself.”
That’s right; any time anything happens, blame Grego.
“No, Ben. The company doesn’t want a big land-rush starting, any
more than we do. They don’t want their whole labor force bugging out
on them, and that’s what it would come to. I don’t know why I can’t
pound it into your head that Victor Grego had as big a stake in keeping
things together on this planet as you have.”
“Yes, if he can control it the way he used to. Well, I’m not going to
let him...”
He made an impatient noise. “And Ingermann; Grego wouldn’t touch
him with a ten-light-year pole. You call Grego a criminal? Well, maybe
you were too busy, over on Beta, counting tree rings and checking on
the love life of bush-goblins, to know about the Mallorysport underworld,
but as a criminal lawyer I had to. Beside Hugo Ingermann, Victor Grego


is a saint, and they have images of him in all the churches and work
miracles with them. You name any kind of a racket—dope, prostitution,
gambling, protection-shakedowns, illicit gem buying, shylocking, stolen
goods—and Ingermann’s at the back of it. This action of his, today; he
has a ring of crooks who want to make a killing in land speculation.
That’s why I wanted to stop him, and that’s why Grego sent Coombes to
help me. Ben, you’re going to find that this is only the first of many
occasions when you and Grego are going to be on the same side.”
Rainsford started an angry reply; before he could speak, Gerd van
Riebeek’s voice floated down from the escalator-head on the terrace
above.
“Anybody home down there?”
“No, nobody but us Fuzzies,” Rainsford called back. “Come on down.”



CHAPTER FOUR
WITH A SIGH of relief, Victor Grego entered the living room of his
penthouse apartment. His hand rose to the switch beside the door, then
dropped; the faint indirect glow from around the edge of the ceiling was
enough. He’d just pour himself a drink and sit here in the crepuscular
silence, resting. His body was tired, more so than it should be, at his
age, but his brain was still racing at top speed. No use trying to go to
sleep now.
He took off his jacket and neckcloth and dropped them on a chair,
opening his shirt collar as he went to the cellaret; he poured a big
inhaler-glass half full of brandy and started for his favorite chair, then
returned to get the bottle. It would take more than one glass to brake
the speeding wheels inside his head. He placed the bottle on a low
table, beside the fluted glass bowl, and sat down, wondering what he
had noticed that had disturbed him. Nothing important; he sipped from
the glass and leaned back, closing his eyes.
They had the trouble in the veldbeest country on Beta and Delta
Continents worked out, at least to where they knew what to do about it.
Close down all the engineering jobs, the Big Blackwater drainage project


on Beta, and the various construction jobs, and shift men to the cattle
ranges; issue them combat equipment and put them on fighting pay, to
deal with these gangs of rustlers that were springing up. Maybe if they
started a couple of range-wars, Ian Ferguson and his Colonial
Constabulary would have to take a hand. But the main thing was to
keep the herds together. And the wild veldbeest; Ben Rainsford was a
conservationist, he ought to be interested in protecting them.
And he still hadn’t decided on a sunstone buying policy. Not enough
information on the present situation. He’d have to do something about
that.
Oh, Nifflheim with it; think about it tomorrow.
He drank more brandy, and reached to the glass bowl on the low
table, and found that it was empty. That was what had bothered him. It
had been half full of the sort of tidbits he privately called nibblements—
salted nuts, wafers, things like that—when he and Leslie Coombes had
gone through the room on their way down for dinner.
Or had it? Maybe he just thought it had been. He began worrying
about that, too. And the way he’d forgotten, this morning, about the
sunstone inventory. Better call in Ernst Mallin to give him a checkup.


Then he laughed mirthlessly. If anybody needed a checkup, it was
the company psychologist himself. Poor Ernst; he’d had a pretty
shattering time of it, and now he probably thought he was being blamed
for everything.
He wasn’t, of course. Mallin had done the best anybody could have
done, in an impossible situation. The Fuzzies had been sapient beings,
and that was all there’d been to it, and that wasn’t Mallin’s fault. That
Mallin had been forced so to testify in court had been the fault of his
immediate subordinate, Dr. Ruth Ortheris, who had also, it developed,
been Lieutenant j.g. Ortheris, TFN Intelligence. She’d been the one
who’d tipped Navy Intelligence about the Fuzzies in the first place. She’d
been the one who’d smuggled Jack Holloway’s Fuzzy family out of
Science Center after Leslie Coombes had gotten hold of them on a
bogus court order. And she’d been the one who’d insisted on livetrapping that other Fuzzy family and exposing Mallin to them.
That had been a beautiful piece of work. He’d watched the trial by
screen; he could still see poor Mallin on the stand, trying to insist that
Fuzzies were just silly little animals, with the red-blazing globe of the
veridicator calling him a liar every time he opened his mouth. Why,
she’d made the company defeat itself with its own witness.


He ought to hate her for that. He didn’t; he admired her for it, as he
admired anybody who had a job to do and did it competently. He had
too damned few people like that in his own organization.
Have to do something nice for Ernst, though. He couldn’t stay in
charge at Science Center, but he’d have to be promoted out of it.
Probably have to invent a job for him.
Finally, he decided that he could go to sleep, now. He took the
brandy bottle back to the cellaret, gathered up the garments he had
thrown down, and went into the bedroom, putting on the lights.
Then he looked at the bed and saw the golden-furred shape snuggled
against the pillows. He swore. One of those life-size Fuzzy dolls that had
been on sale ever since the Fuzzies had gotten into the news. If this was
somebody’s idea of a joke...
Then the thing he had taken for a doll sat up, blinked, and said,
“Yeek?”
“Why, the damn thing’s alive!” he yelled. “It’s a real Fuzzy!” The
Fuzzy was afraid; watching him and at the same time seeking an avenue
of escape. “Don’t be scared, kid,” he soothed. “I won’t hurt you. How’d
you get in here, anyhow?”


One thing, the puzzle of the empty bowl was solved; the contents
were now inside the Fuzzy. This, however, posed the question of how
the Fuzzy got there. When he had thought this was a joke, he had been
angry. Now he doubted that it was a joke, and he was on the edge of
being worried.
The Fuzzy, who had been regarding him warily, had evidently decided
that he was not hostile and might even be friendly. He got to his feet,
tried to walk on the yielding pneumatic mattress, and tumbled heelsover-head. Instantly he was on his feet again, leaping twice his height
into the air, bouncing, and yeeking happily. He caught him on the
second bounce and sat down on the bed with him.
“Are you hungry, kid?” That bowl of nibblements wasn’t much of a
meal, even for a Fuzzy. The stuff was all heavily salted, too. “Bet you’re
thirsty.” What was it Jack Holloway’s Fuzzies called him? Pappy Jack.
“Well, Pappy Vic’ll get you something.”
In the kitchenette-breakfast room, the uninvited guest drank two
small aperitif-glasses of water and part of a third, while his host
wondered about what he’d like to eat. Jack Holloway gave his Fuzzies
Extee-Three, but he didn’t have... Oh, yes; maybe he did.


He went into the bedroom and opened one of the closets, where his
field equipment was kept, rifles, sleeping-bag, cameras and binoculars,
and a couple of rectangular steel cases to be carried in an aircar, full of
camping paraphernalia. He opened one, which contained mess-gear he’d
brought with him from Terra and used on field trips ever since, and sure
enough, there were a couple of tins of Extee-Three.
The Fuzzy, who had been watching beside him, yeeked excitedly
when he saw the blue labels, and ran ahead of him to the kitchenette.
He could hardly wait till the tin was open. Somebody had given him
Extee-Three before.
He made a sandwich for himself and sat down at the table while the
Fuzzy ate, and he was still worried. There were only four doors into
Company House from the ground, and all of them were constantly
guarded. There were no windows less than sixty feet from the ground.
While no bet on what Fuzzies couldn’t do was really safe, he doubted
that they had learned to pilot aircars just yet. So somebody had brought
this Fuzzy here, and beside How, which would be by aircar, the question
branched out into When and Who and Why.
Why was what worried him most. Fuzzies, as he didn’t need to
remind himself, were people, and wards of the Terran Federation, and


all sort of crimes could be committed against them. Leonard Kellogg
would have been executed for killing one of them, if he hadn’t done the
job for himself in his cell at the jail. And beside murder, there was
abduction, and illegal restraint. Maybe somebody was trying to frame
him.
He put on the communication screen and punched the call
combination of the Chief’s office at company police headquarters. He got
Captain Morgan Lansky, who held down Chief Steefer’s desk from
midnight to six. As soon as Lansky saw who was calling, he got rid of his
cigar, zipped up his tunic, and tried to look alert, wide awake and busy.
“Why, Mr. Grego! Is anything wrong?”
“That’s what I want to know, Captain. I have a Fuzzy up here in my
apartment. I want to know how he got here.”
“A Fuzzy? Are you sure, Mr. Grego?”
He stooped and picked up his visitor, setting him on the table. The
Fuzzy was clutching half a cake of Extee-Three. He saw Lansky looking
out of the wall at him and yeeked in astonishment.
“What is your opinion, Captain?”
Captain Lansky’s opinion was that he’d be damned. “How did he get
in, Mr. Grego?”

Grego prayed silently for patience. “That is precisely what I want to
know. To begin with, have you any idea how he got in the building?”
“Somebody,” the captain decided, after deliberation, “must have
brought him in. In an aircar,” he added, after more cogitation.
“I had gotten that far, myself. Would you have any idea when?”
Lansky began to shake his head. Then he was smitten with an idea.
“Hey, Mr. Grego! The pilfering!”
“What pilfering?”
“Why, the pilfering. Pilfering, and ransacking; in offices and like that.
And somebody’s been getting into supply rooms at some of the
cafeterias, and where they keep the candy and stuff for the vending
robots. The first musta been the night of the sixteenth.” That would be
three days ago. “The first report came in day before yesterday morning,
after the 0600-1200 shift came on. It’s been like that ever since; every
morning, places being ransacked and candy and stuff like that taken.
You think that Fuzzy’s been doing all of it?”
He could see no reason why not. Fuzzies were small people, able to
make themselves very inconspicuous when they wanted to. Hadn’t they
survived for oomphty-thousand years in the woods, dodging harpies and
bush-goblins? And Company House was full of hiding places. It had been


built twelve years ago, three years after he came to Zarathustra, and it
had been built big. It wasn’t going to be like the buildings they ran up
on Terra, to be torn down in a couple of decades; it was meant to be
the headquarters of the Chartered Zarathustra Company for a couple of
centuries. Eighteen levels, six to eight floors to a level; more than half of
them were empty and many unfinished, waiting for the CZC to grow into
them.
“The ones Dr. Jimenez trapped for Dr. Mallin,” Lansky said. “Maybe
this is one of them.”
He winced, mentally, at the thought of those Fuzzies. Catching them
and letting Mallin study them had been the worst error of the whole
business, and the way they had gotten rid of them had been a close
runner-up.
It had been a Mallorysport police lieutenant, on his own lame-brained
responsibility, who had started the story about a ten-year-old girl, Lolita
Lurkin, being attacked by Fuzzies, and it had been Resident-General Nick
Emmert, now bound for Terra aboard a destroyer from Xerxes to face
malfeasance charges, who had posted a reward of five thousand sols
apiece on Jack Holloway’s Fuzzies, supposed to be at large in the city.
Dead or alive; that had touched off a hysterical Fuzzy-hunt.


That had been when he and Leslie Coombes had perpetrated their
own masterpiece of imbecility, by turning loose the Fuzzies Mallin had
been studying, whom everybody was now passionately eager to see the
last of, in the hope that they would be shot for Emmert’s reward money.
Instead, Jack Holloway, hunting for his own Fuzzies in ignorance of the
fact that they were safe on Xerxes Naval Base, had found them, and
now he was very glad of it. Gerd and Ruth van Riebeek had them now.
“No, Captain. Those Fuzzies are all accounted for. And Dr. Jimenez
didn’t bring any others to Mallorysport.”
That put Lansky back where he had started. He went off on another
tangent:
“Well, I’ll send somebody up right away to get him, Mr. Grego.”
“You will do nothing of the sort, Captain. The Fuzzy’s quite all right
here; I’m taking care of him. All I want to know is how he got into
Company House. And I want the investigation made discreetly. Tell the
Chief when he comes in.” He thought of something else. “Get hold of a
case of Extee-Three; do it before you go off duty. And have it put on my
delivery lift, where I’ll find it the first thing tomorrow.”
The Fuzzy was disappointed when he blanked the screen; he
wondered where the funny man in the wall had gone. He finished his


Extee-Three, and didn’t seem to want anything else. Well, no wonder;
one of those cakes would keep a man going for twenty-four hours.
He’d have to fix up some place for the Fuzzy to sleep. And some way
for him to get water; the sink in the kitchenette was too high to be
convenient. There was a low sink outside, which the gardener used; he
turned the faucet on slightly, set a bowl under it, and put a little metal
cup beside it. The Fuzzy understood about that, and yeeked
appreciatively. He’d have to get one of those earphones the Navy people
had developed, and learn the Fuzzy language.
Then he remembered that Fuzzies were most meticulous about their
sanitary habits. Going back inside, he entered the big room behind the
kitchenette which served the chef as a pantry, the houseboy for
equipment storage, the gardener as a seed house and tool shed, and all
of them as a general junkroom. He hadn’t been inside the place, himself,
for some time. He swore disgustedly when he saw it, then began
rummaging for something the Fuzzy could use as a digging tool.
Selecting a stout-handled basting spoon, he took it out into the
garden and dug a hole in a flower bed, sticking the spoon in the ground
beside it. The Fuzzy knew what the hole was for, and used it, and then
filled it in and stuck the spoon back where he found it. He made some


ultrasonic remarks, audible as yeeks, in gratification at finding that
human-type people had civilized notions about sanitation too.
Find him something better tomorrow, a miniature spade. And fix up a
real place for him to sleep, and put in a little fountain, and...
It suddenly occurred to him that he was assuming that the Fuzzy
would want to stay with him permanently, and also to wonder whether
he wanted a Fuzzy living with him. Of course he did. A Fuzzy was fun,
and fun was something he ought to have more of. And a Fuzzy would be
a friend. A Fuzzy wouldn’t care whether he was manager-in-chief of the
Charterless Zarathustra Company or not, and friends like that were hard
to come by, once you’d gotten to the top.
Except for Leslie Coombes, he didn’t have any friends like that.
Some time during the night, he was awakened by something soft and
warm squirming against his shoulder.
“Hey; I thought I fixed you a bed of your own.”
“Yeek?”
“Oh, you want to bunk with Pappy Vic. All right.”
They both went back to sleep.



CHAPTER FIVE
IT WAS FUN having company for breakfast, especially company small
enough to sit on the table. The Fuzzy tasted Grego’s coffee; he didn’t
care for it. He liked fruit juice and sipped some. Then he nibbled ExteeThree, and watched quite calmly while Grego lit a cigarette, but
manifested no desire to try one. He’d probably seen humans smoking,
and may have picked up a lighted cigarette and either burned himself or
hadn’t liked it.
Grego poured more coffee, and then put on the screen. The Fuzzy
turned to look at it. Screens were fun: interesting things happened in
them. He was fascinated by the kaleidoscopic jumble of color. Then it
cleared, and Myra Fallada appeared in it.
“Good morning, Mr. Grego,” she started. Then she choked. Her
mouth stayed open, and her eyes bulged as though she had just
swallowed a glass of hundred-and-fifty-proof rum thinking it iced tea.
Her hand rose falteringly to point.
“Mr. Grego! That... Is that a Fuzzy?”
The Fuzzy was delighted; this was a lot more fun than the man in the
blue clothes, last night.


“That’s right. I found him making himself at home, here, last
evening.” He wondered how many more times he’d have to go over
that. “All I can get out of him is yeeks. For all I know, he may be a big
stockholder.”
After consideration, Myra decided this was a joke. A sacrilegious joke;
Mr. Grego oughtn’t to make jokes like that about the Company.
“Well, what are you going to do with it?”
“Him? Why, if he wants to stay, fix up a place for him here.”
“But... But it’s a Fuzzy!”
The Company lost its charter because of Fuzzies. Fuzzies were the
enemy, and loyal Company people oughtn’t to fraternize with them,
least of all Mr. Grego.
“Miss Fallada, the Fuzzies were on this planet for a hundred thousand
years before the Company was ever thought of.” Pity he hadn’t taken
that attitude from the start. “This Fuzzy is a very nice little fellow, who
wants to be friends with me. If he wants to stay with me, I’ll be very
happy to have him.” He closed the subject by asking what had come in
so far this morning.
“Well, the girls have most of the morning reports from last night
processed; they’ll be on your desk when you come down. And then...”


And then, the usual budget of gripes and queries. He thought most of
them had been settled the day before.
“All right; pile it up on me. Has Mr. Coombes called yet?”
Yes. He was going to be busy all day. He would call again before
noon, and would be around at cocktail time. That was all right. Leslie
knew what he had to do and how to do it. When he got Myra off the
screen, he called Chief Steefer.
Harry Steefer didn’t have to zip up his tunic or try to look wide
awake; he looked that way already. He was a retired Federation Army
officer and had a triple row of ribbon on his left breast to prove it.
“Good morning, Mr. Grego.” Then he smiled and nodded at the other
person in view in his screen. “I see you still have the trespasser.”
“Guest, Chief. What’s been learned about him?”
“Well, not too much, yet. I have what you gave Captain Lansky last
night; he’s tabulated all the reports and complaints on this wave of
ransackings and petty thefts. A rather imposing list, by the way. Shall I
give it to you in full?”
“No; just summarize it.”
“Well, it started, apparently, with ransacking in a couple of offices
and a ladies’ lounge on the eighth level down. No valuables taken, but


things tossed around and left in disorder, and candy and other edibles
taken. It’s been going on like that ever since, on progressively higher
levels. There were reports that somebody was in a couple of cafeteria
supply rooms, without evidence of entrance.”
“Human entrance, that is.”
“Yes. Lansky had a couple of detectives look those places over last
night; he says that a Fuzzy could have squirmed into all of them. I had
reports on all of it as it happened. Incidentally, there was nothing
reported for last night, which confirms the supposition that your Fuzzy
was responsible for all of it.”
“Regular little vest-pocket crime wave, aren’t you.” He pummeled the
Fuzzy gently. “And there was nothing before the night of the sixteenth
or below the eighth level down?”
“That’s right, Mr. Grego. I wanted to talk to you before I did
anything, but there may be a chance that either Dr. Mallin or Dr.
Jimenez may know something about it.”
“I’ll talk to both of them, myself. Dr. Jimenez was over on Beta until a
day or so before the trial; after he’d trapped the four Dr. Mallin was
studying, he stayed on to study the Fuzzies in habitat. He had a couple
of men helping him, paid hunters or rangers or something of the sort.”


“I’ll find out who they were,” Steefer said. “And, of course, almost
anybody who works out of Company House on Beta Continent may have
picked the Fuzzy up and brought him back and let him get away. We’ll
do all we can to find out about this, Mr. Grego.”
He thanked Steefer and blanked the screen, and punched out the call
combination of Leslie Coombes’s apartment. Coombes, in a dressing
gown, answered at once; he was in his library, with a coffee service and
a stack of papers in front of him. He smiled and greeted Grego; then his
eyes shifted, and the smile broadened.
“Well! Touching scene; Victor Grego and his Fuzzy. If you can’t lick
them, join them,” he commented. “When and where did you pick him
up?”
“I didn’t; he joined me.” He told Coombes about it. “What I want to
find out now is who brought him here.”
“My advice is, have him flown back to Beta and turned loose in the
woods where he came from. Rainsford agreed not to prosecute us for
what we did before the trial, but if he finds you’re keeping a Fuzzy at
Company House now, he’ll throw the book at you.”
“But he likes it here. He wants to stay with Pappy Vic. Don’t you,
kid?” he asked. The Fuzzy said something that sounded like agreement.


“Suppose you go to Pendarvis and make application for papers of
guardianship for me, like the ones he gave Holloway and George Lunt
and Rainsford.”
A gleam began to creep into Leslie Coombes’s eyes. He’d like nothing
better than a chance at a return bout with Gus Brannhard, with a notcompletely-hopeless case.
“I believe I could...” Then he banished temptation. “No; we have too
much on our hands now, without another Fuzzy trial. Get rid of him,
Victor.” He held up a hand to forestall a protest. “I’ll be around for
cocktails, about 1730-ish,” he said, “You think it over till then.”
Well, maybe Leslie was right. He agreed, and for a while they talked
about the political situation. The Fuzzy became bored and jumped down
from the table. After they blanked their screens he looked around and
couldn’t see him.
The door to the pantry-storeroom-toolroom-junkroom was open;
maybe he was in there investigating things. That was all right; he
couldn’t make the existing mess any worse. Grego poured more coffee
and lit another cigarette.


There was a loud crash from beyond the open door, and an alarmed
yeek, followed by more crashing and thumping and Fuzzy cries of
distress. Jumping to his feet, he ran to the door and looked inside.
The Fuzzy was in the middle of a puddle of brownish gunk that had
spilled from an open five gallon can which seemed to have fallen from a
shelf. Sniffing, he recognized it—a glaze for baked meats, mostly
molasses, that the chef had mixed from a recipe of his own. It took
about a pint to glaze a whole ham, so the damned fool had mixed five
gallons of it. Most of it had gone on the Fuzzy, and in attempting to get
away from the deluge he had upset a lot of jars of spices and herbs,
samples of which were sticking to his fur. Then he had put his foot on a
sheet of paper, and it had stuck; trying to pull it loose, it had stuck to
his hands, too. As soon as he saw Pappy Vic, he gave a desperate yeek
of appeal.
“Yes, yeek yourself.” He caught the Fuzzy, who flung both adhesive
arms around his neck. “Come on, here; let’s get you cleaned up.”
Carrying the Fuzzy into the bathroom, he dumped him into the tub,
then tore off the hopelessly ruined shirt. Trousers all spotted with the
stuff, too; change them when he finished the job. He brought a jar of


shampoo soap from the closet and turned on the hot water, tempering it
to what he estimated the Fuzzy could stand.
Now, wasn’t this a Nifflheim of a business? As if he hadn’t anything to
do but wash Fuzzies.
He rubbed the soap into the Fuzzy’s fur; the Fuzzy first resented and
then decided he liked it, shrieked in pleasure, and grabbed a handful of
the soap and tried to shampoo Grego. Finally, they got finished with it.
The Fuzzy liked the hot-air dryer, too. He’d never had a shampoo
before.
His fur clean and dry and fluffy, he sat on the bed and watched
Pappy Vic change clothes. It was amazing the way the Big Ones could
change their outer skins; must be very convenient. He made remarks,
from time to time, and Grego carried on a conversation with him.
After he had dressed, Grego recorded a message for the houseboy,
to be passed on to the chef and the gardener, to get everything to
Nifflheim out of that back room that didn’t belong there, and to keep
what little did in some kind of decent order. If that place could be kept
in order, now, the Fuzzy had one positive accomplishment to his credit.
They took the lift down to the top executive level—lifts appeared to
be a new experience for the Fuzzy, too—and into his private office. The


Fuzzy looked around in wonder, especially at the big globe of
Zarathustra, floating six feet off the floor on its own built-in
contragravity unit, spotlighted from above to simulate Zarathustra’s KOclass sun, its two satellites circling around it. Finally, for a better view,
he jumped up on a chair.
“If I had any idea you’d stay there... ” He flipped the screen switch
and got Myra on it. “I had a few things to clean up before I could come
down,” he told her, with literal truthfulness. “How many girls have we in
the front office, this morning?”
There were eight, and they were all busy. Myra started to tell him
what with; maybe four could handle it at a pinch, and six without undue
strain. That was another thing the Charterless Zarathustra Company
would have to economize on.
“Well, they can look after the Fuzzy, too,” he said. “Take turns with
him. He’s in here, trying to make up his mind what kind of deviltry to get
into next. Come get him, and take him out and tell the girls to keep him
innocently amused.”
“But, Mr. Grego; they have work...”


“This is more work. We’ll find out which one gets along best with
him, and promote her to chief Fuzzy-sitter. Are we going to let one
Fuzzy disrupt our whole organization?”
Myra started to remind him of what the Fuzzies had done to the
company already, then said, “Yes, Mr. Grego,” and blanked the screen.
A moment later she entered.
She and the Fuzzy looked at one another in mutual hostility and
suspicion. She took a hesitant step forward; the Fuzzy yeeked angrily,
dodged when she reached for him, and ran to Grego, jumping onto his
lap.
“She won’t hurt you,” he soothed. “This is Myra; she likes Fuzzies.
Don’t you, Myra?” He stroked the Fuzzy. “I’m afraid he doesn’t like you.”
“Well, that makes it mutual,” Myra said. “Mr. Grego, I am your
secretary. I am not an animal keeper.”
“Fuzzies are not animals. They are sapient beings. The Chief Justice
himself said so. Have you never heard of the Pendarvis Decisions?”
“Have I heard of anything else, lately? Mr. Grego, how you can make
a pet of that little demon, after all that’s happened...”
“All right, Myra. I’ll take him.”


He went through Myra’s office and into the big room they called
executive operations center, through which reports from all over the
Company’s shrunken but still extensive empire reached him and his
decisions and directives and orders and instructions were handed down
to his subjects. There were eight girls there, none particularly busy. One
was reading alternately from several sets of clipboarded papers and
talking into a vocowriter. Another was making a subdued clatter with a
teleprint machine. A third was at a drawing board, constructing one of
those multicolored zigzag graphs so dear to the organizational heart.
The rest sat smoking and chatting; they all made hasty pretense of
busying themselves as he entered. Then one of them saw the Fuzzy in
his arms.
“Look! Mr. Grego has a Fuzzy!”
“Why, it’s a real live Fuzzy!”
Then they were all on their feet and crowding forward in a swirl of
colored dresses and perfumes and eager, laughing voices and pretty,
smiling faces.
“Where did you get him, Mr. Grego?”
“Oh, can we see him?”


“Yes, girls.” He set the Fuzzy down on the floor. “I don’t know where
he came from, but I think he wants to stay with us. I’m going to leave
him here for a while. Don’t let him interfere too much with your work,
but keep an eye on him and don’t let him get into any trouble. It’ll be at
least an hour before I have anything ready to go out. You can give him
anything you’d eat yourselves; if he doesn’t want, he won’t take it. I
don’t think he’s very hungry right now. And don’t kill him with affection.”
When he went out, they were all sitting on the floor in a circle around
the Fuzzy, who was having a wonderful time. He told Myra to leave the
doors of her office open so he could go through when he wanted to.
Then he went through another door, into the computer room.
It was quarter-circular; two straight walls twenty feet long at right
angles and the curved wall between, the latter occupied by the input
board for the situation-analysis and operation-guidance computers. This
was a band of pale green plastic, three feet wide, divided into foot
squares by horizontal and vertical red lines, each square perforated with
thousands of tiny holes, in some of them little plug-in lights twinkled in
every color of the spectrum. Three levels down, a whole floor was
occupied with the computers this board serviced. From it, new


information was added in the quasi-mathematical symbology computers
understood.
He stood for a moment, looking at the Christmas-tree lights. Nothing
in the world would have tempted him to touch it; he knew far too little
about it. He wondered if they had started the computers working on the
sunstone-buying policy problem, then went out into his own office,
closing the door behind him, and sat down at his desk.
In the old, pre-Fuzzy days, he would have spent a leisurely couple of
hours here, drinking more coffee and going over reports. Once in a
while he would have made some comment, or asked a question, or
made a suggestion, to show that he was keeping up with what was
going on. Only rarely would any situation arise requiring his personal
action.
Now everybody was having situations; things he had thought settled
at the marathon staff conference of the past four days were coming
unstuck; conflicts were developing. He had to make screen-calls to
people he would never have bothered talking to under ordinary
circumstances—the superintendent of the meat-packing plant on Delta
Continent, the chief engineer on the now-idle Big Blackwater drainage
project, the master mechanic at the nuclear-electric power-unit plant.


He welcomed one such necessity, the master mechanic at the
electronics-equipment factory; they were starting production of ultrasonic hearing-aids for the Government, and he ordered half a dozen
sent around to his office. When he got one of them, he could hear what
his new friend was saying.
Myra Fallada came in, dithering in the doorway till he had finished
talking to the chief of chemical industries about a bottleneck in blastingexplosive production. As soon as he blanked the screen, she began.
“Mr. Grego, you will simply have to get that horrid creature out of
operations center. The girls aren’t doing a bit of work, and the noise is
driving me simply mad!”
He could hear shrieks of laughter, and the running scamper of Fuzzy
feet. Now that he thought of it, he had been hearing that for some time.
“And I positively can’t work... Aaaaaa!”
Something bright red hit her on the back of the head and bounced
into the room. A red plastic bag, a sponge bag or swimsuit bag or
something like that, stuffed with tissue paper. The Fuzzy ran into the
room, dodging past Myra, and hurled it back, within inches of her face,
then ran after it.


“Well, yes, Myra. I’m afraid this is being carried a bit far.” He rose
and went past her into her office, in time to see the improvised softball
come whizzing at him from the big office beyond. He caught it and went
on through; the Fuzzy ran ahead of him to a tall girl with red hair who
stooped and caught him up.
“Look, girls,” he said, “I said keep the Fuzzy amused; I didn’t say turn
this into a kindergarten with the teacher gone AWOL. It’s bad enough to
have the Fuzzies tear up our charter, without letting them stop work on
what we have left.”
“Well, it did get a little out of hand,” the tall redhead understated.
“Yes. Slightly.” Nobody was going to under-understate him. What was
her name? Sandra Glenn. “Sandra, he seems to like you. You take care
of him. Just keep him quiet and keep him from bothering everybody
else.”
He hoped she wouldn’t ask him how. She didn’t; she just said, “I’ll
try, Mr. Grego.” He decided to settle for that; that was all anybody could
do.
By the time he got back to his desk, there was a call from the head of
Public Services, wanting to know what he was going to tell the school


teachers about their job futures. When he got rid of that, he called Dr.
Ernst Mallin at Science Center.
The acting head of Science Center was fussily neat in an
uncompromisingly black and white costume which matched his
uncompromisingly black and white mind. He had a narrow face and a
small, tight mouth; it had been an arrogantly positive face once. Now it
was the face of a man who expects the chair he is sitting on to collapse
under him at any moment.
“Good morning, Mr. Grego.” Apprehensive, and trying not to show it.
“Good morning, Doctor. Those Fuzzies you were working with before
the trial; the ones Dr. and Mrs. van Riebeek have now. Were they the
only ones you had?”
The question took Mallin by surprise. They were, he stated positively.
And to the best of his knowledge Juan Jimenez, who had secured them
for him, had caught no others.
“Have you talked to Dr. Jimenez yet?” he asked, after hearing about
the Fuzzy in Company House. “I don’t believe he brought any when he
came in from Beta Continent.”


“No, not yet. I wanted to talk to you, first, about the Fuzzy and about
something else. Dr. Mallin, I gather you’re not exactly happy in charge
of Science Center.”
“No, Mr. Grego. I took it over because it was the only thing to do at
the time, but now that the trial is over, I’d much rather go back to my
own work.”
“Well, so you shall, and your salary definitely won’t suffer because of
it. And I want to assure you again of my complete confidence in you,
Doctor. During the Fuzzy trouble you did the best any man could have,
in a thoroughly impossible situation... ”
He watched the anxiety ebb out of Mallin’s face; before he was
finished, the psychologist was smiling one of his tight little smiles.
“Now, there’s the matter of your successor. What would you think of
Juan Jimenez?”
Mallin frowned. Have to make a show of thinking it over, and he was
one of these people who thought with his face.
“He’s rather young, but I believe it would be a good choice, Mr.
Grego. I won’t presume to speak of his ability as a scientist, his field is
rather far from mine. But he has executive ability, capacity for decisions


and for supervision, and gets along well with people. Yes; I should
recommend him.” He paused, then asked, “Do you think he’ll accept it?”
“What do you think, Doctor?”
Mallin chuckled. “That was a foolish question,” he admitted. “Mr.
Grego; this Fuzzy. You still have him at Company House? What are you
going to do with him?”
“Well, I had hoped to keep him, but I’m afraid I can’t. He is a little
too enterprising. He made my apartment look like a slightly used
battlefield this morning, and now he’s turning the office into a three-ring
circus. And Leslie Coombes advises me to get rid of him; he thinks it
may start Rainsford after us again. I think I’ll have him taken back to
Beta and liberated there.”
“I’d like to have him, myself, Mr. Grego. Just keep him at my home
and play with him and talk to him and try to find how he thinks about
things. Mr. Grego, those Fuzzies are the sanest people I have ever seen.
I know; I tried to drive the ones I had psychotic with frustrationsituation experiments, and I simply couldn’t. If we could learn their basic
psychological patterns, it would be the greatest advance in psychology
and psychiatry since Freud.”


He meant it. He was a different Ernst Mallin now; ready to learn, to
conquer his own ignorance instead of denying it. But what he wanted
was out of the question.
“I’m sorry, believe me I am. But if I gave you the Fuzzy, Leslie
Coombes would have a fit, and that’s nothing to what Ben Rainsford
would have; he’d bring prosecutions against the lot of us. If I do keep
him, you’ll have opportunity to study him, but I’m afraid I can’t.”
He brought the conversation to a close, and blanked the screen. The
noise had stopped in operation center; the work probably had, too. He
didn’t want to get rid of the Fuzzy. He was a nice little fellow. But...


CHAPTER SIX
HE WASN’T ABLE to get Juan Jimenez immediately. Juan was doing
something at the zoo, and the zoo was spread over too much area to
track him down. He left word to call him as soon as possible, and went
back to his own work, and finally had his lunch brought in and ate it at
the desk. The outside office got noisy again, for a while. The girls
seemed to be feeding the Fuzzy, and he wondered apprehensively on
what. Some of the things those girls ate would give a billygoat
indigestion. About an hour afterward, Jimenez was on the screen.
The chief mammalogist was a young man, with one of those cheerful,
alert, agreeable, sincere and accommodating faces you saw everywhere
on the upper echelons of big corporations or institutions. He might or
might not be a good scientist, but he was a real two-hundred-proof
Company man.
“Hello, Juan; calling from Science Center?”
“Yes, Mr. Grego. I was at the zoo; they have some new panzer pigs
from Gamma. When I got back, they told me you wanted to talk to me.”
“Yes. When you came back, just before the trial, from Beta, did you
bring any Fuzzies along with you?”


“Good Lord, no!” Jimenez was startled. “I got the impression that we
needed Fuzzies like we needed a hole in the head. I got the impression
that the one was about equal to the other.”
“Just like Ernst Mallin: the more you saw of them, the more sapient
they looked. Well, dammit, what else were they? What were you doing
on Beta?”
“Well, as I told you, Mr. Grego, we had a camp and we’d attracted
about a dozen of them around it with Extee-Three, and we were
photographing them and studying behavior, but we never made any
attempt to capture any, after the first four.”
“Beside yourself, who were ‘we’?”
“The two men helping me, a couple of rangers from Survey Division;
their names were Herckerd and Novaes. They helped me live-trap the
four I gave to Dr. Mallin, and they helped with the camp work, and with
photographing and so on.”
“Well, here’s the situation.” He went into it again, realizing why
witnesses in court who have been taken a dozen times over their stories
by the police and the prosecuting attorney’s people always sounded so
glib. “So, you see, I want to find out what this is. It may be something
quite innocent, but I want to be sure.”


"Well, I didn’t bring him in, and Herckerd and Novaes came in along
with me; they didn’t.”
“I wish you, or they, had brought him; then I’d know what this is all
about. Oh, another thing, Juan. As you know, Dr. Mallin was only in
temporary charge at Science Center after Kellogg was arrested. He’s
going back to what’s left of his original job, most happily, I might add.
Do you think you could handle it? If you do, you can have it.”
One thing you had to give Jimenez, he wasn’t a hypocrite. He didn’t
pretend to be overcome with the honor, and he didn’t question his own
fitness. “Why, thank you, Mr. Grego!” Then he went into a little speech
of acceptance which sounded suspiciously premeditated. Yes; he would
definitely accept. So Grego made a little speech of his own, ending:
“I suggest you contact Dr. Mallin at once. He knows of my decision to
appoint you, and you’ll find him quite pleased to turn over to you. Oh,
suppose we have lunch together tomorrow; by that time you should
know what you have, and we can talk over future plans.”
As soon as he had Jimenez off the screen he got Harry Steefer onto
it.
“Mallin says he knows nothing about it, and so does Juan Jimenez. I
have the names of two men who were helping Jimenez on Beta... ”


Steefer grinned. “Phil Novaes and Moses Herckerd; they both worked
for the Survey Division. Herckerd’s a geologist, and Novaes is a hunter
and wildlife man. They came in along with Jimenez the day before the
trial, and then they vanished. A company aircar vanished along with
them. My guess is they either went prospecting or down into the
veldbeest country to do a little rustling. Want me to put out a wanted
for them?”
“Yes, do that, Chief, about the car. Too many company vehicles have
been vanishing along with employees since this turned into a Class-IV
planet. And I still want to know who brought that Fuzzy here—and
why.”
“We’re working on it,” Steefer said. “There are close to a hundred
people in half a dozen divisions who might have been over on Beta, in
Fuzzy country, and picked up a Fuzzy for a pet. Then, say the Fuzzy got
away here in Company House. Whoever was responsible would keep
quiet about it afterward. I’m trying to find out, but you said you wanted
it done discreetly.”
“As discreetly as possible; I want it done, though. And you might
start a search on some of the unoccupied floors on the eighth and ninth


levels down, for evidence of where the Fuzzy was kept before he got
away.”
Steefer nodded. “We haven’t any more men than we need,” he
mentioned. “Well, I’ll do the best I can.”
On past performance, Harry Steefer’s best was likely to be pretty
good. He nodded, satisfied, and went back to work, trying to figure what
sort of a cargo could be scraped up for the Terra-Baldur-Marduk liner

City of Kapstaad, which would be getting in, in a week. He was still at it,
calculating values on the Terra market against cubic feet of hold-space,
when the door from the computer room opened behind him.
He turned, to see Sandra Glenn in the doorway. Her red hair and
lipstick and her green eyes were vivid against a face that was white as
paper.
“Mr. Grego.” It was a barely audible whisper, shocked and frightened.
“Were you doing anything with the board?”
“Good God, no!” He shoved his chair back and came to his feet. “I
keep my ignorant fingers off that. What’s been done to it?”
She stepped forward and aside and pointed. When he looked he saw
the middle of the board a blaze of many-colored lights; not the randomlooking pattern that would make sense only to a computer or a


computerman, but a studied design, symmetrical and harmonious. A
beautiful design. But God, Allah to Zeus, take your pick—only knew what
gibbering nonsense it was putting into the trusting innards of that
computer. Sandra was close to the screaming meemies; she had some
idea of what kind of a computation would emerge.
“That,” he said, “was our little friend Fuzzy fuzzy holloway. He came
in here and saw the lights and found out they could be pulled out and
shifted around, and he decided to make a real pretty thing. Weren’t you,
or any of the other girls, watching him?”
“Well, I had some work, and Gertrude was watching him, and then
he lay down for a nap after lunch, and somebody called Gertrude to the
screen... ”
“All right. You’re not the first one to be fooled by a Fuzzy, and
neither’s Gertrude. They fooled a guy named Grego pretty badly a few
times. Has anything been done about this?”
“No; I just saw it a moment ago... ”
“All right. Call Joe Verganno. No; I’ll do it, his screen girl won’t try to
argue with me. You go find that Fuzzy.”
He crossed in two long steps to the communication screen and
punched a combination from the card taped up beside it. The girl who


answered started to say, “Master computerman’s office,” and then saw
who she had on screen. “Why, Mr. Grego!”
“Give me Verganno, quick.”
Her hand moved; the screen exploded into a shatter of light and
cleared with the computerman looking out of it.
“Joe, hell’s to pay,” he said, before Verganno could speak.
“Somebody shoved a lot of plugs into the input board here and bitched
everything up. Here.” He reached under the screen and grabbed
something that looked vaguely like a pistol, with a wide-angle lens
where the muzzle should be, connected with the screen by a length of
minicable. Aiming at the colored pattern on the board, he squeezed the
trigger switch. Behind him, Joe Verganno’s voice howled:
“Good God! Who did that?”
“A Fuzzy. No, I’m not kidding; that’s right. You got it?”
“Just a sec. Yeah, turn it off.” In the screen, Verganno grabbed a
handphone. “General warning, all computer outlets. False data has been
added affecting Executive One and Executive Two; no reliance is to be
placed on computations from Executive One or Two until further notice.
All right, Mr. Grego, I’ll be right up. You mean there’s a Fuzzy loose in
your office?”


“Yes, he’s been here all day. I don’t think,” he added, “that he’ll be
here much longer.”
One of the girls looked into the room from operation-center.
“We can’t find him anywhere, Mr. Grego!” she almost wailed. “And it’s
all my fault; I was supposed to be watching him!”
“Hell with whose fault it is; find him. If it’s anybody’s fault it’s mine
for bringing him here.”
That was a fault that would be rectified directly. He saw Myra
dithering in the door of her office.
“Get Ernst Mallin. Tell him to come here and get that damned Fuzzy
to Nifflheim out of here.”
Argue about the legal aspects later; if Mallin wanted a Fuzzy to study,
he could have one. Myra said something about better late than never,
and retracted into her office. The door from the outside hall opened
cautiously, and a couple of police and three mechanics from one of the
aircar hangars entered; somebody’s had sense enough to call for
reinforcements. One of the mechanics had a blanket over his arm; that
was smart, too. The girls were searching the big room, and keeping
watch on the doors. The hall door opened again, and Joe Verganno and
one of his technicians came in with a hand lifter loaded with tools.


“Anything been done to the board yet?” he asked.
“Nifflheim, no! We’re not making a bad matter worse than it is. See if
you can figure out what’s happening in the computer.”
“A couple of my men are going to find that out down below. Lemme
see this screen, now.” He went into the room, followed by the technician
with the lifter. The technician said something obscenely blasphemous a
moment later.
He went back to the big room; through the open door of her office,
he could hear Myra talking to somebody. “Come and get him, right
away. No, we don’t know where he is... Eeeeeeh! Get away from me,
you little monster! Mr. Grego, here he is!”
“Grab him and hold him,” he ordered. “Go help her,” he told one of
the cops. “Don’t hurt the Fuzzy; just get hold of him.”
Then he turned and ran through the computer room almost colliding
with Verganno’s helper, and ran into his own office. As he skidded
around his desk, the Fuzzy dashed through the door of Myra’s office.
The blanket the aircar mechanic had been carrying sailed after him,
missing him. Myra, the cop, and the mechanic came running after it; the
mechanic caught his feet in it and went down. The cop tripped over him,
and Myra tripped over the cop. The cop was cursing. Myra was


screaming. The mechanic, knocked breathless under both of them, was
merely gasping. The Fuzzy landed on top of the desk, saw Grego, and
took off from there, landing against his chest and throwing his arms
around Grego’s neck. One of the girls, coming through from Myra’s
office and avoiding the struggling heap in front of the door, whooped,
“Come on, everybody! Mr. Grego’s caught him!”
The cop, who had gotten to his feet, said, “I’ll take him, Mr. Grego,”
and reached for the Fuzzy. The Fuzzy yeeked loudly, and clung tighter
to Grego.
“No, I’ll hold him. He isn’t afraid of me.” He sat down in his desk
chair, holding the Fuzzy and stroking him. “It’s all right, kid. Nobody’s
going to hurt you. And we’re going to take you out of here, to a nice
place where you can have fun, and people’ll be good to you... ”
The words meant nothing to the Fuzzy; the voice, and the stroking
hands, were comforting and reassuring. He snuggled closer, making
happy little sounds. He was safe, now.
“What are you gonna do with him, Mr. Grego?” the cop asked.
Grego hugged the Fuzzy to him. “I’m not going to do anything with
him. Look at him; he trusts me; he thinks I won’t let anybody do


anything to him. Well, I won’t. I never let anybody who trusted me
down yet, and be damned if I’ll start now, with a Fuzzy.”
“You mean, you’re going to keep him?” Myra demanded. “After what
he did?”
“He didn’t mean to do anything bad, Myra. He just wanted to make a
pretty thing with the lights. I’ll bet he’s as proud as anything of it. It’s
just going to be up to me to see that he doesn’t get at anything else he
can make trouble with.”
“Dr. Mallin said he was coming right away. He’ll be disappointed.”
“He’ll have to be disappointed, then. He can study the Fuzzy here.
And get the building superintendent and the chief decorator; tell them I
want them to start putting in a Fuzzy garden up on my terrace. Tell both
of them to come up to my suite personally; tell them I want work
started immediately, and I’ll authorize double time for overtime till it’s
finished.”
The Fuzzy wasn’t scared, anymore. Pappy Vic was taking care of him.
And all these other Big Ones were listening to Pappy Vic; they wouldn’t
hurt him or chase him anymore.
“And call Tregaskis at Electronics Equipment; ask him what’s holding
up those hearing-aids he was going to send me. And I’ll need somebody


to help look after the kid. Sandra, do you do anything we can’t replace
you at? Then you’ve just been appointed Fuzzy-Sitter in Chief. You start
immediately; ten percent raise as of this morning.”
Sandra was happy. “I’ll love that, Mr. Grego. What’s his name?”
“Name? I don’t have a name for him, yet. Anybody have any ideas?”
“I have a few!” Myra said savagely.
“Call him Diamond,” Joe Verganno, in the doorway of the computer
room, suggested.
“Because he’s so small and precious? I like that. But don’t be a piker.
Call him Sunstone.”
“No; that was probably why the original Diamond was named, but I
was thinking of calling him after a little dog that belonged to Sir Isaac
Newton,” Verganno said. “It seems Diamond got hold of a manuscript
Sir Isaac had just finished and was going to send to his publisher. Mostly
math, all done with a quill pen, no carbons of course. So Diamond got
this manuscript down on the floor and he tore hell out of it, which meant
about three months’ work to do over. When Newton saw it, he just
looked at it, and then sat down with the dog on his lap, and said, ‘Oh,
Diamond, poor Diamond; how little you know what mischief you have
done!’ ”


“That’s a nice little story, Joe. It’s something I’ll want to remind
myself of, now and then. Bet you’ll give a lot of reasons to, won’t you,
Diamond?”



CHAPTER SEVEN
JACK HOLLOWAY LEANED back in his chair, resting one ankle across the
corner of the desk and propping the other foot on a partly open bottom
drawer. If he had to work in an office, it was nice working in a real one,
and it was a big improvement to be able to use his living quarters
exclusively for living in again. The wide doors at either end of the arched
prefab hut were open and a little breeze was drawing through, just
enough to keep the place cool and carry off his pipe smoke. There
wasn’t so much noise outside anymore; most of the new buildings were
up now. He could hear a distant popping of small arms as the dozen and
a half ZNPF recruits fired for qualification.
A hundred yards away, at the other end, Sergeant Yorimitsu was
monitoring screen-views transmitted in from a couple of cars up on
patrol, and Lieutenant Ahmed Khadra and Sergeant Knabber were taking
the fingerprints of a couple of Fuzzies that had come in an hour ago.
Little Fuzzy, resting the point of his chopper-digger on the floor with his
hands on the knob pommel, watched boredly. Fingerprinting was old
stuff, now. The space between was mostly vacant; a few unoccupied
desks and idle business machines scattered about. Some of these days


they’d have a real office force, and then he’d be able to get out and
move around among the natives, the way a Commissioner ought to.
One thing, they had the Fuzzy Reservation question settled, at least
for now. Ben Rainsford was closing everything north of the Little
Blackwater and the East Fork of the Snake to settlement; that country
all belonged to the Fuzzies and nobody else. Now if the Fuzzies could
only be persuaded to stay there. And Gerd and Ruth and Pancho Ybarra
and the Andrews girl were here, now, and set up. Maybe they’d begin to
find out a few of the things they had to know.
The stamp machine banged twice, putting numbers on the ID discs
for the two newcomers. Khadra brought the discs back and squatted to
put them on the two Fuzzies.
“How many is that, now, Ahmed?” he called down the hut.
“These are Fifty-eight and Fifty-nine,” Khadra called back. “Deduct
three, two for Rainsford’s, and one for Goldilocks.”
Poor little Goldilocks; she’d have loved having an ID disc. She’d been
so proud of the little jingle-charm Ruth had given her, just before she’d
been killed. Fifty-six Fuzzies; getting quite a population here.
The communication screen buzzed. He flipped a switch on the edge
of his desk and dropped his feet to the floor, turning. It was Ben


Rainsford, and he was furiously angry about something. His red
whiskers bristled as though electrically charged, and his blue eyes were
almost shooting sparks.
“Jack,” he began indignantly, “I’ve just found out that Victor Grego
has a Fuzzy cooped up at Company House. What’s more, he’s had the
effrontery to have Leslie Coombes apply to Judge Pendarvis to have him
appointed guardian.”
That surprised him slightly. To date, Grego hadn’t exactly established
himself as one of the Friends of Little Fuzzy.
“How did he get him, do you know?”
Rainsford gobbled in rage for a moment, then said:
“He claims he found this Fuzzy in his apartment, night before last, up
at the top of Company House. Now isn’t that one Nifflheim of a story;
does he think anybody’s silly enough to believe that?”
“Well, it is a funny place for a Fuzzy to be,” he admitted. “You
suppose it might be one that was live-trapped for Mallin to study, before
the trial? Ruth says there were only four, and they were all turned loose
the night of the Lurkin business.”
“I don’t know. All I know is what Gus Brannhard told me that
Pendarvis’s secretary told him, that Pendarvis told her, that Coombes


told Pendarvis.” That sounded pretty roundabout, but he supposed that
was the way Colonial Governors had to get things. “Gus says Coombes
claims Grego says he doesn’t know where the Fuzzy came from or how
he got into Company House. That is probably a thumping big lie.”
“It’s probably the truth. Victor Grego’s too smart to lie to his lawyer,
and Coombes is too smart to lie to the Chief Justice. Judges are funny
about that; they want statements veridicated, and after what you saw
happen to Mallin in court, you don’t suppose any of that crowd would try
to lie under veridication.”
Rainsford snorted scornfully. Grego was lying; if the veridicator
backed him up, the veridicator was as big a liar as he was.
“Well, I don’t care how he got the Fuzzy; what I’m concerned with is
what he’s doing to him,” Rainsford replied. “And Ernst Mallin; Coombes
admitted to Pendarvis that Mallin was helping Grego look after the
Fuzzy. Look after him! They’re probably torturing the poor thing, Grego
and that sadistic quack head-shrinker. Jack, you’ve got to get that Fuzzy
away from Grego!”
“Oh, I doubt that. Grego wouldn’t mistreat the Fuzzy, and if he was,
he wouldn’t apply for papers of guardianship and make himself legally
responsible. What do you want me to do?”


“Well, I told Gus to get a court order; Gus told me you were the
Native Commissioner, that it was your job to act to protect the Fuzzy...”
Gus didn’t think the Fuzzy needed any protecting; he thought Grego
was treating him well, and ought to be allowed to keep him. So he’d
passed the buck. He nodded.
“All right. I’m coming in to Mallorysport now. You’re three hours
behind us here, and if I use Gerd’s boat I can make it in three hours. I’ll
be at Government House at 1530, your time. I’ll bring either Pancho or
Ruth along. You have Gus meet us when we get in. And I’ll want to
borrow your Flora and Fauna.”
“What for?”
“Interpreters, and to interrogate Grego’s Fuzzy. And I want them
instead of any of our crowd here because they may have to testify in
court and they won’t have to travel back and forth. And tell Gus to get
all the papers we’ll need to crash Company House with. This is the first
time anything like this has come up. We’re going to give it the full
treatment.”
He blanked the screen, scribbled on a notepad and tore off the sheet,
then looked around. Ko-Ko and Cinderella and Mamma Fuzzy and a


couple of the Constabulary Fuzzies were working on a jigsaw puzzle on
the floor near his desk.
“Ko-Ko,” he called. “Do-bizzo.” When Ko-Ko got to his feet and came
over, he handed him the note. “Give to Unka Panko,” he said. “Make run
fast.”

VICTOR GREGO HAD Leslie Coombes on screen; the lawyer was saying:
“The Chief Justice is not hostile. Hospitable, I’d say. I think he’s trying
to be careful not to establish any precedent that might embarrass the
Native Affairs Commission later. He was rather curious about how the
Fuzzy got into Company House, though.”
“Tell him that makes two of us. So am I.”
“Have Steefer’s men found out anything yet?”
“Not that he’s reported. I’m going to talk to him shortly. The way
things are, he’s spread out pretty thin.”
“It would help a lot if we could explain that. Would you be willing to
make a veridicated statement of what you know?”
“With adequate safeguards. Not for anybody to pump me about
business matters.”
“Naturally. How about Mallin and Jimenez?”


“They will if they want to keep on working for the company.” It
surprised him that Coombes would even ask such a question. “You think
it’s necessary?”
“I think it very advisable. Rainsford will certainly oppose your
application; possibly Holloway. How about getting a statement from the
Fuzzy?”
“Mallin and I tried, last evening. I don’t know any of the language,
and he only has a few tapes he got from Lieutenant Ybarra at the time
of the trial. We have hearing aids, now. It’s a hell of a language; sounds
like Old Terran Japanese more than anything else. The Fuzzy was trying
to tell us something, but we couldn’t make out what. We have it all on
tape.
“And we showed him audiovisual portraits of those two Survey
rangers who were helping Jimenez. He made both of them; I doubt if he
likes them very much. We’re looking for them. We are also looking for a
Company scout car that vanished along with them.”
“Vehicle theft’s a felony; that will do to hold and interrogate them
on,” Coombes mentioned. “Well, shall I see you for cocktails?”
“Yes. You’d better call me, say every half-hour. If Rainsford gets
nasty about this, I may need you before then.”


After that, he called Chief Steefer. Steefer greeted him with:
“Mr. Grego, how red is my face?”
“Not noticeably so. Should it be?”
Steefer swore. “Mr. Grego, I want your authorization to make an
inch-by-inch search of this whole building.”
“Good God, Harry!” He was thinking of how many millions on millions
of inches that was. “Have you found something?”
“Not about the Fuzzy, but— You have no idea what’s been going on
here, on these unoccupied levels. We found places where people had
been camping for weeks. We found one place where there must have
been a nonstop party going on for a month; there was almost a lifter
scow full of empty bottles. And we found a tea pad.”
“Yes? What was that like?”
“Nothing much; lot of mattresses thrown around, and the floor
covered with butts—mostly chuckleweed or opiate-impregnated tobacco.
I don’t think that was any of our people; everybody and his girlfriend in
Mallorysport seems to have been sneaking in here. We have men at all
the landing stages, of course, but there aren’t enough to...” His face
hardened. “I’ve just gone slack on the job. That’s the only explanation I
can make.”


“We’ve all gone slack, Harry.” He thought of the mess in his pantry;
that was symptomatic. “You know, we may owe the Fuzzies a debt of
gratitude, if what’s happened to us will make us start acting like a
business concern instead of a bunch of kids in fairyland. All right; go
ahead. Finding out how the Fuzzy got in here is still of top importance,
but clean house generally while you’re at it and see that it stays cleaned
up.”
Then he called Juan Jimenez at Science Center. Jimenez had gotten a
new suit since yesterday, less casual, more executive. His public face
had been done over too, to emphasize efficiency rather than
agreeableness.
“Good morning, Victor.” He stumbled a little over the first name,
which was a prerogative of a division chief but to which he was not yet
accustomed.
“Good morning, Juan. I know you haven’t forgotten we’re lunching
together, but I wondered if you could make it a little early. There are a
couple of things we want to go over first. In twenty minutes?”
“Easily; sooner than that if you wish.”
“As soon as you can make it. Just come in the back way.”


Then he made another screen call. This was an outside call, for which
he had to look up the combination. When the screen cleared, a thinfaced, elderly man with white hair looked out of it. He wore a gray work
smock, the breast pockets full of small tools and calibrating instruments.
His name was Henry Stenson, and he might have been called an
instrument maker, just as Benvenuto Cellini might have been called a
jeweler.
“Why, Mr. Grego,” he greeted, in pleased surprise, or reasonable
facsimile. “I haven’t heard from you for some time.”
“No. Not since that gadget you planted in my globe stopped
broadcasting. Incidentally, the globe’s about thirty seconds slow, and
both moons are impossibly out of synchronization. We had to stop it to
take out that thing you built into it, and none of my people has your fine
touch.”
Stenson grimaced slightly. “I suppose you know for whom I did
that?”
“Well, I’m not certain whether you’re Navy Intelligence, like our
former employee, Ruth Ortheris, or Colonial Office Investigative Bureau;
but that’s minor. Whoever, they’re to be congratulated on an excellent
operative. You know, I could get quite nasty about that; planting radio-


transmitted microphones in people’s offices is a felony. I don’t intend
doing anything, but I definitely want no more of it. You can understand
my attitude.”
“Well, naturally, Mr. Grego. You know,” he added, “I thought that
thing was detection proof.”
“Instrumentally, yes. My people were awed when they saw the
detection baffles on that thing. Have you patented them? If you have,
we owe you some money, because we’re copying them. But nothing is
proof against physical search, and we practically tore my office apart as
soon as it became evident that anything said in it was known almost
immediately on Xerxes Base.”
Stenson nodded gravely. “You didn’t call me just to tell me you’d
caught me out? I knew that as soon as the radio went dead.”
“No. I want you to put the globe back in synchronization, as soon as
possible. And there’s another thing. You helped the people on Xerxes
design those ultrasonic hearing aids, didn’t you? Well, could you attack
the problem from the other side, Mr. Stenson? I mean, design a little
self-powered hand-phone, small enough for a Fuzzy to carry, that would
transform the Fuzzy’s voice to audible frequencies?”


Stenson was silent for all of five seconds. “Yes, of course, Mr. Grego.
If anything, it should be simpler. Of course, teaching the Fuzzy to carry
and use it would be a problem, but not in my line of work.”
“Well, try and get an experimental model done as soon as possible. I
have a Fuzzy available to try it. And if there’s anything patentable about
it, get it protected. Talk to Leslie Coombes. This may be of commercial
value to both of us.”
“You think there’ll be a demand?” Stenson asked. “How much do you
think a Fuzzy would pay for one?”
“I think the Native Affairs Commission would pay ten to fifteen sols
apiece for them, and I’m sure our electronics plant could turn them out
to sell profitably for that.”
Somebody had entered the office; in one of the strategically placed
mirrors, he saw that it was Juan Jimenez keeping out of the field of the
screen-pickup. He nodded to him and went on talking to Stenson, who
would be around the next morning to look at the globe. When they
finished the conversation and blanked screens, he motioned Jimenez to
his deskside chair.
“How much of that did you hear?” he asked.


“Well, I heard that white-haired old Iscariot say he’d be around
tomorrow to fix the globe...”
“Henry Stenson is no Iscariot, Juan. He is a Terran Federation secret
agent, and the Federation is to be congratulated on his loyalty and
ability. Now that I know just what he is, and now that he knows I know
it, we can do business on a friendly basis of mutual respect and distrust.
He’s going to work up a gadget by which the Fuzzies can speak audibly
to us.
“Now, about Fuzzies,” he continued. “We’re sure that your two
helpers, Herckerd and Novaes, brought this Fuzzy of mine here to
Mallorysport. You say they didn’t have him when they came back with
you?”
“Absolutely not, Mr. Grego.”
“Would you veridicate that?”
Jimenez didn’t want to, that was plain. But he did want to work for
the Company, especially now that he had just been promoted to chief of
Scientific Study and Research. He was as close to the top of the
Company House hierarchy as he could get, and he wanted to stay there.
“Yes, of course. I’d hoped, though, that my word would be good
enough...”


“Nobody’s word’s going to be good enough. I’m going to veridicate
what I know about it, myself; so’s Ernst Mallin. There will be quite a few
veridicated statements taken in the next few days. Now, I want you to
meet this Fuzzy. See if you know him, or if he knows you.”
They went out to the private lift and up to the penthouse. In the
living room, Sandra Glenn was lounging in his favorite chair, listening to
something from a record player with an earphone, and smoking. As they
entered, she shut off the player and closed her eyes. “Sojosso-aki; you
give me,” she said. “Aki-jossoso; I give you. So-noho-aki dokko; you tell
me how many.”
They tiptoed past her and out onto the terrace. Ernst Mallin was
sitting on a low hassock, with his hearing aid on; Diamond was
squatting in front of him, tying knots in a length of twine. An audiovisual
recorder was set up to cover both of them. Diamond sprang to his feet
and ran to meet them, crying out: “Pappy Vic! Heeta!” and holding up
the cord to show the knots he had been learning to tie.
“Hello, Diamond. Those are very fine knots. You are a smart Fuzzy.
How do I say that, Ernst?” Mallin said something, haltingly; he repeated
it, patting the Fuzzy’s head. “Now, how do I ask him if he’s ever seen
this Big One with me before?”


Mallin asked the question himself. Diamond said something; he
caught “Vov,” a couple of times. That was negative.
“He doesn’t know you, Juan. What I’m sure happened is that
Herckerd and Novaes came in with you, just before the trial, then went
back to Beta, probably in the aircar they stole from us, and picked up
this Fuzzy. We won’t know why till we catch them and question them.”
He turned to Mallin. “Get anything more out of him?”
Mallin shook his head. “I’m picking up a few more words, but I still
can’t be sure. He says two Hagga, the ones we showed him the films of,
brought him here. I think they brought some other Fuzzies with him; I
can’t be sure. There doesn’t seem to be any way of pluralizing in his
language. He says they were tosh-ki gashta, bad people. They put him
in a bad place.”
“We’ll put them in a bad place. Penitentiary place. I don’t suppose
you can find out how long ago this was? During or right after the trial, I
suppose.”
Sandra Glenn came out onto the terrace.
“Mr. Grego; Miss Fallada’s on screen. She says representatives of all
the press-services are here. They’ve heard about Diamond; they want
the story, and pictures of him.”


“That was all we needed! All right, tell her to have a policeman show
them up. I’m afraid our lunch’ll have to wait till we get through with
them, Juan.”



CHAPTER EIGHT
COMING OUT OF the lift, Jack Holloway advanced to let the others
follow and halted, looking at the three men waiting to meet them in the
foyer of Victor Grego’s apartment. Two he had met already: Ernst Mallin,
under uniformly unpleasant circumstances culminating in the murder of
Goldilocks, the beating of Leonard Kellogg, and the shooting of Kurt
Borch, at his camp, and Leslie Coombes, first at George Lunt’s complaint
court at Beta Fifteen and then in Judge Pendarvis’s court during the
Fuzzy Trial. As the trial had dragged out, the frigid politeness with which
he and Coombes had first met had thawed into something like mutual
cordiality.
But, except for news-screen appearances, he had never seen Victor
Grego before. Enemy generals rarely met while the fighting was going
on. It struck him that, meeting Grego for the first time as a complete
stranger, he would have instantly liked him. He had to remember that
Grego was the man who had wanted to treat Fuzzies as fur-bearing
animals and exterminate the whole race. Well, Grego hadn’t known any
Fuzzies, then. It was easy enough to plan atrocities against verbal
labels.


They paused for an instant, ten feet apart, Mallin and Coombes
flanking Grego, and Gus Brannhard, Pancho Ybarra, Ahmed Khadra, and
Flora and Fauna behind him, like two gangs waiting for somebody to pull
a gun. Then Grego stepped forward, extending his hand.
“Mr. Holloway? Happy to meet you.” They shook hands. “You’ve met
Mr. Coombes and Dr. Mallin. It was good of you to warn us you were
coming.”
Ben Rainsford hadn’t thought so. He’d wanted them to descend on
Company House by surprise, probably with drawn pistols, and catch
Grego red-handed at whatever villainy he was up to. Brannhard and
Coombes were shaking hands, so were Ybarra and Mallin. He introduced
Ahmed Khadra.
“And these other people are Flora and Fauna,” he added. “I brought
them along to meet Diamond.”
Grego stopped, and they came forward. He said, “Hello, Flora; hello,
Fauna. Aki-gazza heeta-so.”
The accent was reasonably good, but he had to think between words.
The two Fuzzies replied politely. Grego started to say that Diamond was
out on the terrace, then laughed when he saw the Fuzzy peeping
through the door from the living room. An instant later, Diamond saw


Flora and Fauna and rushed forward, and they ran to meet him, all
jabbering excitedly. A tall girl with red hair entered behind him; Grego
introduced her as Sandra Glenn. And behind her came Juan Jimenez;
regular Old Home Week.
“Shall we go in the living room, or out on the terrace?” Grego asked.
“I’d advise the terrace; the living room might be a little crowded, with
three Fuzzies getting acquainted. Sometimes it seems a trifle crowded
with just one Fuzzy.”
They went through the living room; the quiet and tasteful luxury of
its furnishings had suffered somewhat. There was an audiovisual
recorder set up, and an extra reading screen and an audiovisual screen
and a tape player; they looked more like office equipment than domestic
furnishings. Evidently Fuzzies did the same things to living rooms
everywhere. And another piece of furniture, surprising in any living
room; a thing like an old-fashioned electric chair, with a bright metal
helmet and a big translucent globe mounted above it. A polyencephalographic veridicator; Grego wasn’t expecting anybody to
take his unsupported word about anything. They all affected not to
notice it, and passed out onto the terrace.


This had evidently been Grego’s private garden; now it seemed to be
mostly the Fuzzy’s. An awful lot of men must have been working awfully
hard up here recently. There was a lot of playground equipment—swing,
slide, skeletal construction of jointed pipe for climbing-bars. A little
Fuzzy-sized drinking fountain, and a bathing pool. Grego seemed to
have just thought of everything he’d like if he were a Fuzzy and gotten
it. Diamond led Flora and Fauna to the slide, ran up the ladder, and
came shooting down. They both ran after him and tried it, too, and then
ran up to try it again. Have to get some playground stuff like that for the
camp. Bet Flora and Fauna would start pestering Pappy Ben to get them
some things like this, as soon as they got home.
According to plan, Ahmed Khadra and Pancho Ybarra stayed on the
terrace with the Fuzzies; he and Gus and Grego and Mallin and Coombes
went back inside. For a while, they chatted about Fuzzies in general and
Diamond in particular. One thing was obvious: Grego liked Fuzzies, and
was devoted to his own.
The Fuzzies had done him all the damage they could. Now he could
be friends with them.
“I suppose you want to hear how he turned up here? If you don’t
mind, I’d prefer veridicating what I have to tell you, so there won’t be


any argument about it. Do you want to test the machine first, Mr.
Brannhard?”
“It would be a good idea. Jack, you want to be the test witness?”
“If you do the questioning.”
A veridicator operated by identifying and registering the distinctive
electromagnetic brainwave pattern involved in suppression of a true
statement and substitution of a false one. You didn’t have to do that
aloud; a mere intention to falsify would turn the blue light in the globe
red, and even a yogi adept couldn’t control his thoughts enough to
prevent it. He took his place in the chair, and Brannhard clipped on the
electrodes and lowered the helmet over his head.
“What is your name?”
He answered that truthfully, and Gus nodded and asked him his place
of residence.
“How old are you?”
He lied ten years off his age. The veridicator caught that at once; Gus
wanted to know how old he really was.
“Seventy-four: I was born in 580. I couldn’t even estimate how much
to allow for on time-differential for hyperspace trips.”


“That’s the truth,” Gus said. “I didn’t think you were much over
sixty.”
Then he asked about the planets he’d been on. Jack named them,
including one he’d never been within fifty light-years of, and the
veridicator caught that. He ended in a crimson blaze of mendacity by
claiming to be a teetotaler, a Gandhian pacifist, and the illegitimate son
of a Satanist archbishop. Brannhard was satisfied; the veridicator
worked. He unfastened Jack, and Grego took his place.
The globe stayed blue all through Grego’s account of how he had
found Diamond in his bedroom; it was the same story they had already
gotten from newscasts while coming in from Beta. Then Grego gave
place to Mallin, and Mallin to Jimenez. They were all uninvolved in
bringing the Fuzzy to Mallorysport, and the veridicator supported them.
They all agreed that Diamond had recognized Herckerd and Novaes as
the men who had brought him and possibly other Fuzzies there.
“What do you think?” Coombes asked, when they were all back in
their chairs. “Do you think they brought those Fuzzies in to sell as pets?”
“I can’t see any other reason. I’ve been expecting something like this.
Why would they bring them to Company House, though? I don’t quite
see the sense in that.”


“I do.” Grego was angry about something. What he was angry about
emerged immediately; he spoke bitterly about what had been going on
among the unoccupied rooms of Company House. “Chief Steefer’s on
the warpath, starting with his own department. We have wants out for
Herckerd and Novaes, on a stolen-vehicle charge...”
“Forget about that,” Brannhard advised. “That’s petty larceny to what
I’m going to charge them with.”
Khadra came in from outside; he took off his beret, but left his pistol
on.
“Well, there were six of them,” he said. “Diamond, and five others.
Herckerd and Novaes—he’s positive about the identification—brought
them in and kept them for a couple of days in a dark room somewhere
in this building. Then the others were taken away; Diamond made a
break and got away from the two tosh-ki Hagga while they were being
put in the aircar. He doesn’t know how long ago it was—three sleeps, he
says. He found things to eat, and he found water to drink, and then
Pappy Vic found him and gave him wonderful-food. He doesn’t know
what happened to his friends; he hopes they got away too.”
“They didn’t in here,” Grego said. “Are you going to hunt for them?”
“We certainly are.”


“And if anything’s happened to them, we’ll hunt for Herckerd and
Novaes till they die of old age if we don’t catch them first,” Brannhard
added.
“How’s Diamond like it here, Ahmed?”
“Oh, wonderful. He’s the happiest Fuzzy I ever saw, and I never saw
any real melancholy Fuzzies. You have a mighty nice Fuzzy, Mr. Grego.”
“Well, that’s if I’ll be allowed to keep him,” Grego said.
“My report’s going to be very favorable,” Khadra told him.
“Of course you will, Mr. Grego. You like the Fuzzy, and he likes you,
and he’s happy here. That’s all I’m interested in.”
“I’m afraid Governor Rainsford isn’t going to see it like that, Mr.
Holloway.”
“Governor Rainsford isn’t Commissioner of Native Affairs. And he isn’t
the Federation Courts. The way Judge Pendarvis told me a week ago,
the court will accept the advice of the Commission on Fuzzy questions.”
“The Attorney-General has a little influence with the court, too,”
Brannhard said. “The Attorney-General will recommend granting your
application for adoption.” He rose to his feet. “We don’t have anything
more to talk about, do we? Then let’s go out and see how the Fuzzies
are doing.”



CHAPTER NINE
GUS BRANNHARD POURED coffee into a cup already half full of brandy,
brushed his beard out of the way with his left hand, and tasted it. It was
good, but he still thought it would be better out of a tin pannikin beside
a campfire on Beta. It was time to get down to business; after the bare
report while hustling indecently through cocktails, they had talked all
around the subject at dinner.
“Well, I can and will bring criminal charges,” he assured the others
who were having coffee in the drawing room at Government House.
“Forcible overpowering and transportation under restraint; if that isn’t
kidnapping what is it?”
“Try your damnedest to make enslavement out of it, Gus,” Jack
Holloway said. “If you get a conviction, we can have the pair of them
shot. And telecast the executions; a real memorable public example is
what we want, right now.”
“Well, I got the whole story out of Diamond,” Pancho Ybarra said.
“He and another Fuzzy met four others; the six of them went down a
little stream past a waterfall, and then came to a place where there
were two Hagga, the ones he was shown audiovisuals of. The Hagga


gave them Extee-Three, and then gave them something out of a bottle.
They all woke up with hangovers in what sounds like one of the
unfinished rooms in Company House. Diamond got away from them; the
two bad Big Ones took the rest away.”
“So now we have five Fuzzies to hunt,” Holloway said. “That’ll be your
job, Ahmed. You’ll stay here in Mallorysport. We’ll promote you to
captain and chief of detectives; that’ll give you a little status equality
with the other enforcement heads around here. If they’re trapping
Fuzzies for sale, that’s not just Native Commission business; that’s
Federation stuff.”
“They probably caught them for Mallin to experiment with,” Ben
Rainsford said.
Jack swore. “Ben, you haven’t been paying attention. All this stuff we
got from them was veridicated. They don’t know anything about any
Fuzzies but those four Gerd and Ruth have.”
“Mr. Grego has been cooperating very satisfactorily, Governor,”
Ahmed Khadra said, stiffly formal. “He has the whole Company police
working on it, and told me to call on Chief Steefer for anything, and
tomorrow Dr. Jimenez is going out to Beta to show some of our people


where he was camping. From the Fuzzy’s description, we think Herckerd
and Novaes went back there.”
“Well, what are you going to do about that Fuzzy at Company
House?” he asked Jack, ignoring Khadra’s words. “You aren’t going to let
him stay with Grego, are you?”
“Of course we are. Diamond’s happy, and Grego’s taking good care of
him. I’m going to recommend that Judge Pendarvis issue papers of
guardianship to him.”
“But it isn’t right! Not after all Grego did,” Rainsford insisted. “Why,
he was going to have all the Fuzzies trapped off for their furs. He took
your own Fuzzies away from you. He had Jimenez trap those other four,
and let Mallin torture them, ask Ruth about that, and then started the
story about the Lurkin girl and turned them loose for the mob to kill.
And look how he was trying to make out that you’d just taught your
Fuzzies a few tricks and then got me to back up your claim that they
were sapient beings...”
There, at last and obliquely, Ben had let the cat out. What he meant
was that Grego had tried to accuse him of deliberately engineering a
scientific fraud. Well, a scientist would have trouble forgiving that. It
was like accusing a soldier of treason or a doctor of malpractice.


“Well, it’s my professional opinion,” Pancho Ybarra said, “that Grego
and Diamond are much attached to each other, and that it would be
injustice to both to separate them, and probably psychologically harmful
to the Fuzzy. I shall so advise Judge Pendarvis.”
“I think that’ll be official policy,” Holloway said. “When we find
Fuzzies and humans living happily together, we have no right to
separate them, and we won’t.”
Rainsford, who had started to fill his pipe, looked up angrily.
“Maybe you forget I’m the Governor; I make the policy. I appointed
you...”
Jack’s white mustache was twitching at the tips; his eyes narrowed.
He looked like an elderly and irascible tiger.
“That’s right,” he said. “You appointed me Commissioner of Native
Affairs. Any time you don’t like the way I do my job, get yourself a new
Commissioner.”
“Get yourself a new Attorney-General, too. I’m with Jack on this.”
Rainsford dropped his pipe into the tobacco pouch.
“You mean you’re all against me? What are you doing, bucking for
jobs with the CZC?”


After a crack like that, there were those who would have insisted on
continuing the discussion by correspondence and through seconds. With
anybody but Ben Rainsford, he would have, himself. He turned to
Pancho Ybarra.
“Doctor, as a psychiatrist what is your opinion of that outburst?” he
asked.
“I’m not entitled to express an opinion,” the Navy psychologist
replied. “Governor Rainsford is not my patient.”
“You mean, I ought to be somebody’s?” Rainsford demanded.
“Well, now that you ask, you’re not exactly psychotic, but you’re
certainly not displaying much sanity on the subject of Victor Grego.”
“You think we ought to just sit back and let him do anything he
pleases; run the planet the way he did before the Pendarvis Decisions?”
“He didn’t do such a bad job, Ben,” he said. “I’m beginning to think
he did a damn sight better job than you’ll do unless you stop playing
Hatfields and McCoys and start governing. You have to arrange for
elections for delegates, and a constitutional convention. You have to
take over and operate all these public services the Company’s been
relieved of responsibility for when their charter was invalidated. And
you’ll have to stop this cattle rustling on Beta and Delta Continents, or


you’ll have a couple of first-class range wars on your hands. And you’d
better start thinking about the immigrant rush that’s going to hit this
planet when the news of the Pendarvis Decisions gets around.”
Rainsford, his pipe and tobacco shoved into his side pocket, was on
his feet. He’d tried to interrupt a couple of times.
“Oh, to Nifflheim with you!” he cried. “I’m going out and talk to my
Fuzzies.”
With that, he flung out of the room. For a moment, nobody said
anything, then Jack Holloway swore.
“I hope the Fuzzies talk some sense into him. Be damned if I can.”
They probably would, if he’d listen to them. They had more sense
than he had, at the moment. Ahmed Khadra, who had sat motionless
through the upper-echelon brawl, clattered his cup and saucer.
“Jack, you think we ought to go check in at the hotel?” he asked.
“Nifflheim, no! This isn’t Ben Rainsford’s private camp, this is
Government House,” Holloway said. “We work for the Government, too.
We have work to do now.”
“We’ll have to talk to him again.” He wasn’t looking forward to it with
any pleasure. “We have to get some kind of a Fuzzy Code scotch-taped
together, and he’ll have to okay it. We need special legislation, and till


we can get a Colonial Legislature, that’ll have to be by executive decree.
And you’ll have to figure out a way to make Fuzzies available for
adoption. You can’t break up a black market by shooting a few people
for enslavement; you’ll have to make it possible for people to get Fuzzies
legally, with controls and safeguards, instead of buying them from
racketeers.”
“I know it, Gus,” Jack said. “I’ve been thinking about it; a regular
adoption bureau. But who can I get to handle it? I don’t know anybody.”
“Well, I know everybody around Central Courts Building.” That ought
to be enough; Central Courts was like a village, in which everybody
knew everybody else. “Maybe Leslie Coombes would help me.”
“My God, Gus; don’t let Ben hear you say that,” Jack implored. “He’d
blow up about a hundred megatons. You might just as well talk about
getting G-dash-R-dash-E-dash-G-dash-O to help.”
“He could help a lot. If we ask him, he would.”
“Ruth did a lot of work with juvenile court, on her cover-job,” Ybarra
mentioned. “There’s some kind of a Juvenile Welfare Association... ”
“Claudette Pendarvis. The Chief Justice’s wife. She does a lot about
Juvenile Welfare.”


“Yes,” Ybarra agreed instantly. “I’ve heard Ruth talk about her. Very
favorably, too, and Ruth has a galloping allergy for volunteer do-gooders
as a rule.”
“She likes Fuzzies,” Jack said. “She couldn’t stay away from them
during the trial. I promised her a pair as soon as I got a nice couple.” He
got to his feet. “Let’s move into one of the offices, where we have a
table to work on, and some communication screens. I’ll call her now and
ask her about it.”

“FREDERIC, MAY I interrupt?”
Pendarvis turned from the reading-screen and started to lay aside his
cigar and rise. Claudette, entering the room, motioned him to keep his
seat and advanced to take the low cushion-stool, clasping her hands
about her knees and tilting her head back in the same girlish pose he
remembered from the long ago days on Baldur when he had been
courting her.
“I want to tell you something lovely, Frederic,” she began. “Mr.
Holloway just called me. He says he has two Fuzzies for me, a boy Fuzzy
and a girl Fuzzy; he’s going to have them brought in tomorrow or the
next day.”


"Well, that is lovely.” Claudette was crazy about Fuzzies. Had been
ever since the first telecasts of them, and she had watched them in
court and visited them at the Hotel Mallory during the trial. Now that he
considered, he would like a pair of Fuzzies, too. “I think I’ll enjoy having
them here as much as you will. I like Fuzzies, as long as they stay out of
my courtroom.”
They both laughed, remembering what seventeen Fuzzies and a Baby
Fuzzy had done to the dignity of the court while their sapience was
being debated.
“I hope this won’t be regarded as special privilege though,” he added.
“A great many people want Fuzzies, and...”
“But other people can have Fuzzies, too. That was what Mr. Holloway
was calling me about. They’ll be made available for adoption, and he
wants me to supervise it, to make sure they don’t get into wrong hands
and aren’t mistreated.”
That was something else. They’d both have to think about that
carefully.
“You think it would be proper for you to have an official position like
that?” he asked.


“I can’t see why not. I’m doing the same kind of work with Juvenile
Welfare.”
“You’ll be making decisions on who should and who should not be
allowed to adopt Fuzzies. When I get a Native Cases Court set up—I
think Yves Janiver, for that—your decisions will be accepted.”
“Whose decisions do you think Adolphe Ruiz’s Juvenile Court accepts
now?”
“That’s right,” he agreed. And she couldn’t accept the Fuzzies and
refuse to help with the adoption bureau; that wouldn’t be right, at all.
And she wanted Fuzzies so badly. “Well, go ahead, darling; do it.
Whoever takes that position will have to be somebody who really loves
Fuzzies. What did you tell Mr. Holloway?”
“That I’d talk to you, and then call him back. He’s at Government
House now.”
“Well, call him and tell him you accept. I’ll call Yves and talk to him
about the Native Cases Court...”
She had left the low seat while he was speaking; she stopped to kiss
him on the way out. She’d be so happy. He hoped he wouldn’t be too
severely criticized. Well, he’d been criticized before and survived it.


VICTOR GREGO WATCHED Diamond investigating the articles on top of
the low cocktail table. He took a couple of salted nuts from the glass
bowl, nibbled one, and put the rest back. He looked at the half-full
coffee cup and the liqueur glass, and left both alone. Then he started to
pick up the ashtray.
“No, Diamond. Vov. Don’t touch.”
“Vov ninta, Diamond,” Ernst Mallin, who was a slightly more
advanced Fuzzy linguist, said. “We ought to learn their language,
instead of making them learn ours.”
“We ought to teach them our language, so they can speak to
anybody, and not just Fuzzyologists.”
“I deplore that term, Mr. Grego. The suffix is Greek, from logos.
Fuzzy is not a Greek word, and should not be combined with it.”
“Oh, rubbish, Ernst. We’re not speaking Greek; we’re speaking Lingua
Terra. You know what Lingua Terra is? An indiscriminate mixture of
English, Spanish, Portuguese, and Afrikaans, mostly English. And you
know what English is? The result of the efforts of Norman men-at-arms
to make dates with Saxon barmaids in the Ninth Century Pre-Atomic,
and no more legitimate than any of the other results. If a little Greek
suffix gets into a mess like that, it’ll have to take care of itself the best


way it can. And you’d better learn to like the term, because it’s your new
title. Chief Fuzzyologist; fifteen percent salary increase.”
Mallin gave one of his tight little smiles. “For that, I believe I can
condone a linguistic barbarism.”
Diamond seemed, he couldn’t be sure, to be wanting to know why
not touch; would it hurt?
“And how do you explain that he mustn’t spill ashes on the floor, in
his own language? What are the Fuzzy words for ‘floor,’ and ‘ashes’?” He
leaned forward and dropped the ash from his cigarette into the tray.
“Ashtray,” he said.
Diamond repeated it as well as he could. Then he strolled over to
where Mallin sat. Mallin regarded smoking as an act of infantile oralism;
his ashtray was empty.
“Asht’ay?” he asked. “Diamond vov ninta?”
“You see. He knows that ashtray is a class-word, not just the name of
a specific object,” Mallin said. “And I tried so hard to prove that Fuzzies
couldn’t generalize. This one is empty; let’s see how we can explain the
difference. If we give him the word ‘ashes,’ and then... ”
A bell began ringing softly; Diamond turned quickly to see what it
was. It was the bell for the private communication screen, and only half


a dozen people knew the call-combination. He rose and put it on. Harry
Steefer looked out of it.
“We found it, sir; ninth level down.” That was the one below the first
reported thefts and ransackings. “The Fuzzies were penned in a small
room that looks as though it had been intended for a general toilet and
washroom. It’s right off a main hall, and somebody’s had an aircar in
and out and set it down recently. I’d say half a dozen Fuzzies for two or
three days.”
“Good. I want to see it. I want Diamond to see it, too. Send
somebody who knows where it is up to my private stage with a car small
enough to get into it.”
He blanked the screen and turned to Mallin. “You heard that. Well,
let’s all three of us go down and look at it.”

JACK HOLLOWAY STOPPED at the head of the long escalator and
looked down into the garden, now double-lighted by Darius, almost full,
and Xerxes, past full and just rising. After a moment he saw Ben
Rainsford reclining in a lawn-chair, with Flora and Fauna snuggled
together on his lap. As he started toward them, after descending, he


thought they were all asleep. Then one of the Fuzzies stirred and
yeeked, and Rainsford turned his head.
“Who is it?” he asked.
“Jack. Have you been here all evening?”
“Yes, all three of us,” Rainsford said. “I think it’s time for Fuzzies to
go to bed, now.”
“Ben, we just had a screen call from Company House. They found
where those Fuzzies had been kept, an empty room on one of the
unfinished floors. They showed us with a portable pickup; dark, filthy
place. The Company police are working on it for physical evidence to
corroborate Diamond’s story. And they’ve put out a general want for
those two Company rangers, Herckerd and Novaes; kidnapping and
suspicion of enslavement.”
“Who called you? Steefer?”
“Grego. He says we can count on him for anything. He’s really sore
about this.”
The Fuzzies had jumped to the ground and were trying to attract his
attention. Ben shifted in his chair, and began stuffing tobacco into his
pipe.


“Jack.” His voice was soft; he spoke hesitantly. “I’ve been talking to
the kids, out here, till they got sleepy. They had a big time at Company
House with Diamond. They say he’s lonesome for other Fuzzies. They’d
like him to come here and visit them, and they’d like to go back and visit
him again.”
“Well, a Fuzzy would get lonesome by himself. It didn’t take Little
Fuzzy long to go and bring the rest of his family into my place.”
“And they say that outside that he’s happy. They told me about all
the nice things he had, and the garden, and the room that was fixed up
for him. They say everybody’s good to him, and Pappy Vic loves him.
That’s what they call Grego; Pappy Vic, just like they call us Pappy Ben
and Pappy Jack.” His lighter flared, showing a puzzled face above the
pipe bowl. “I can’t understand it, Jack. I thought Grego would hate
Fuzzies.”
“Why should he? The Fuzzies didn’t know anything about the
Company’s charter; they don’t know a Class-IV planet from Nifflheim. He
doesn’t even hate us; he’d have done the same thing in our place. Ben,
he’s willing to call the war off; why can’t you?”
Rainsford puffed slowly, the smoke drifting and changing color in the
double moonlight.


“Do you honestly believe that Fuzzy wants to stay with Grego?” he
asked.
“It’d break Diamond’s heart if you took him away from Pappy Vic.
Ben, why don’t you invite Diamond over to play with your two? You
wouldn’t have to meet Grego; the girl he has helping with Diamond
could bring him.”
“Maybe I will. You’re on speaking terms with Grego; why don’t you?”
“I will, tomorrow.” The Fuzzies hadn’t wanted to play; they’d just
wanted to be noticed. He picked Flora up and gave her to Ben, then
took Fauna in his own arms. “Let’s go put them to bed, and then go
inside. We have a lot of things to do, in a hurry, and we need your
authorization.”
“Well, what?”
“Ahmed’s staying here; he and Harry Steefer and Ian Ferguson and
some others are having a conference tomorrow on this case and on
general Fuzzy protection. And I’m setting up an Adoption Bureau; Judge
Pendarvis’s wife’s agreed to take charge of that. We need laws, and till
there’s some kind of a legislature, you have to do that by decree.”
“Well, all right. But there’s one thing, Jack. Just because Grego’s with
us on this doesn’t mean I’m going to let him grab back control of this


planet, the way he had it before the Pendarvis Decisions. It took the
Fuzzies to break the Company’s monopoly; well, I’m going to see it stays
broken.”



CHAPTER TEN
KNOWING HENRY STENSON’S part in the dischartering of the
Zarathustra Company, Pancho Ybarra was mildly surprised to find him in
the Fuzzyroom Grego had fitted up back of the kitchenette of his
apartment, when Ernst Mallin, who met him on the landing stage,
ushered him in. Grego’s Fuzzy-sitter, Sandra Glenn, was there, and so,
although in the middle of business hours, was Grego himself. And, of
course, Diamond.
“Mr. Stenson,” he greeted noncommittally. “This is a pleasure.”
Stenson laughed. “We needn’t pretend to distant acquaintance,
Lieutenant,” he said. “Mr. Grego is quite aware of my, er, other
profession. He doesn’t hold it against me; he just insists that I no longer
practice it on him.”
“Mr. Stenson has something here that’ll interest you,” Grego said,
picking up something that looked like a small nuclear-electric razor.
“Turn off your hearing aid, if you please, Lieutenant. Thank you. Now,
Diamond, make talk for Unka Panko.”


“Heyo, Unka Panko.” Diamond said, when Grego held the thing to his
mouth, very clearly and audibly. “You hear Diamond make talk like
Hagga?”
“I sure do, Diamond! That’s wonderful.”
“How make do?” Diamond asked. “Make talk with talk-thing, talk like
Hagga. Not have talk-thing, no can talk like Fuzzy, Hagga no hear. How
make do?”
Fuzzies could hear all through the human-audibility range; the race
wouldn’t have survived the dangers of the woods if they hadn’t been
able to. They could hear beyond that, to about 40,000 cycles. None of
the other Zarathustran mammals could; that supported Gerd van
Riebeek’s theory that Fuzzies were living fossils, the sole survivors of a
large and otherwise extinct order of Zarathustran quasi-primates. Gerd
thought they had developed ultrasonic hearing to meet some ancient
survival-problem long before they had developed the power of
symbolizing ideas in speech, and had always conversed ultrasonically
with one another, probably to avoid betraying themselves to their
natural enemies.
“Fuzzies hear Big Ones talk. Fuzzies little, Hagga big, make big talk.
Hagga not hear Fuzzy talk, Fuzzies little, make little talk. So, Big Ones


make ear-things, make Fuzzy talk big in ears, can hear. Now, Hagga
make talk-things, so Fuzzies make big talk like Hagga, everybody hear,
have ear-things, not have ear-things.”
That wasn’t the question. Diamond had gotten that far, himself,
already. The question, which he repeated, was, “How make do?”
Grego was grinning at him. “You’re doing fine, Lieutenant. Now, go
ahead and give him a lecture on ultrasonics and electronics and
acoustics.”
“Has your Chief Fuzzyologist done anything on that yet?”
“I haven’t even tried,” Mallin said. “You know much more of the
language than I do; what Fuzzy words would you use to explain
anything like that?”
That was right. Any race—Homo sapiens terra, or Fuzzy fuzzy
holloway zarathustra—thought just as far as their verbal symbolism
went, and no further. And they could only comprehend ideas for which
they had words.
“Just tell him it’s Terran black magic,” Sandra Glenn suggested.
That would work on planets like Loki or Thor or Yggdrasil; on Shesha
or Uller, you could also mention the mysterious ways of the gods. The


Fuzzies had just about as much conception of magic or religion as they
had of electronics or nucleonics or the Abbot life-and-drive.
He stooped forward and held out his hand. “So-josso-aki, Diamond.
So-pokko Unka Panko.”
The Fuzzy gave him the thing, which he had been holding in both
hands. The resemblance to an electric razor was more than coincidental;
the mechanism was enclosed in the plastic case of one. The end that
would have done the shaving was open; the Fuzzy talked into that.
There was a circular screened opening on the side from which the
transformed sound emerged. It still had the original thumb-switch.
“Still has the original power-unit, too,” Stenson said. That would be a
little capsule the size of a 6-mm short pistol cartridge. “A lot of the parts
are worked over from ultrasonic hearing-aid parts. I’m going to have to
do something better than that switch, too. A little handle, maybe like a
pistol grip, with a grip-squeeze switch, so that the Fuzzy will turn it on
when he takes hold of it, and turn it off when he lets go. And it’ll have to
be a lot lighter and a lot smaller.” He gestured toward some sheets of
paper on which he had been making diagrams and schematics and
notes. “I have some people at my shop working on that now. We’ll have


production prototypes in about a week. The Company’s factory will start
production as soon as they can tool up for it.”
“We’re getting a patent,” Grego said. “We’re calling it the Stenson
Fuzzyphone.”
“Grego-Stenson; it was your original idea.”
“Hell, I just told you what I wanted; you invented it,” Grego argued.
“As soon as we have all the bugs chased out, we’ll be in production. We
don’t know how much we’ll have to ask for them. Not more than twenty
sols, I don’t suppose.”
Flora and Fauna were puzzled. They sat on the floor at Pappy Ben’s
feet, looking up at the funny people that came and went in the picturething on the wall and spoke out of it. Long ago they had found out that
nothing in the screen could get out of it, and they couldn’t get in. It was
just one of the strange things the Big Ones had, and they couldn’t
understand it, but it was fun.
But then, all of a sudden, there was Pappy Ben, right in the screen.
They looked around, startled, thinking he had left them, but no, there
he was, still in the chair smoking his pipe. They both felt him to make
sure he was really there, then they both climbed onto his lap and
pointed at the Pappy Ben in the screen.


Flora and Fauna didn’t know about audiovisual recordings; they
couldn’t understand how Pappy Ben could be in two places at the same
time. That bothered them. It just couldn’t happen.
“It’s all right, kids,” he assured them. “I’m really here. That isn’t me,
there.”
“Is,” Flora contradicted. “I see it.”
“Is not,” Fauna told her. “Pappy Ben here.”
Maybe Pancho Ybarra or Ruth van Riebeek could explain it; he
couldn’t.
“Of course I’m here,” he said, hugging both of them. “That is just
not-real look-like.”
“It will be illegal,” the Pappy Ben in the screen was saying, “to
capture any Fuzzy in habitat by any other means, including the use of
intoxicants, narcotics, sleepgas, sono-stunners or traps. This will
constitute kidnapping. It will be illegal to keep any Fuzzy chained, tied or
otherwise physically restrained. It will be illegal to transport any Fuzzy
from Beta Continent to any other part of this planet without a permit
from the Native Affairs Commission, each permit to bear the fingerprints
of the Fuzzy for whom it is issued. It will be illegal knowingly to deliver


any Fuzzy to anybody intending to so transport him. This will constitute
kidnapping, also, and will be punished accordingly.”
The Pappy Ben in the screen was scowling menacingly. Flora and
Fauna looked quickly around to see if the real Pappy Ben was mad
about something too.
Flora said: “Make talk about Fuzzy.”
“Yes. Talk about what Big Ones do to bad Big Ones who hurt
Fuzzies,” he told her.
“Make dead, like bad Big One who make Goldilocks dead?” Fauna
asked.
“Something like that.”
That was what all the Fuzzies who had been in court during the trial
thought had happened. Suicide while of unsound mind due to remorse
of conscience was a little too complicated to explain to a Fuzzy, at least
at present.
All the Fuzzies who knew what had happened to Goldilocks thought
that had been no more than the bad Big One deserved.
Captain Ahmed Khadra, chief of detectives, ZNPF, and Colonel Ian
Ferguson, Commandant, Colonial Constabulary, were listening to the


telecast with Max Fane, the Colonial Marshal, in the latter’s office. In the
screen, Governor Rainsford was saying:
“And any person capturing or illegally transporting or illegally holding
in restraint any Fuzzy for purposes of sale will be guilty of enslavement.”
“Aah!” Max Fane set a stiffly extended index finger against the base
of his skull, cocked his thumb and clicked his tongue. “Death’s
mandatory; no discretion-of-the-court about it.”
“Yves Janiver’ll try all the Fuzzy cases. He likes Fuzzies,” Ferguson
said. “He won’t like people who mistreat them.”
“I know Janiver’s attitude on death penalties,” Fane said. “He doesn’t
think people should be shot for committing crimes; he thinks they
should be shot for being the kind of people who commit them. He thinks
shooting criminals is like shooting diseased veldbeest. A sanitation
measure. So do I.”
“If Herckerd and Novaes are smart, they’ll come in and surrender
now,” Ferguson said. “You think they still have the other five?”
Khadra shook his head. “I think they sold them to somebody in
Mallorysport as soon as they moved them out of Company House. If we
could find out who that is... ”


“I could name a dozen possibilities,” Max Fane told him. “And back of
each one of them is Hugo Ingermann.”
“I wish we could haul Ingermann in and veridicate him,” Ferguson
said.
“Well, you can’t. Ingermann’s a lawyer, and the only way you can
question a lawyer under veridication is catch him standing over a corpse
with a bloody knife in his hand. And you have a Nifflheim of a time
doing it, even then.”

“A GREAT MANY people want Fuzzies; we know that,” the Governor was
saying. “Many of them should have them; they would make Fuzzies
happy, and would be made happy by them. We are not going to deny
such people an opportunity to adopt these charming little persons. An
adoption bureau has been set up already; Mrs. Frederic Pendarvis, the
wife of the Chief Justice, will be in charge of it, and the offices have
already been set up in the Central Courts Building, and will open
tomorrow morning...”
“Oh, Daddy; Mother!” the little girl cried. “You hear that, now. The
Governor says people can have Fuzzies of their own. Won’t you get me
a Fuzzy? I’ll be as good as good to it—him, I mean, or her, whichever.”


The parents looked at one another, and then at their twelve-year-old
daughter.
“What do you think, Bob?”
“You’ll have to take care of it, Marjory, and that will be a lot of work.
You’ll have to feed it, and give it baths, and... ”
“Oh, I will; I’ll do anything, just if I can have one. And people mustn’t
call Fuzzies ‘it,’ Daddy; Fuzzies are people, too, like us. You didn’t call
me ‘it,’ when I was a little baby, did you?”
“I’m afraid your father did, my dear. Just at first. And you’ll have to
study and learn the language, so you can talk to the Fuzzy, because
Fuzzies don’t speak Lingua Terra. You know, Bob, I think I’d enjoy
having a Fuzzy around, myself.”
“You know, I believe I would, too. Well, let’s get around to this
adoption bureau the first thing tomorrow...”



CHAPTER ELEVEN
THEY WERE HAVING a party at the Pendarvis home. Jack Holloway sat
on his heels on the floor, smoking his pipe and interpreting, while the
judge and his wife, in a low easy-chair and on a drum-shaped hassock
respectively, were getting acquainted with the guests of honor, the two
Fuzzies Juan Jimenez had brought in from Beta Continent that evening.
Gus Brannhard, who had come along from Government House, was
sprawled in one of the larger chairs, chuckling in his beard. Juan
Jimenez and Ahmed Khadra had removed their hearing aids and carried
their drinks to the other side of the room, where they were talking about
Jimenez’s visit, with a couple of George Lunt’s troopers, to the site of his
former camp.
“They were back, after we left,” Jimenez was saying. “We could see
where they’d set a car down. There wasn’t much to see; they policed
everything up very neatly after they left, the second time. Didn’t leave
any litter around.”
“Or any evidence,” Khadra added.
“That was what Yorimitsu and Calderon said when they saw it. I
gather they take a dim view of neatness.”


"Around where they’re investigating, sure. Tidying up around the
scene of a crime’s gotten more criminals off than all the crooked lawyers
in the Galaxy. In this case it doesn’t matter. Herckerd and Novaes
brought those Fuzzies in; we know that. We have a witness.”
“Can you veridicate a Fuzzy?” Brannhard asked, over his shoulder. “If
you can’t, the defense’ll object.”
Pendarvis looked up and around. “Mr. Brannhard, I’m afraid I’d have
to sustain such an objection. I suspect that Judge Janiver, who’d be
hearing the case, would, too. If I were you, I’d find out. Have you ever
been veridicated?” he asked the Fuzzy on his lap.
The Fuzzy—the male member of the couple, who was trying to work
the zipper of his jacket—said, “Unnh?” The judge scratched the back of
his head, which the Fuzzy, like most furry people, liked, and wondered
how long it would take to learn the language.
“Not too long,” Jack told him. “It only took me a day to learn
everything the people on Xerxes learned; by the time we were starting
for home, after the trial, I could talk to them. What are you going to call
them?”
“Don’t they have names of their own, Mr. Holloway?” the judge’s wife
asked.


“They don’t seem to. In the woods, there are never more than six or
eight in a family, if that’s what the groups are. I guess all the natives
names are things like ‘me,’ and ‘you,’ and ‘this one,’ and ‘that one’.”
“You’ll have to have names for them, for the adoption papers,”
Brannhard said.
“At the camp, we just called them ‘the Newlyweds,’ ” Khadra said.
“How about Pierrot and Columbine?” Mrs. Pendarvis asked.
Her husband nodded. “I think that would be fine.” He pointed to
himself.
“Aki Pappy Frederic. So Pierrot. “
“Aki Py’hot? Py’hot siggo Pappy F’ed’ik. “
“He accepts the name. He says he likes you. What are you going to
do with them tomorrow, Mrs. Pendarvis? Do you have any human
servants here?”
“No, everything’s robotic, and I oughtn’t to leave them alone with
robots. Not till they get used to them.”
“Drop them off at Government House; they can play with Flora and
Fauna,” Brannhard suggested. “And I’ll call Victor Grego and invite his
Diamond over, and they can have a real party. First Fuzzy social event
of the season.”


A mellow-toned bell began chiming. The Judge set Pierrot on the
floor and excused himself; Pierrot trotted after him. In a moment, both
were back.
“Chief Earlie’s on screen,” he said. “He wants to talk either to Captain
Khadra or Mr. Holloway.”
That was the new Mallorysport chief of police. Jack nodded to
Khadra, who left the room.
“Probably found something out about Herckerd and Novaes,”
Brannhard said.
“Will you really charge them with enslavement?” Mrs. Pendarvis
asked. “That’s mandatory death.”
“You catch people, deprive them of their freedom, make property of
them,” Brannhard said. “What else can you call it? A pet slave is still a
slave, if he belongs to somebody else. I don’t know how a Fuzzy could
be made to work...”
“Nightclub entertainers, attractions in bars, sideshow acts...”
Khadra came back; he had his beret on, and was buckling on his
pistol.
“Earlie says he has a report on a Fuzzy being seen in an apartmentunit over on the north side of the city,” he said. “Informant says a Fuzzy


is being kept by a family on one of the upper floors. He’s sending men
there now.”
That would probably be one of the five Herckerd and Novaes had
brought in. He could see what had happened. The two former Company
employees had sold them all to somebody here in Mallorysport, some
racketeer who was selling them individually. There was somebody who
really did need shooting. And by this time, Herckerd and Novaes would
be back on Beta Continent, trapping more. Get the people who had
bought this Fuzzy under veridication, the police had plenty of ways to
make people want to talk, and work back from there.
“I’ll go see what it is,” Khadra was saying. “I’ll call in as soon as I
can. I don’t know how long I’ll be gone. In case I don’t get back, thanks
for a nice evening, Judge, Mrs. Pendarvis.”
He hurried out, and for a moment nobody said anything. Then
Jimenez suggested that if this were one of the Herckerd-Novaes lot,
Diamond ought to see him as soon as possible; he’d be able to identify
him. Khadra would think of that. Mrs. Pendarvis hoped there wouldn’t be
any shooting. Mallorysport city police were notoriously trigger-happy.
The conversation continued by jerks and starts; the two Fuzzies seemed
to be the only ones unconcerned.


After about an hour, Khadra returned; he had left his belt and beret
in the hall.
“What was it?” Brannhard asked. Jack was wanting to know if the
Fuzzy was all right.
“It wasn’t a Fuzzy,” Khadra said disgustedly. “It was a Terran
marmoset; these people have had it for a couple of years; brought it
from Terra. The people who own it have had a wire screen around their
terrace to keep it, ever since they moved in. Somebody in an aircar saw
it outside and thought it was a Fuzzy. I wonder how much more of this
we’re going to get.”
It was a wonder he hadn’t gotten that, himself, when his own family
was lost and he was hunting for them.


CHAPTER TWELVE
THE AIR TRAFFIC around Central Courts Building the next morning
seemed normal to Jack Holloway. There were quite a few cars on the
landing stage above the sixth level down when he came in, but no more
than he remembered from the time of the Fuzzy Trial. It was not until
he left the escalator on the fourth floor below, where the Adoption
Bureau offices were, that he began to suspect that there was a Fuzzy
rush on.
The corridor leading back from the main hall to the suite that had
been taken over yesterday was jammed. It was a well behaved, well
dressed crowd, mostly couples clinging to each other to avoid being
jostled apart. Everybody seemed to be happy and excited; it was more
like a Year-End Holidays shopping crowd than anything else.
A uniformed deputy-marshal saw him and approached, touching his
cap-brim in a half salute.
“Mr. Holloway; are you trying to get in to your offices? You’d better
come this way, sir; there’s a queue down at the other end.”
There must be five or six hundred of them. Cut that in half; most of
them were couples.

"How long’s this been going on?” he asked, noticing that several
more couples and individuals were coming behind him.
“Since about 0700. There were a few here before then; the big rush
didn’t start till 0830.”
Some of the people in the rear of the jam saw and recognized him.
“Holloway.” “Jack Holloway; he’s the Commissioner.” “Mr. Holloway; are
there Fuzzies here now?”
The deputy took him down the hall and unlocked the door of an
office; it was empty, and the desks and chairs and things shrouded in
dust-covers. They went through and out into a back hall, where another
deputy-marshal was arguing with some people who were trying to get in
that way.
“Well, why are they letting him in; who’s he?” a woman demanded.
“He works here. That’s Jack Holloway.”
“Oh! Mr. Holloway! Can you tell us how soon we can get Fuzzies?”
His guide rushed him, almost as though he were under arrest, along
the hall, and opened another door.
“In here, Mr. Holloway; Mrs. Pendarvis’s office. I’ll have to get back
and keep that mob in front straightened out.” He touched his cap-brim
again and hastened away.


Mrs. Pendarvis sat at a desk, her back to the door, going over a stack
of forms in front of her. Beside her, at a smaller desk, a girl was taking
them as she finished with them, and talking into the whispermouthpiece of a vocowriter. Two more girls sat at another desk, one
talking to somebody in a communication screen. Mrs. Pendarvis said,
“Who is it?” and turned her head, then rose, extending her hand. “Oh;
Mr. Holloway. Good morning. What’s it like out in the hall, now?”
“Well, you see how I had to come in. I’d say about five hundred,
now. How are you handling them?”
She gestured toward the door to the front office, and he opened it
and looked through. Five girls sat at five desks; each was interviewing
applicants. Another girl was gathering up application-forms and carrying
them to a desk where they were being sorted to be passed on to the
back office.
“I arrived at 0830,” Mrs. Pendarvis said. “Just after I dropped Pierrot
and Columbine off at Government House. There was a crowd then, and
it’s been going on ever since. How many Fuzzies have you, Mr.
Holloway?”
“Available for adoption? I don’t know. Beside mine and Gerd and
Ruth van Riebeek’s and the Constabulary Fuzzies, there were forty day


before yesterday. That had gotten up to a hundred and three by last
evening.”
“We have, to date, three hundred and eleven applications; there are
possibly twenty more that haven’t been sent back to me yet. By the time
we close, it’ll be five or six hundred. How are we going to handle this,
anyhow? Some of these people want just one Fuzzy, some of them want
two, some of them will take a whole family. And we can’t separate
Fuzzies who want to stay together. If you’d separate Pierrot and
Columbine, they’d both grieve themselves to death. And there are
families of five or six who want to stay together, aren’t there?”
“Well, not permanently. These groups aren’t really families; they’re
sort of temporary gangs for mutual assistance. Five or six are about as
many as can make a living together in the woods. They’re hunters and
food-gatherers, low Paleolithic economy, and individual small-game
hunters at that. When a gang gets too big to live together, they split up;
when one couple meets another, they team up to hunt together. That’s
why they have such a well-developed and uniform language, and I
imagine that’s how the news about the zatku spread all over the Fuzzy
country as fast as it did. They don’t even mate permanently. Your pair
are just young, first mating for both of them. They think each other are


the most wonderful ever. But you will have others that won’t want to be
separated; you’ll have to let them be adopted together.” He thought for
a moment. “You can’t begin to furnish Fuzzies for everybody; why don’t
you give them out by lot? Each of those applications is numbered, isn’t
it? Draw numbers.”
“Like a jury-drawing, of course. Let the jury-commissioners handle
that,” the Chief Justice’s wife said.
“Fair enough. You’ll have to investigate each of these applicants, of
course; that’ll take a little time, won’t it?”
“Well, Captain Khadra’s taking charge of that. He’s borrowed some
people from the schools, and some from the city police juvenile squad
and some from the company personnel division. I’ve been getting my
staff together the same way—parent-teacher groups, Juvenile Welfare.
I’m going to get a paid staff together, as soon as I can. I think they’ll
come from the Company’s public service division; I’m told that Mr.
Grego’s going to suspend all those activities in ninety days.”
“That’s right. That includes the schools, and the hospitals. Why don’t
you talk to Ernst Mallin? He’ll find you all the people you want. He’s
joined the Friends of Little Fuzzy, too, now.”


“Well, after we’ve allocated Fuzzies to these people, what then? Do
they come out to your camp and pick their own?”
“Good Lord, no! We have enough trouble, without having the place
overrun with human people.” He hadn’t given that thought until now.
“What we’ll need will be a place here in Mallorysport where a couple of
hundred Fuzzies can stay and where the people who have been
endorsed for foster-parents can come and select the ones they want.”
That would have to be a big place, with a park all around it, that
could be fenced in to keep them from wandering off and getting lost. A
nice place, where they could all have fun together. He didn’t know of
any such place, and asked her about it.
“I’ll talk to Mr. Urswick, he’s the Company Chief of Public Services.
He’ll know about something. You know, Mr. Holloway, I didn’t have any
idea, when I took this job, that it was going to be so complicated.”
“Mrs. Pendarvis, I’ve been saying that every hour on the hour since I
let Ben Rainsford talk me into taking the job I have. You’re going to
have to do something about information, too—Fuzzies, care and feeding
of; Fuzzies, psychology of; language. We’ll try to find somebody to
prepare booklets and language-learning tapes. And hearing aids.”


The door at the side of the room was marked INVESTIGATION. He found Ahmed Khadra in the room behind it, talking to somebody in a city
police uniform by screen.
“Well, have you gotten anything from any of them?” he was asking.
“Damn little,” the city policeman told him. “We’ve been pulling them
in all day, everybody in town who has a record. And Hugo Ingermann’s
been pulling them away from us as fast as they come in. He had a
couple of his legmen and assistants here with portable radios, and as
fast as we bring some punk in, they call somebody at Central Courts and
he gets a writ; order to show grounds for suspicion. Most of them we
can’t question at all; it takes an hour to an hour and a half from the time
they’re brought in before we can veridicate those we can. And none of
them knows a damn thing when we do.”
“Well, how about known associates? Didn’t either of them have any
friends?”
“Yes. All middle-salary Company people; they’ve been cooperating,
but none of them knows anything.”
The conversation went on for a few more minutes, then they blanked
screens. Khadra turned in his chair and lit a cigarette.


“Well, you heard it, Jack,” he said. “They just vanished, and the
Fuzzies with them. I’m not surprised we’re not getting anything out of
their friends in the Company. They wouldn’t know. We searched their
rooms; they seem to have cleaned out everything they had when they
disappeared. And we can’t get anything from underworld sources. None
of the city police stool-pigeons knows anything.”
“You know, Ahmed, I’m worried about that. I wonder what’s
happened to those Fuzzies...” He sat down on the edge of the desk and
got out his pipe and tobacco. “How soon will you be able to start
investigating these people who want Fuzzies?”

GERD VAN RIEBEEK refilled his cup and shoved the coffee across the
table to George Lunt. He ought to be getting back to work; they both
ought to. Work was piling up, with both Jack and Pancho away and
Ahmed Khadra permanently detached from duty at the camp.
“Eighty-seven,” Lunt said. “That’s not counting yours and mine and
Jack’s.”
“The Extee-Three’s getting low.” They’d had to start rationing it;
tomorrow, they’d not be able to issue any, or on alternate days
thereafter. The Fuzzies wouldn’t like that. “Jack says he thinks


speculators are buying it and holding it off the market. They’ll get big
prices for it when the Fuzzies start coming in to Mallorysport.”
There wasn’t much Extee-Three on Zarathustra. People kept a tin or
so in their aircars, in case of forced landings in the wilderness which was
ninety percent of the planet’s land surface, but until the Fuzzies found
out about it, the consumption had been practically zero. There was a
supply on Xerxes, for emergency ships’ stores, individual survival kits
and so on, but that wouldn’t last. It was on order, but it would be four
months till any could get in from the nearest Federation planet. And the
supply on hand wouldn’t last that long.
“Personally, I wish there were eighty-seven hundred of them,” Lunt
said. “No, I’m not crazy, and I mean it. The ones we have here aren’t
getting into deviltry down in the farming country. So far, I haven’t heard
of any of them getting that far, except that one family that’s moved in
on that backwoods farm, and they’re behaving themselves. But wait till
they get down in the real farm country, and among the sugar
plantations. You know, Jack and I thought, at first, that our big job was
going to be protecting Fuzzies from humans. It looks to me, now, like
it’s going to be the other way round too.”


“That’s right. They won’t mean any harm; the only malicious thing I
ever heard of Fuzzies doing was the time Jack’s family wrecked Juan
Jimenez’s office, after they broke out of the cages he put them in, and I
don’t blame them for that. But they just don’t understand about what
they mustn’t do among humans. They don’t seem to have any idea at all
of property in the absence of a visible owner.”
“That’s what I’m talking about. Crops; they won’t understand that
somebody’s planted them, they’ll think they’re just there. And I never
saw a farmer that wouldn’t shoot first and argue afterward to protect his
crops.”
“Education,” Gerd said.
“Recipe for roast turkey—first catch a turkey,” Lunt said. “We’re
educating this crowd. How in Nifflheim are we going to catch all the
other ones?”
“Educate the farmers. What do Fuzzies eat, beside Extee-Three?”
“Zatku, and they’ve cleaned all of them out around the camp. That’s
why we have to have one car patrolling a couple of miles out to shoot
harpies off.”
“And do you know any kind of crops land-prawns don’t destroy? I
was making a study of them, for a while. I don’t. That’s what I mean by


educating the farmers. A Fuzzy does X-much damage to crops. He kills
half a dozen land-prawns a day, and among them they do about Xtimes-ten damage.”
“Write up a script about it, and we’ll put it on the air this evening. ‘Be
good to Fuzzies; Fuzzies are the farmer’s best friend.’ Maybe that’ll help
some.”
Gerd nodded. “Eighty-seven, we have now. How many little ones?”
“Beside Baby Fuzzy? Four. Why?”
“And we think we have five pregnancies. That’s all Lynne Andrews is
sure of; the only way she can tell is listening with a stethoscope for fetal
movements. They seem to be too small to make any conspicuous visible
difference. This is out of eighty seven. What kind of a birthrate do you
call that, George?”
George Lunt poured more coffee into his cup and blew on it
automatically. Somewhere, maybe Constabulary School, the coffee had
always been too hot to drink right away. Across the messhall, half a
dozen Fuzzies tagged behind a robot, watching it clear the tables.
“It sure to Nifflheim isn’t any population explosion,” he said.
“Race extinction, George. I don’t know what the normal life
expectancy is in the woods, but I’d say four out of five of them die by


violence. When the birthrate curve drops below the deathrate curve, a
race is dying out.”
“A hundred and two Fuzzies, and four children. Hey, you said five of
the girls were pregnant, didn’t you? And you admit that’s not complete,
if Doc Andrews has to use a stethoscope for a pregnancy test.”
“I wondered if you’d notice that. That’s not a bad ratio, for females
who have a monthly cycle instead of an annual mating season. And
these four children; we don’t know anything about the maturation
period, but in the three months we’ve been checking on him, Baby
Fuzzy’s only gained six ounces and an inch. I’d make it about fifteen
years, ten at very least.”
“Then,” Lunt said, “it isn’t birthrate at all. It’s infant mortality. They
just don’t live.”
“That’s it, George. That’s what I’m worried about. And Ruth and
Lynne, too. If we don’t find out what causes it, and how to stop it, there
won’t be any Fuzzies after a while.”

“THIS IS LIKE old times, Victor,” Coombes said, stretching in one of the
chairs. “Nobody here but us humans.”


“That’s right.” He brought the jug and the two glasses over and put
them on the low table, careful not to disturb a pattern of colored tiles
laid on one end of it. “That thing there is a Fuzzy work of art. It is
unfinished, but just see the deep symbolic significance.”
“You see it. I can’t.” Coombes accepted his glass with mechanical
thanks and sipped. “Where is everybody?”
“Diamond is a guest, at a place where I’m not welcome. Government
House. He and Flora and Fauna are meeting Pierrot and Columbine,
Judge and Mrs. Pendarvis’s Fuzzies. Sandra is chaperoning the affair,
and Ernst is conferring with Mrs. Pendarvis about quarters for a couple
of hundred Fuzzies who are coming to town in about a week to be
adopted.”
“I’ll say this: your Fuzzy and Fuzzyologists are getting in with the
right people. Did you hear Hugo Ingermann’s telecast this afternoon?”
“I did not. I pay people to do that kind of work for me. I went over a
semantically correct summary, with a symbolic-logic study. As nearly as
I can interpret it, it reduces to the propositions that, A) Ben Rainsford is
a bigger crook than Victor Grego, and, B) Victor Grego is a bigger crook
than Ben Rainsford, and, C) between them, they are conspiring to rob
and enslave everybody on the planet, Fuzzies included.”


“I listened to it very carefully, and recorded it, in the hope that he
might forget himself and say something actionable. He didn’t; he’s
lawyer enough to know what’s libel and what isn’t. Sometimes I dream
of being able to sue that bastard for something, so that I can get him in
the stand under veridication, but...” He shrugged.
“I noticed one thing. He’s attacking the Company, and he’s attacking
Rainsford, but at the same time he’s trying to drive wedges between us,
so we don’t gang up on him.”
“Yes. That spaceport proposition. ‘Why doesn’t our honest and
upright Governor do something to end this infamous space-transport
monopoly of the Company’s, which is strangling the economy of the
planet?’ ”
“Well, why doesn’t he? Because it would cost about fifty million sols,
and ships using it would have to load and unload from orbit. But that
sounds like a real live issue to the people who don’t think and have
nothing to think with, which means a large majority of the voters. You
know what I’m worried about, Leslie? Ingermann attacking Rainsford for
collusion with the Company. He hammers at that point long enough, and
Rainsford’s going to do something to prove he isn’t, and whatever it is,
it’ll hurt us.”


“That’s the way it looks to me, too,” Coombes agreed. “You know,
among the many benefits of the Pendarvis Decisions, we now have a
democratic government on Zarathustra. That means, we now have
politics here. Ingermann controls all the other rackets, and politics is the
biggest racket there is. Hugo Ingermann is running himself for political
boss of Zarathustra.”



CHAPTER THIRTEEN
THE AIRCAR SETTLED to the ground; the Marine sergeant at the
controls, who had been expecting to smash a dozen or so Fuzzies
getting down, gave a whoosh of relief. Pancho Ybarra opened the door
and motioned his companion, in Marine field-greens, to precede him,
then stepped to the ground. George Lunt, still in his slightly altered
Constabulary uniform, and Gerd van Riebeek, in bush-jacket and fieldboots, advanced to meet them, accompanied by a swarm of Fuzzies.
They all greeted him enthusiastically, and then wanted to know where
Pappy Jack was.
“Pappy Jack in Big House Place; not come this place with Unka
Panko. Pappy Jack come this place soon; two lights-and-darks,” he told
them. “Pappy Jack have to make much talk with other Big Ones.”
“Make talk about Fuzzies?” Little Fuzzy wanted to know. “Find Big
Ones for all Fuzzies?”
“That’s right. Find place for Fuzzies to go in Big House Place,” he
said.
“He’s been on that ever since Jack went away,” Gerd said. “All the
Fuzzies are going to have Big Ones of their own, now.”


“Well, Jack’s working on it,” he said. “You’ve both met Captain
Casagra, haven’t you? Gerd van Riebeek; Major Lunt. The captain’s
staying with us a couple of days; tomorrow Lieutenant Paine and some
reinforcements are coming out; fifty men and fifteen combat-cars, to
help out with the patrolling till we can get men and vehicles of our own.”
“Well, I’m glad to hear that, Captain!” Lunt said. “We’re very short of
both.”
“You have a lot of country to patrol, too,” Casagra said. “As Navy
Lieutenant Ybarra says, I’ll only stay a few days, to get the feel of the
situation. Marine-Lieutenant Paine will stay till you can get your own
force recruited up and trained. That is, if things don’t blow up again in
the veldbeest country.”
“Well, I hope they don’t,” Lunt said. “The vehicles are as welcome as
the men; we have very few of our own.”
“The Company’s making some available,” he said. “And along with his
other work, Ahmed Khadra’s starting a ZNPF recruiting drive.”
“Has Jack been able to get his hands on any more Extee-Three?”
Gerd wanted to know.
He shook his head. “He hasn’t even been able to get any for the
reception center, when the Fuzzies start coming in to town. The


Company’s going to start producing it, but that’ll take time. After they
get the plant set up, they’ll probably be running off test batches for a
couple of weeks before they get one right.”
“The formula’s very simple,” Casagra said.
“Some of the processes aren’t; I was talking to Victor Grego. His
synthetics people aren’t optimistic, but Grego’s whip-cracking at them to
get it done yesterday morning.”
“Isn’t that something?” Gerd asked. “Victor Grego, Fuzzy-lover. And
Jimenez, and Mallin; you ought to have heard the language my refined
and delicate wife used when she heard about that.”
“Last war’s enemies, next war’s allies,” Casagra laughed. “I spent a
couple of years on Thor; clans that’d be shooting us on sight one season
would be our bosom friends the next, and planning to double-cross us
the one after.”
An aircar rose from behind the ZNPF barracks across the run and
started south; another, which had been circling the camp five miles out,
was coming in.
“Harpy patrol,” Lunt was explaining to Casagra. “The Fuzzies cleaned
out all the zatku, land-prawns, around the camp, and they’ve been
hunting farther out each day. Harpies like Fuzzies the way Fuzzies like


zatku, so we have to give them air-cover. That’s been since you left,
Pancho; we’ve shot about twenty harpies since then. Four up to noon
today; I don’t know how many since.”
“Lost any Fuzzies yet?”
“Not to harpies, no. We almost had a lot of them massacred
yesterday; two of these families or whatever they are got into a shoppodiggo fight about some playthings. A couple got chopped up a little;
there’s one.” He pointed to a Fuzzy with a white bandage turbaned
about his head; he seemed quite proud of it. “One got a broken leg; Doc
Andrews has him in the hospital with his leg in a cast. Before I could get
to the fight, Little Fuzzy and Ko-Ko and Mamma Fuzzy and a couple of
my crowd had broken it up; just waded in with their flats as if they’d
been doing riot-work all their lives. And you ought to have heard Little
Fuzzy chewing them out afterward. Talked to them like an old sergeant
in boot camp.”
“Oh, they fight among themselves?” Casagra asked.
“This is the first time it’s happened here. I suppose they do, now and
then, in the woods, with their wooden zatku-hodda. They have a regular
fencing system. Nothing up to Interstellar Olympic epee standards, but
effective. That’s why half of them weren’t killed in the first five seconds.”


Lunt looked at his watch. “Well, Captain, suppose you come with me;
we’ll go to Protection Force headquarters and go over what we’ve been
doing and how your Lieutenant Paine and his men can help out.”
Casagra went over to the car and spoke to the sergeant at the
controls, then he and Lunt climbed in. Ybarra fell in with Gerd and they
started in the direction of the lab-hut.
“One of the pregnancy cases lost her baby,” Gerd said. “It was born
prematurely and dead. We have the baby, fetus rather, under
refrigeration. It seems to be about equivalent to human six-month
stage. It wouldn’t have survived in any case. Malformed, visibly and I
suppose internally as well. We haven’t done anything with it, yet; Lynne
wanted you to see it. The Fuzzies were all sore; they thought it rated a
funeral. We managed to explain to Little Fuzzy and a couple of others
what we wanted to do with it, and they tried to explain to the others. I
don’t know how far any of it got.”
The Fuzzies with them ran ahead, shouting “Mummy Woof! Auntie
Lynne! Unka Panko bizzo do-mitto!” They were all making a clamor
inside the lab-hut when he and Gerd entered, and Ruth, who was
working at one of the benches making some kind of a test, was trying to
shush them.


"Heyo, Unka Panko,” she greeted him, hastening through with what
she had at hand. “I’ll be loose in a jiffy.” She made a few notes, set a
test-tube in a rack and made a grease-pencil number on it, and then
pulled down the cover and locked it. “I hadn’t done this since med
school. Lynne’s back in the dispensary with a couple of volunteer native
nurses, looking after the combat casualty.” She got cigarettes out of her
smock-pocket and lit one, then dropped into a chair. “Pancho, what is
this about Ernst Mallin?” she asked. “Do you believe it?”
“Yes. He’s really interested, now that he doesn’t have to prove any
predetermined Company policy points about them. And he really likes
Fuzzies. I’ve seen him with that one of Grego’s, and with Ben’s Flora and
Fauna, and Mrs. Pendarvis’s pair.”
“I wouldn’t believe it, even if I saw it. I saw what he did to Id and
Superego and Complex and Syndrome. It’s a wonder all four of them
aren’t incurably psychotic.”
“But they aren’t; they’re just as sane as any other Fuzzies. Mallin’s
sorry for doing what he did with them, but he isn’t sorry about what he
learned from them. He says Fuzzies are the only people he’s ever seen
who are absolutely sane and can’t be driven out of sanity. He says if


humans could learn to think like Fuzzies, it would empty all the mental
hospitals and throw all the psychiatrists out of work.”
“But they’re just like little children. Dear, smart little children, but... ”
“Maybe children who are too smart to grow up. Maybe we’d be like
Fuzzies, too, if we didn’t have a lot of adults around us from the
moment we were born, infecting us with non-sanity. I hope we don’t
begin infecting the Fuzzies, now. What was this fight all about, the other
day?”
“Well, it was about some playthings, over in the big Fuzzy-shelter.
This new crowd that came in that day saw them and wanted to take
them. They were things that were intended for everybody to play with,
but they didn’t know that. There was an argument, and the next thing
the shoppo-diggo were going. The crowd who started it are all sorry,
now, and everybody’s friends.”
Lynne came through the door from the dispensary at the end of the
hut. A couple of Fuzzies were running along with her. Some of the
Fuzzies who had come in from outside with them drifted in through the
dispensary door, to visit their wounded friend. Lynne came over and
joined them. Gerd asked about the patient; the patient was doing well,
and being very good about staying in bed.


“How about the girl who lost her baby?” he asked.
“She’s running around as though nothing had happened. It was
heartbreaking, Pancho. The thing—it was so malformed that I’m not
sure it was male or female—was born dead. She looked at it, and
touched it, and then she looked up at me and said, ‘Hudda. Shi-nozza.’ ”
“Dead. Like always,” Gerd said.
“She acted as though it were only what she’d expected. I don’t think
more than ten percent of them live more than a few days. You want to
see it, Pancho?”
He didn’t, particularly; it wasn’t his field. But then, Fuzzy embryology
wasn’t anybody’s field, yet. They went over to one of the refrigerators,
and Gerd got it out and unwrapped it. It was smaller than a mouse, and
he had to use a magnifier to look at it. The arms and legs were short
and underdeveloped; the head was malformed, too.
“I can’t say anything about it,” he said, “except that it’s a good thing
it was born dead. What are you going to do with it?”
“I don’t want to dissect it myself,” Lynne said. “I’m not competent.
That’s too important to bungle with.”
“I’m no good at dissection. Take it in to Mallorysport Hospital; that’s
what I’d do.” He rewrapped the tiny thing and put it back. “The more of


you work on it, the less you’ll miss. You want to find everything out you
can.”
“That’s what I’m going to do. I’ll call them now, and see who all can
help, and when.”
Half a dozen Fuzzies came in from outside; they were carrying a dead
land-prawn. Some of the Fuzzies already in the hut ran ahead of them,
into the dispensary.
“Come on, Pancho; let’s watch,” Gerd said. “They’re bringing a
present for their sick friend. They must have dragged that thing three or
four miles.”

THERE WERE FIVE Fuzzies and two other people in the west lower
garden of Government House, as the aircar came in. The other people
were Captain Ahmed Khadra, ZNPF, and Sandra Glenn, so the five
Fuzzies would be the host and hostess, Fauna and Flora, and Pierrot and
Columbine Pendarvis and Diamond Grego. They had a red and gold ball,
two feet, or one Fuzzy-height, in diameter, and they were pushing and
chasing it about the lawn. Every once in a while, they would push it to
where Khadra was standing, and then he would give it a kick and send it
bounding. Jack Holloway chuckled; it looked like the kind of romping he


and his Fuzzies had done on the lawn beside his camp, when there had
been a lawn there and when there had just been his own Fuzzies.
“Ben, drop me down there, will you?” he said. “I feel like a good
Fuzzy-romp, right now.”
“So do I,” Rainsford said. “Will, set us down, if you please.”
The pilot circled downward, holding the car a few inches above the
grass while they climbed out. The Fuzzies had seen the car descend and
came pelting over. At first, he thought they were carrying pistols; at
least, they wore belts and small holsters. The things in the holsters had
pistol-grips, but when they drew them, he saw that they were three-inch
black discs, which the Fuzzies held to their mouths.
“Pappy Ben; Pappy Jack!” they were all yelling. “Listen; we talk like
Big Ones, now!”
He snapped off his hearing-aid. It was true; they were all speaking
audibly.
“Pappy Vic make,” Diamond said proudly.
“Actually, Henry Stenson made them,” the girl said. “At least, he
invented them. All Mr. Grego did was tell him what he wanted. They are
Fuzzyphones.”


“Heeta, Pappy Jack.” Diamond held his up. “Yeek-yeek. Yeeek!” He
was exasperated, and then remembered he’d taken it away from his
mouth. “Fuzzy-talk go in here, this side. Inside, grow big. Come out this
side, big like Hagga-talk,” he said, holding the device to his mouth.
“That good, Diamond. Good-good,” he commended. “What do you
think of this, Ben?”
Rainsford squatted in front of his own Fuzzies, holding out a hand.
“So-pokko-aki, Flora,” he said, and the Fuzzy handed him hers, first
saying, “Keffu, Pappy Ben; do’ brek.”
“I won’t.” Rainsford looked at it curiously, and handed it back. “That
thing’s good. Little switch on the grip, and it looks as though the
frequency transformer’s in the middle and they can talk into either side
of it.”
It would have to work that way; Fuzzies were ambidextrous. Gerd
had a theory about that. Fuzzies weren’t anatomists, mainly because
they didn’t produce fire and didn’t cut up the small animals they killed
for cooking, and only races who had learned the location and
importance of the heart fought with their hearts turned away from the
enemy. Homo sapiens terra’s ancestors in the same culture-stage were
probably ambidextrous too. Like most of Gerd’s theories, it made sense.


"Who makes these things?” he asked. “Stenson?”
“He made these, in his shop. The CZC electronics equipment plant is
going to manufacture them,” the girl said, adding: “Advertisement.”
“You tell Mr. Grego to tell his electronics plant to get cracking on
them. The Native Affairs Commission wants a lot of them.”
“You staying for dinner with us, Miss Glenn?” Rainsford asked.
“Thank you, Governor, but I have to take Diamond home.”
“I have to take Pierrot and Columbine home, too,” Khadra said.
“What are you doing this evening?”
“I have my homework to do. Fuzzy language lessons.”
“Well, why can’t I help you with your homework?” Khadra wanted to
know. “I speak Fuzzy like a native, myself.”
“Well, if it won’t be too much trouble...” she began.
Holloway laughed. “Who are you trying to kid, Miss Glenn? Look in
the mirror if you think teaching you Fuzzy would be too much trouble for
anybody Ahmed’s age. If I was about ten years younger, I’d pull rank on
him and leave him with the Fuzzies.”
Pierrot and Columbine thought all this conversation boring and
irrelevant. They trundled the ball over in front of Khadra and
commanded: “Mek kikko!”


Khadra kicked the ball, lifting it from the ground and sending it
soaring away. The Fuzzies ran after it.
“Dr. Mallin says you were looking at the sanatorium,” Sandra said.
“Yes. That’s going to be a good place. You know about it?” he asked
Khadra.
“Well, it’s a big place,” Khadra said. “I’ve seen it from the air, of
course. They only use about ten percent of it, now.”
“Yes. We’re taking a building, intended for a mental ward; about a
half square mile of park around it, with a good fence, so the Fuzzies
won’t stray off and get lost. We could put five-six hundred Fuzzies in
there, and they wouldn’t be crowded a bit. And it’ll be some time before
we get that many there at one time. I expect there’ll be about a
hundred to a hundred and fifty this time next week.”
“There were precisely eight hundred and seventy-two applications in
when the office closed this evening,” Khadra said. “When are you going
back, Jack?”
“Day after tomorrow. I want to make sure the work’s started on the
reception center, and I’m still trying to locate some Extee-Three. I think
a bunch of damn speculators have cornered the market and are holding
it for high prices.”


The Fuzzies had pushed the ball into some shrubbery and were
having trouble dislodging it. Sandra Glenn started off to help them, Ben
Rainsford walking along with her. Khadra said:
“That’ll probably be some of Hugo Ingermann’s crowd, too.”
“Speaking about Ingermann; how are you making out about Herckerd
and Novaes?” he asked. “And the five Fuzzies.”
“Jack, I swear I’m beginning to think Herckerd and Novaes and those
Fuzzies all walked into a mass-energy converter together. That’s how
completely all of them have vanished.”
“They hadn’t sold them before Ben’s telecast, evening before last.
After that, with the Adoption Bureau opening all that talk about
kidnapping and enslavement and so on, nobody would buy a bootleg
Fuzzy. So they couldn’t sell them, so they got rid of them.” How? That
was what bothered him. If they’d used sense, they’d have flown them
back to Beta and turned them loose. He was afraid, though, that they’d
killed them. By this time everybody knew that live Fuzzies could tell
tales. “I think those Fuzzies are dead.”
“I don’t know. Eight hundred and seventy-two applications, and a
hundred and fifty Fuzzies at most,” Khadra said. “There’ll be a market
for bootleg Fuzzies. Jack, you know what I think? I think those Fuzzies


weren’t brought in for sale. I think this gang—Herckerd and Novaes and
whoever else is in with them—are training those Fuzzies to help catch
other Fuzzies. Do you think a Fuzzy could be trained to do that?”
“Sure. To all intents and purposes, that’s what our Fuzzies are doing
out at the camp. You know how Fuzzies think? Big Ones are a Good
Thing. Any Fuzzy who has a Big One doesn’t need to worry about
anything. All Fuzzies ought to have Big Ones. That’s what Little Fuzzy
has been telling the ones from the woods, out at camp. Ahmed, I think
you have something.”
“I thought of something else, too. If this gang can make a deal with
some tramp freighter captain, they could ship Fuzzies off-planet and
make terrific profits on it. You wait till the news about the Fuzzies gets
around. There’ll be a sale for them everywhere—Terra, Odin, Freya,
Marduk, Aton, Baldur, planets like that. Anybody can bring a ship into
orbit on this planet, now, if he has his own landing-craft and doesn’t use
the CZC spaceport. In a month, word will have gotten to Gimli, that’s the
nearest planet, and in two more months a ship can get here from
there.”


“Spaceport. That could be why Ingermann’s been harping on this
nefarious CZC space terminal monopoly. If he had a little spaceport of
his own, now... ”
“Any kind of smuggling you can think of,” Khadra said. “Hot
sunstones. Narcotics. Or Fuzzies.”
Rainsford and Sandra Glenn were approaching; Sandra carried
Diamond, Pierrot and Columbine ran beside her, and Flora and Fauna
were trundling the ball ahead of them. He wanted to talk to Rainsford
about this. They needed more laws, to prohibit shipping Fuzzies offplanet; nobody’d thought of that possibility before. And talk to Grego;
the Company controlled the only existing egress from the planet.

LYNNE ANDREWS STRAIGHTENED and removed the binocular loop and
laid it down, blinking. The others, four men and two women in labsmocks, were pushing aside the spotlights and magnifiers and cameras
on their swinging arms and laying down instruments.
“That thing wouldn’t have lived thirty seconds, even if it hadn’t been
premature,” one man said. “And it doesn’t add a thing to what we don’t
know about Fuzzy embryology.” He was an embryologist, human-type,


himself. “I have dissected over five hundred aborted fetuses and I never
saw one in worse shape than that.”
“It was so tiny,” one of the women said. She was an obstetrician. “I
can’t believe that that’s human six-months equivalent.”
“Well, I can,” somebody else said. “I know what a young Fuzzy looks
like; I spent a lot of time with Jack Holloway’s Baby Fuzzy, during the
trial. And I don’t suppose a fertilized Fuzzy ovum is much different from
one of ours. Between the two, there has to be a regular progressive
development. I say this one is two-thirds developed. Misdeveloped, I
should say.”
“Misdeveloped is correct, Doctor. Have you any idea why this one
misdeveloped as it did?”
“No, Doctor, I haven’t.”
“They come from northern Beta; that country’s never been more than
air-scouted. Does anybody know what radioactivity conditions are, up
there? I’ve seen pictures of worse things than this from nuclear bomb
radiations on Terra during and after the Third and Fourth World Wars, at
the beginning of the First Federation.”
“The country hasn’t been explored, but it’s been scanned. Any natural
radioactivity strong enough to do that would be detectable from Xerxes.”


“Oh, Nifflheim; that fetus could have been conceived on a patch of
pitchblende no bigger than this table... ”
“Well, couldn’t it be chemical? Something in the pregnant female’s
diet?” the other woman asked.
“The Thaladomide Babies!” somebody exclaimed. “First Century,
between the Second and Third World Wars. That was due to chemicals
taken orally by pregnant women.”
“All right; let’s get the biochemists in on this, then.”
“Chris Hoenveld,” somebody else said. “It’s not too late to call him
now.”

FUZZIES DIDN’T HAVE Cocktail Hour; that was for the Big Ones, to sit
together and make Big One talk. Fuzzies just came stringing in before
dinner, more or less interested in food depending on how the hunting
had been, and after they ate they romped and played until they were
tired, and then sat in groups, talking idly until they became sleepy.
In the woods, it had not been like that. When the sun began to go to
bed, they had found safe places, where the big animals couldn’t get at
them, and they had snuggled together and slept, one staying awake all
the time. But here the Big Ones kept the animals away, and killed them


with thunder-things when they came too close, and it was safe. And the
Big Ones had things that made light even when the sky was dark, and
there were places where it was always bright as day. So here, there was
more fun, because there was less danger, and many new things to talk
about. This was the Hoksu-Mitto, the Wonderful Place.
And today, they were even happier, because today Pappy Jack had
come back.
Little Fuzzy got out his pipe, the new one Pappy Jack had brought
from the Big House Place, and stuffed it with tobacco, and got out the
little fire-maker. Some of the Fuzzies around him, who had just come in
from the woods, were frightened. They were not used to fire; when fire
happened in the woods, it was bad. That was wild fire, though. The Big
Ones had tamed fire, and if a person were careful not to touch it or let it
get loose, fire was nothing to be afraid of.
“We go other places, and all have Big Ones, tomorrow?” one asked.
“Big Ones for us, like Pappy Jack for you?”
“Not tomorrow. Not next day. Day after that.” He held up three
fingers.


“Then go in high-up-thing, to place like this. Big Ones come, make
talk. You like Big One, Big One like you, you go with Big One, you live in
Big One place.”
“Nice place, like this?”
“Nice place. Not like this. Different place.”
“Not want to go. Nice place here, much fun.”
“Then you not go. Pappy Jack not make you go. You want to go,
Pappy Jack find nice Big One for you, be good to you.”
“Suppose not good. Suppose bad to us?”
“Then Pappy Jack come, Pappy Jorj, Unka Ahmed, Pappy Ge’hd, Unka
Panko; make much trouble for bad Big One, bang, bang, bang!”



CHAPTER FOURTEEN
MYRA WAS VEXED. “It’s Mr. Dunbar. The chief chemist at Synthetic
Foods,” she added, as though he didn’t know that. “He is here himself;
he has something he insists he must give to you personally.”
“That’s what I told him to do, Myra. Send him in.”
Malcolm Dunbar pushed through the door from Myra’s office with an
open fiberboard carton under his arm. That had probably helped vex
Myra; Dunbar was an executive, and executives ought not to carry their
own parcels; it was infra dignitatem. He set it on the corner of the desk.
“Here it is, Mr. Grego; this is the first batch. We just finished the
chemical tests on it. Identical with both the Navy stuff and the stuff we
imported ourselves.”
He rose and went around the desk, reaching into the carton and
taking out a light brown slab, breaking off a corner and tasting it. It had
the same slightly rancid, slightly oily and slightly sweetish flavor as the
regular product. It tasted as though it had been compounded according
to the best scientific principles of dietetics, by somebody who thought
there was something sinful about eating for pleasure. He yielded to no


one in his admiration of Fuzzy fuzzy holloway, but anybody who liked
this stuff was nuts.
“You’re sure it’s safe?”
Dunbar was outraged. “My God, would I bring it here for you to feed
your Fuzzy if I didn’t know it was? In the first place, it’s made strictly
according to Terran Federation Armed Forces specifications. The bulkmatter is pure wheat farina, the same as Argentine Syntho-Foods and
Odin Dietetics use. The rest is chemically pure synthetic nutrients. We
have a man at the plant who used to be a chemical engineer at Odin
Dietetics; he checked all the processes and they’re identical. And we
tried it on all the standard lab animals; Terran hamsters and Thoran
tilbras, and then on Freyan kholphs and Terran rhesus monkeys. The
kholphs,” he footnoted, “didn’t like it worth a damn. It harmed none of
them. And I ate a cake of the damned stuff myself, and it took a couple
of hours and a pint of bourbon to get rid of the taste,” the martyr to
science added.
“All right. I will accept that it is fit for Fuzzy consumption.
Fortunately, the whole Fuzzy population of Mallorysport, all five of them,
are up on my terrace now. Let’s go.”


Ben Rainsford’s Flora and Fauna, and Mrs. Pendarvis’s Pierrot and
Columbine were with Diamond in the Fuzzy-room. Outside on the
terrace it was raw and rainy, one of Mallorysport’s rare unpleasant days.
They had a lot of colored triangular tiles on the floor, and were making
patterns with them. Sandra Glenn was watching them with one eye and
reading with the other. They all sprang to their feet and began yeeking,
then remembered the Fuzzy phones on their belts, whipped them out,
and began shouting, “Heyo, Pappy Vic!” He’d tried to explain that he
was Diamond’s Pappy Vic, and just Uncle Vic to the rest, but they
refused to make the distinction. Pappy to one Fuzzy, pappy to all.
“Pappy Vic give Estee-fee, “ he told them. “New estefee, very good.”
He set the box down and got out one of the slabs, breaking and
distributing it. The Fuzzies had nice manners; the two most recent
guests, Pierrot and Columbine, served first, held theirs till the others
were served. Then they all nibbled together.
They each took one nibble and stopped.
“Not good,” Diamond declared. “Not Estee-fee. Want Estee-fee. “
“Bad,” Flora pronounced it, spitting out what she had in her mouth
and carrying the rest to the trash-bin. “Estee-fee good; this not.”
“Estee-fee for look; not Estee-fee in mouth,” Pierrot said.


“What are they saying?” Dunbar wanted to know.
“They say it isn’t Extee-Three at all, and they want to know how
dumb I am to think it is.”
“But look, Mr. Grego; this is Extee-Three. It is chemically identical
with the stuff they’ve been eating all along.”
“The Fuzzies aren’t chemists. They only know what it tastes like, and
it doesn’t taste like Extee-Three to them.”
“It tastes like Extee-Three to me... ”
“You,” Sandra told him, “are not a Fuzzy.” She switched languages
and explained that Pappy Vic and the other Big One really thought it was
Estee-fee.
“Pappy Vic feel bad,” he told them. “Pappy Vic want to give real
Estee-fee.”
He gathered up the offending carton and carried it into the
kitchenette, going to one of the cupboards and getting out a tin of the
genuine article. Only a dozen left; he’d have to start rationing it himself.
He cut it into six pieces, put by a piece for Diamond after the company
was gone, and distributed the rest.
Dunbar was still arguing with Sandra that the stuff he’d brought was
chemically Extee-Three.


“All right, Malcolm, I believe you. The point is, these Fuzzies don’t
give a hoot on Nifflheim what the chemical composition is.” He looked at
the label on the tin. “The man you have at the plant worked for Odin
Dietetics, didn’t he? Well, this stuff was made on Terra by Argentine
Syntho-Foods. What do they use for cereal bulk-matter at Odin
Dietetics, some native grain?”
“No, introduced Terran wheat, and Argentine uses wheat from the
pampas and from the Mississippi Valley in North America.”
“Different soil-chemicals, different bacteria; hell, man, look at
tobacco. We’ve introduced it on every planet we’ve ever colonized, and
no tobacco tastes just like the tobacco from anywhere else.”
“Do we have any Odin Extee-Three?” Sandra asked.
“Smart girl; a triple A for good thinking. Do we?”
“Yes. The stuff we import’s Argentine, and the stuff the Navy has on
Xerxes is Odin.”
“And the Fuzzies can’t tell the difference? No, of course they can’t.
Jack Holloway bought his Extee-Three from us and gave it to his
Fuzzies, and when they got on Xerxes, the Navy fed them theirs. What
did you use in this stuff, local wheat?”


“Introduced wheat; seed came from South America. Grown on
Gamma Continent.”
“Well, Mal, we’re going to find out what’s the matter with this stuff.
Real all-out study, tear it apart molecule by molecule. Who’s our best
biochemist?”
“Hoenveld.”
“Well, put him to work on it. There’s some difference, and the Fuzzies
know it. You say this stuff’s Government specification standard?”
“It meets the Government tests.”
“Well; Napier has a lot of Extee-Three on Xerxes he won’t release
because it’s regulation required emergency stores. We’ll see if we can
trade this for it... ”

“WELL, YOU GOOFED on it somehow!” the superintendent of the
synthetics plant was insisting. “The Fuzzies eat regular Extee-Three;
they’re crazy about it. If they won’t eat your stuff, it isn’t Extee-Three.”
“Listen, Abe, goddamit, I know it is Extee-Three! We followed the
formula exactly. Ask Joe Vespi, here; he used to work at Odin
Dietetics... ”


“That’s correct, Mr. Fitch; every step of the process is exactly as I
remember it from Odin—”
“As you remembered it!” Fitch pounced triumphantly. “What did you
remember wrong?”
“Why, nothing, Mr. Fitch. Look, here’s the schematic. The farina,
that’s the bulk-matter, comes in here, to these pressure-cookers... ”

DR. JAN CHRISTIAAN Hoenveld was annoyed, and because he was an
eminent scientist and Victor Grego was only a businessman, he was at
no pains to hide it.
“Mr. Grego, do you realize how much work is piled up on me now?
Dr. Andrews and Dr. Reynier and Dr. Dosihara are at me to find out
whether there is any biochemical cause of premature and defective
births among Fuzzies. And now you want me to drop that and find out
why one batch of Extee-Three tastes differently to a Fuzzy from another.
There is a gunsmith here in town who has a sign in his shop, There are

only twenty four hours in a day and there is only one of me. I have
often considered copying that sign in my laboratory.” He sat frowning
into his screen from Science Center, across the city, for a moment. “Mr.


Grego, has it occurred to you or any of your master-minds at Synthetics
that difference may be in the Fuzzies’ taste-perception?”
“It has occurred to me that Fuzzies must have a sense of taste that
would shame the most famous wine-taster in the Galaxy. But I question
if it is more accurate than your chemical analysis. If those Fuzzies tasted
a difference between our Extee-Three and Argentine SynthoFood’s, the
difference must be detectable. I don’t know anybody better able to
detect it than you, Doctor; that’s why I’m asking you to find out what it
is.”
Dr. Jan Christiaan Hoenveld said, “Hunnh!” ungraciously. Flattered,
and didn’t want to show it.
“Well, I’ll do what I can, Mr. Grego... ”



CHAPTER FIFTEEN
I MUST BE very nice to Dr. Ernst Mallin. I must be very nice to Dr. Ernst
Mallin. I must be... Ruth van Riebeek repeated it silently, as though
writing it a hundred times on a mental blackboard, as an airboat lost
altitude and came slanting down across the city, past the high crag of
Company House, with the lower, broader, butte of Central Courts
Building in the distance to the left. Ahead, the sanatorium area drew
closer, wide parklands scattered with low white buildings. She hadn’t
seen Mallin since the trial, and even then she had avoided speaking to
him as much as possible. Part of it was because of the things he had
done with the four Fuzzies; Pancho Ybarra said she also had a guiltcomplex because of the way she’d fifth columned the company.
Rubbish! That had been intelligence work; that had been why she’d
taken a job with the CZC in the first place. She had nothing at all to feel
guilty about...
“I must be very nice to Dr. Ernst Mallin,” she said, aloud. “And I’m
going to have one Nifflheim of a time doing it.”
“So am I,” her husband, standing beside her, said. “He’ll have to
make an effort to be nice to us, too. He’ll still remember my pistol


shoved into his back out at Holloway’s the day Goldilocks was killed. I
wonder if he knows how little it would have taken to make me squeeze
the trigger.”
“Pancho says he is a reformed character.”
“Pancho’s seen him since we have. He could be right. Anyhow, he’s
helping us, and we need all the help we can get. And he won’t hurt the
Fuzzies, not with Ahmed Khadra and Mrs. Pendarvis keeping an eye on
him.”
The Fuzzies, crowded on the cargo-deck below, were becoming
excited. There was a forward view screen rigged where they could see
it, and they could probably sense as well as see that the boat was
descending. And this place ahead must be the place Pappy Jack and
Pappy Gerd and Unka Panko and Little Fuzzy had been telling them
about, where the Big Ones would come and take them away to nice
places of their own.
She hoped too many of them wouldn’t be too badly disappointed. She
hoped this adoption deal wouldn’t be too much of a failure.
The airboat grounded on the vitrified stone apron beside the building.
It looked like a good place; Jack said it had been intended for but never
used as a mental ward-unit; four stories high, each with its own terrace,


and a flat garden-planted roof. High mesh fences around each level; the
Fuzzies wouldn’t fall off. Plenty of trees and bushes; the Fuzzies would
like that.
They got the Fuzzies off and into the building, helped by the small
crowd who were waiting for them. Mrs. Pendarvis; she and the Chief
Justice’s wife were old friends. And a tall, red haired girl, Grego’s Fuzzysitter, Sandra Glenn. And Ahmed Khadra, in a new suit of civvies but
bulging slightly under the left arm. And half a dozen other people whom
she had met now and then—school department and company public
health section. And Ernst Mallin, pompous and black-suited and
pedantic-looking. I must be very nice... She extended a hand to him.
“Good afternoon, Dr. Mallin.”
Maybe Gerd was right; maybe she did feel guilty about the way she’d
tricked him. She was, she found, being counter-offensively defensive.
“Good afternoon, Ruth. Dr. van Riebeek,” he corrected himself. “Can
you bring your people down this way?” he asked, nodding to the
hundred and fifty Fuzzies milling about in the hall, yeeking excitedly.
People, he called them. He must be making an effort, too. “We have
refreshments for them. Extee-Three. And things for them to play with.”


“Where do you get the Extee-Three?” she asked. “We haven’t been
able to get any for almost a week, now.”
Mallin gave one of his little secretive smiles, the sort he gave when
he was one up on somebody.
“We got it from Xerxes. The Company’s started producing it, but
unfortunately, the Fuzzies don’t like it. We still can’t find out why; it’s
made on exactly the same formula. And as it’s entirely up to
Government specifications, Mr. Grego was able to talk Commodore
Napier into accepting it in exchange for what he has on hand. We have
about five tons of it. How much do you need at Holloway’s Camp? Will a
couple of tons help you any?”
Would a couple of tons help them any? “Why, I don’t know how to
thank you, Dr. Mallin! Of course it will; we’ve been giving it to our
Fuzzies a quarter-cake apiece on alternate days.” I must be very, VERY,
nice to Dr Mallin! “Why don’t they like the stuff you people have been
making? What’s wrong with it?”
“We don’t know. Mr. Grego has been raging at everybody to find out;
it’s made in exactly the same way... ”


WHEN MALCOLM DUNBAR lighted his screen, Dr. Jan Christiaan
Hoenveld appeared in it. He didn’t waste time on greetings or other
superfluities.
“I think we have something, Mr. Dunbar. There is a component in
both the Odin Dietetics and the Argentine Syntho-Foods products that is
absent from our own product. It is not one of the synthetic nutrient or
vitamin or hormone compounds which are part of the field-ration
formula; it is not a compound regularly synthesized, either commercially
or experimentally in any laboratory I know of. It’s a rather complicated
long-chain organic molecule; most of it seems to be oxygen-hydrogencarbon, but there are a few atoms of titanium in it. If that’s what the
Fuzzies find lacking in our products, all I can say is that they have the
keenest taste perception of any creature, sapient or nonsapient, that I
have ever heard of.”
“All right, then; they have. I saw them reject our Extee-Three in
disgust, and then Mr. Grego gave them a little of the Argentine stuff,
and they ate it with the greatest pleasure. How much of this unknown
compound is there in Extee-Three?”
“About one part in ten thousand,” Hoenveld said.
“And the titanium?”


“Five atoms out of sixty-four in the molecule.”
“That’s pretty keen tasting.” He thought for a moment. “I suppose it’s
in the wheat; the rest of that stuff is synthesized.”
“Well, naturally, Mr. Dunbar. That would seem to be the inescapable
conclusion,” Hoenveld said, patronizingly.
“We have quite a bit of metallic titanium, imported in fabricated form
before we got our own steel-mills working. Do you think you could
synthesize that molecule, Dr. Hoenveld?”
Hoenveld gave him a look of undisguised contempt. “Certainly, Mr.
Dunbar. In about a year and a half to two years. As I understand, the
object of manufacturing the stuff here is to supply a temporary shortage
which will be relieved in about six months, when imported Extee-Three
begins coming in from Marduk. Unless I am directly and specifically
ordered to do so by Mr. Grego, I will not waste my time on trying.”

OF COURSE, IT was ending in a cocktail party. Wherever Terran humans
went, they planted tobacco and coffee, to have coffee and cigarettes for
breakfast, and wherever they went they found or introduced something
that would ferment to produce C2H5OH and around 1730-ish each day,


they had Cocktail Hour. The natives on planets like Loki and Gimli and
Thor and even Shesha and Uller thought it was a religious observance.
Maybe it was, at that.
Sipping his own cocktail, Gerd van Riebeek ignored, for a moment,
the conversation in which he had become involved and eavesdropped on
his wife and Claudette Pendarvis and Ernst Mallin and Ahmed Khadra
and Sandra Glenn.
“Well, we want to keep them here for at least a week before we let
people take them away,” the Chief Justice’s wife was saying. “You’ll
have to stay with us for a day or so, Ruth, and help us teach them what
to expect in their new homes.”
“You’re going to have to educate the people who adopt them,”
Sandra Glenn said. “What to expect and what not to expect from
Fuzzies. I think, evening classes. Language, for one thing.”
“You know,” Mallin said, “I’d like to take a few Fuzzies around
through the other units of the sanatorium, to visit the patients. The
patients here would like it. They don’t have an awful lot of fun, you
know.”


That was new for Ernst Mallin. He never seemed to recall that Mallin
had thought having fun was important, before. Maybe the Fuzzies had
taught him that it was.
The group he was drinking with were Science Center and Public
Health people. One of them, a woman gynecologist, was wondering
what Chris Hoenveld had found out, so far.
“What can he find out?” Raynier, the pathologist, asked. “He only has
the one specimen, and it probably isn’t there at all, it’s probably
something in the mother’s metabolism. It might be radioactivity, but that
would only produce an occasional isolated case, and from what you’ve
seen, it seems to be a racial characteristic. I think you’ll find it in the
racial dietary habits.”
“Land-prawns,” somebody suggested. “As far as I know, nothing else
eats them but Fuzzies; that right, Gerd?”
“Yes. We always thought they had no natural enemies at all, till we
found out about the Fuzzies. But it’s been our observation that Fuzzies
won’t take anything that’ll hurt them.”
“They won’t take anything that gives them a bellyache or a hangover,
no. They can establish a direct relationship there. But whatever caused
this defective birth we were investigating, and I agree that that’s


probably a common thing with Fuzzies, was something that acted on a
level the Fuzzies couldn’t be aware of. I think there’s a good chance that
eating land-prawns may be responsible.”
“Well, let’s find out. Put Chris Hoenveld to work on that.”
“You put him to work on it. Or get Victor Grego to; he won’t throw
Grego out of his lab. Chris is sore enough about this Fuzzy business as it
is.”
“Well, we’ll have to study more than one fetus. We have a hundred
and fifty Fuzzies here, we ought to find something out... ”
“Isolate all the pregnant females; get Mrs. Pendarvis to withhold
them from adoption... ”
“... may have to perform a few abortions... ”
“... microsurgery; fertilized ova... ”
That wasn’t what he and Ruth and Jack Holloway had had in mind,
when they’d brought this lot to Mallorysport. But they had to find out; if
they didn’t, in a few more generations there might be no more Fuzzies
at all. If a few of them suffered, now...
Well, hadn’t poor Goldilocks had to be killed before the Fuzzies were
recognized for the people they were?


“TITANIUM,” VICTOR GREGO said. “Now that’s interesting.”
“Is that all you can call it, Mr. Grego?” Dunbar, in the screen,
demanded. “I call it impossible. I was checking up. Titanium, on this
planet, is damn near as rare as calcium on Uller. It’s present, and that’s
all; I’ll bet most of the titanium on Zarathustra was brought here in
fabricated form between the time the planet was discovered and seven
years ago when we got our steel-mill going.”
That was a big exaggeration, of course. It existed, but it was a fact
that they’d never been able to extract it by any commercially profitable
process, and on Zarathustra they used light-alloy steel for everything for
which titanium was used elsewhere. So a little of it got picked up, as a
trace-element, in wheat grown on Terra or on Odin, but it was useless
to hope for it in Zarathustran wheat.
“It looks,” he said, “as though we’re stuck, Mal. Do you think Chris
Hoenveld could synthesize that molecule? We could add it to the other
ingredients... ”
“He says he could—in six months to a year. He refuses to try unless
you order him categorically to.”
“And by that time, we’ll have all the Extee-Three we want. Well, a lot
of Fuzzies, including mine, are going to have to do without, then.”


He blanked the screen and lit a cigarette and looked at the globe of
Zarathustra, which Henry Stenson had running on time again and which
he could interpret like a clock. Be another hour till Sandra got back from
the new Adoption Center; she’d have to pick up Diamond at Government
House. And Leslie wouldn’t be in for cocktails this evening; he was over
on Epsilon Continent, talking to people about things he didn’t want to
discuss by screen. Ben Rainsford had finally gotten around to calling for
an election for delegates to a constitutional convention, and they
wanted to line up candidates of their own. It looked as though Mr. Victor
Grego would have cocktails with the manager-in-chief of the Charterless
Zarathustra Company, this evening. Might as well have them here.
Titanium, he thought disgustedly. It would be something like that.
What was it they called the stuff? Oh, yes; the nymphomaniac metal;
when it gets hot it combines with anything. An idea suddenly danced
just out of reach. He stopped, halfway from the desk to the cabinet, his
eyes closed. Then he caught it, and dashed for the communication
screen, punching Malcolm Dunbar’s call combination.
It was a few minutes before Dunbar answered; he had his hat and
coat on.
“I was just going out, Mr. Grego.”


“So I see. That man Vespi, the one who worked for Odin Dietetics; is
he still around?”
“Why, no. He left twenty minutes ago, and I don’t know how to reach
him right away.”
“No matter; get him in the morning. Listen, the pressure cookers, the
ones you use to cook the farina for bulk-matter. What are they made
of?”
“Why, light nonox-steel; our manufacture. Why?”
“Ask Vespi what they used for that purpose on Odin. Don’t suggest
the answer, but see if it wasn’t titanium.”
Dunbar’s eyes widened. He’d heard about the chemical nymphomania
of titanium, too.
“Sure; that’s what they’d use, there. And at Argentine Syntho-Foods,
too. Listen, suppose I give the police an emergency-call request; they
could find Joe in half an hour.”
“Don’t bother; tomorrow morning’s good enough. I want to try
something first.”
He blanked the screen, and called Myra Fallada. She never left the
office before he did.


“Myra; call out and get me five pounds of pure wheat farina, and be
sure it’s made from Zarathustran wheat. Have it sent up to my
apartment, fifteen minutes ago.”
“Fifteen minutes from now do?” she asked. “What’s it for; the Little
Monster? All right, Mr. Grego.”
He forgot about the drink he was going to have with Mr. Victor
Grego. You had a drink when the work was done, and there was still
work to do.

THERE WAS CLATTERING in the kitchenette when Sandra Glenn brought
Diamond into the Fuzzy-room. She opened the door between and looked
through, and Diamond crowded past her knees for a look, too. Mr.
Grego was cooking something, in a battered old stew pan she had never
seen around the place before. He looked over his shoulder and said, “Hi,
Sandra. Heyo, Diamond; use Fuzzyphone, Pappy Vic no get ear-thing.”
“What make do, Pappy Vic?” Diamond asked.
“That’s what I want to know, too.”
“Sandra, keep your fingers crossed; when this stuff’s done and has
cooled off, we’re going to see how Diamond likes it. I think we have
found out what’s the matter with that Extee-Three.”


“Estee-fee? You make Estee-fee? Real? Not like other?” Diamond
wanted to know.
“You eat,” Pappy Vic said. “Tell if good. Pappy Vic not know.”
“Well, what is it?” she asked.
“Hoenveld found what was different about it.” The explanation was
rather complicated; she had been exposed to, rather than studied,
chemistry. She got the general idea; the Extee-Three the Fuzzies liked
had been cooked in titanium.
“That’s what this stew pan is; part of a camp cooking kit I brought
here from Terra.” He gave the white mess in the pan a final stir and
lifted it from the stove, burning his finger and swearing; just like a man
in a kitchen. “Now, as soon as this slop’s cool... ”
Diamond smelled it, and wanted to try it right away. He had to wait,
though, until it was cool. Then they carried the pan, it had a
treacherous-looking folding handle, out to the Fuzzy-room, and Mr.
Grego spooned some onto Diamond’s plate, and Diamond took his little
spoon and tasted, cautiously. Then he began shoveling it into his mouth
ravenously.


“The Master Mind crashes through again,” she said. “He really likes
it.” Diamond had finished what was on his plate. “You like?” she asked,
in Fuzzy. “Want more?”
“Give him the rest of it, Sandra. I’m going to call Dr. Jan Christiaan
Hoenveld, and suggest an experiment for him to try. And after that, Miss
Glenn, will you honor me by having a cocktail with me?”

JACK HOLLOWAY LAUGHED. “So that’s it. When did you find out?”
“Mallin just screened me; he just got it from Grego,” Gerd van
Riebeek, in the screen, said. “They’re going to start tearing out all the
stainless-steel cookers right away, and replace them with titanium. Jack,
have you any titanium cooking utensils?”
“No. Everything we have here is steel. We have sheet titanium; the
house and the sheds and the old hangar are all sheet-titanium. We
might be able to make something... ” He stopped short. “Gerd, we don’t
have to cook the food in titanium. We can cook titanium in the food. Cut
up some chunks and put them in the kettles. It would work the same
way.”
“Well, I’ll be damned,” Gerd said. “I never thought of that. I’ll bet
nobody else did, either.”


DR. JAN CHRISTIAAN Hoenveld was disgusted and chagrined and
embarrassed, and mostly disgusted.
It had been gratifying to discover a hitherto unknown biochemical,
especially one existing unsuspected in a well known, long manufactured,
and widely distributed commercial product. He could understand how it
had happened; a by-effect in one of the manufacturing processes, and
since the stuff had been proven safe and nutritious for humans and
other life-forms having similar biochemistry and metabolism, nobody had
bothered until some little animals—no, people, that had been
scientifically established—had detected its absence by taste. Things like
that happened all the time. He had been proud of the accomplishment;
he’d been going to call the newly discovered substance hoenveldine. He
could have worked out a way of synthesizing it, too, but by proper
scientific methods it would have taken over a year, and he knew it, and
he’d said so to everybody.
And now, within a day, it had been synthesized, if that were the word
for it, by a rank amateur, a layman, a complete non-scientist. And not in
a laboratory but in a kitchen, with no equipment but a battered old stew
pan!


And the worst of it was that this layman, this empiric, was his
employer. The claims of the manager-in-chief of the Zarathustra
Company simply couldn’t be brushed off. Not by a Company scientist.
Well, Grego had found out what he wanted; he could stop worrying
about that. He had important work to do; an orderly, long-term study of
the differences between Zarathustran and Terran biochemistry. The
differences were minute, but they existed, and they had to be
understood, and they had to be investigated in an orderly, scientific
manner.
And now, they wanted him to go haring off, hit-or-miss, after this
problem about Fuzzy infant mortality and defective births, and they
didn’t even know any such problem existed. They had one, just one,
case—that six-month fetus the Andrews girl had brought in—and they
had a lot of unsubstantiated theorizing by Gerd van Riebeek, pure
conclusion jumping. And now they wanted him to find out if eating landprawns caused these defective births which they believed, on the basis
of one case and a lot of supposition, to exist. Maybe after years of
observation of hundreds of cases they might have some justification,
but...


He rose from the chair at the desk in the corner of the laboratory and
walked slowly among the workbenches. Ten men and women, eight of
them working on new projects that had been started since young van
Riebeek had started after this mare’s-nest of his, all of them diverted
from serious planned research. He stopped at one bench, where a
woman was working.
“Miss Tresca, can’t you keep your bench in better order than this?” he
scolded. “Keep things in their places. What are you working on?”
“Oh, a hunch I had, about this hokfusine.”
Hunch! That was the trouble, all through Science Center; too many
hunches and not enough sound theory.
“About what?”
“Oh, the titanium thing. It’s a name Mr. Grego suggested, from a
couple of Fuzzy words, hoku fusso, wonderful food. It’s what the Fuzzies
call Extee-Three.”
Hokfusine, indeed. Now they were getting the Fuzzy language into
scientific nomenclature.
“Well, just forget about your hunch,” he told her. “There are a lot of
samples of organic matter, blood, body secretions, hormones, tissue,
from pregnant female Fuzzies that they want analyzed. I don’t suppose


it makes any more sense than your hunch, but they want analyses
immediately. They want everything immediately, it seems. And
straighten up that clutter on your bench. How often do I have to tell you
that order is the first virtue in scientific work?”



CHAPTER SIXTEEN
THEY WERE IN Jack’s living room, and it looked almost exactly as it
had the first night Gerd van Riebeek had seen it, when he and Ruth and
Juan Jimenez had come out to see the Fuzzies, without the least idea
that the validity of the Company’s charter would be involved. All the new
office equipment that had cluttered it had gone, in the two weeks he
and Ruth had been in Mallorysport, and there was just the sturdy,
comfortable furniture Jack had made himself, and the damnthing and
the bush-goblin and veldbeest skins on the floor, and the gunrack with
the tangle of bedding under it.
There were just five of them, as there had been that other evening,
three months, or was it three ages, ago. Juan Jimenez and Ben
Rainsford were absent, in Mallorysport, but they had been replaced by
Pancho Ybarra, lounging in one of the deep chairs, and Lynne Andrews,
on the couch beside Ruth. Jack sat in the armchair at his table-desk,
trying to keep Baby Fuzzy, on his lap, from climbing up to sit on his
head. On the floor, the adult Fuzzies—just Jack’s own family; this was
their place, and the others didn’t intrude here—were in the middle of the
room, playing with the things that had been brought back from


Mallorysport. The kind of playthings Fuzzies liked; ingenuity-challenging
toys for putting together shapes and colors.
He was glad they weren’t playing with their molecule-model kit. He’d
seen enough molecule models in the last two weeks to last him a
lifetime.
“And there isn’t anything we can do about it, at all?” Lynne was
asking.
“No. There isn’t anything anybody can do. The people in Mallorysport
have given up trying. They’re still investigating, but that’s only to be
able to write a scientifically accurate epitaph for the Fuzzy race.”
“Can’t they do something to reverse it?”
“It’s irreversible,” Ruth told her. “It isn’t a matter of diet or
environment or anything external. It’s this hormone, NFMp, that they
produce in their own bodies, that inhibits normal development of the
embryo. And we can’t even correct it in individual cases by surgery;
excising the glands that secrete it would result in sterility.”
“Well, it doesn’t always work,” Jack said, lifting Baby Fuzzy from his
shoulder. “It didn’t work in Baby’s case.”


“It works in about nine cases out of ten, apparently. We’ve had ten
births so far; one normal and healthy, and the rest premature and
defective, stillbirths, or live births that die within hours.”
“But there are exceptions, Baby here, and the one over at the Fuzzyshelter,” Lynne said. “Can’t we figure out how the exceptions can be
encouraged?”
“They’re working on that, in a half-hearted way,” he told her.
“Fuzzies have a menstrual cycle and fertility rhythm, the same as Homo
s. terra, and apparently the NFMp output is also cyclic, and when the
two are out of phase there is a normal viable birth, and not otherwise.
And this doesn’t happen often enough, and any correction of it would
have to be done individually in the case of each female Fuzzy, and
nobody even knows how to find out how it could be done.”
“But, Gerd, the whole thing doesn’t make sense to me,” Pancho
objected. “I know, ‘sense’ is nothing but ignorance rationalized, and this
isn’t my subject, but if this NFMp thing is a racial characteristic, it must
be hereditary, and a hereditary tendency to miscarriages, premature and
defective births, and infant mortality, now what kind of sense does that
make?”


“Well, on the face of it, not much. But we know nothing at all about
the racial history of the Fuzzies, and very little about the history of this
planet. Say that fifty thousand years ago there were millions of Fuzzies,
and say that fifty thousand years ago environmental conditions were
radically different. This NFMp hormone was evolved to meet some
environmental survival demand, and something in the environment,
some article of diet that has now vanished, kept it from injuriously
affecting the unborn Fuzzies. Then the environment changed—
glaciation, glacial recession, sea-level fluctuation, I can think of dozens
of reasons—and after having adapted to original conditions, they
couldn’t re-adapt to the change. We’ve seen it on every planet we’ve
ever studied; hundreds of cases on Terra alone. The Fuzzies are just
caught in a genetic trap they can’t get out of, and we can’t get them out
of it.”
He looked at them; six happy little people, busily fitting many-colored
jointed blocks together to make a useless and delightful pretty-thing.
Happy in ignorance of their racial doom.
“If we knew how many children the average female has in her
lifetime, and how many child bearers there are, we could figure it out


mathematically, I suppose. Ten little Fuzzies, nine little Fuzzies, eight
little Fuzzies, and finally no little Fuzzies.”
Little Fuzzy thought he was being talked about; he looked up
inquiringly.
“Well, they won’t all just vanish in the next minute,” Jack said. “I
expect this gang’ll attend my funeral, and there’ll be Fuzzies as long as
any of you live, and longer. In a couple of million years, there won’t be
any more humans, I suppose. Let’s just be as good to the Fuzzies we
have as we can, and make them as happy as possible... Yes, Baby; you
can sit on Pappy’s head if you want to.”



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
THE BEST TIME for telecast political speeches was between 2000 and
2100, when people were relaxing after dinner and before they started
going out or before guests began to arrive. That was a little late for Beta
Continent and impossibly so for Gamma, but Delta and Epsilon, to the
west, could be reached with late night repeats and about eighty percent
of the planetary population was concentrated here on Alpha Continent.
Of late, Hugo Ingermann had been having trouble getting on the air at
that time. The 2000-2100 spot, he was always told, was already booked,
and it would usually turn out to be by the Citizen’s Government League
which everybody knew but nobody could prove was masterminded by
Leslie Coombes and Victor Grego, or it would be Ben Rainsford trying to
alibi his Government, or by a lecture on the care and feeding of Fuzzies.
But this time, somebody had goofed. This time, he’d been able to get
the 2000-2100 spot himself. The voice of the announcer at the telecast
station came out of the sound-outlet:
“... an important message, to all the citizens of the Colony, now, by
virtue of the Pendarvis Decisions, enjoying, for the first time, the right of
democratic self-government. The next voice you will hear will be that of


the Honorable Hugo Ingermann, organizer and leader of the Planetary
Prosperity Party. Mr. Ingermann.”
The green light came on, and the showback lightened; he lifted his
hand in greeting.
“My... friends!” he began.

FREDERIC PENDARVIS WAS growing coldly angry. It wasn’t an
organizational abstraction, the Native Adoption Bureau, that was being
attacked; it was his wife, Claudette, and he was taking it personally, and
a judge should never take anything personally. Why, he had actually
been looking at the plump, bland faced man in the screen, his blue eyes
wide with counterfeit sincerity, and wondering whom to send to him
with a challenge. Dueling wasn’t illegal on Zarathustra, it wasn’t on most
of the newer planets, but judges did not duel.
And the worst of it, he thought, was that the next time he had to rule
against Ingermann in court, Ingermann would be sure, by some
innuendo which couldn’t be established as overt contempt, to create an
impression that it was due to personal vindictiveness.
“It is a disgraceful record,” Ingermann was declaring. “A record
reeking with favoritism, inequity, class prejudice. In all, twelve hundred


applications have been received. Over two hundred have been rejected
outright, often on the most frivolous and insulting grounds... ”
“Mental or emotional instability, inability to support or care for a
Fuzzy, irresponsibility, bad character, undesirable home conditions,”
Claudette, who was beginning to become angry herself, mentioned.
Pierrot and Columbine, on the floor, with a big Mobius strip
somebody had made from a length of tape, looked up quickly and then,
deciding that it was the man in the wall Mummy was mad at, went back
to trying to figure out where the other side always went.
“And of the thousand applications, only three hundred and forty-five
have been filled, although five hundred and sixty-six Fuzzies have been
brought to this city since the Adoption Bureau was opened. One
hundred and seventy-two of these applicants have received a Fuzzy
each. One hundred and fifty-five have received two Fuzzies each. And
eighteen especially favored ones have received a total of eighty-four
Fuzzies.
“And almost without exception, all these Fuzzies have gone to socially
or politically prominent persons, persons of wealth. You might as well
make up your mind to it, a poor man has no chance whatever. Look who
all have gotten Fuzzies under the Fuzzy laws, if one may so term the


edicts of a bayonet imposed Governor. The first papers of adoption were
issued to—guess who now?—Victor Grego, the manager-in-chief of the
now Charterless Zarathustra Company. And the next pair went to Mrs.
Frederic Pendarvis, and beside being the Chief Justice’s wife, who is
she? Why, the head of the Adoption Bureau, of course. And look at the
rest of these names! Nine tenths of them are Zarathustra Company
executives.” He held up his hands, as though to hush an outburst of
righteous indignation. “Now I won’t claim, I won’t even suppose, that
there is any actual corruption or any bribery about this... ”
“You damned well better hadn’t! If you do, I won’t sue you, I’ll shoot
you,” Pendarvis barked.
“I won’t do either,” his wife told him calmly. “But I will answer him.
Under veridication, and that’s something Hugo Ingermann would never
dare do.”
“Claudette!” He was shocked. “You wouldn’t do that? Not on
telecast?”
“On telecast. You can’t ignore this sort of thing. If you do, you just
admit it by default. There’s only one answer to slander, and that’s to
prove the truth.”


“AND WHO’S PAYING for all this?” Ingermann demanded out of the
screen. “The Government? When Space Commodore Napier presented
us with this Government, and this Governor, at pistol point, there was
exactly half a million sols to the account of the Colony in the Bank of
Mallorysport. Since then, Governor Rainsford has borrowed approximately half a billion sols from the Banking Cartel. And how is Ben
Rainsford going to repay them? By taking it out of you and me and all of
us, as soon as he can get a Colonial Legislature to rubber-stamp his
demands for him. And now, do you know what he is spending millions of
your money on? On a project to increase the Fuzzy birthrate, so that
you’ll have more and more Fuzzies for his friends to make pets of and
for you to pay the bills for... ”
“He is a God damned unmitigated liar!” Victor Grego said. “Except for
a little work Ruth Ortheris and her husband and Pancho Ybarra and
Lynne Andrews are doing out at Holloway’s, the Company’s paying for
all that infant mortality research, and I’ll have to justify it to the
stockholders.”
“How about some publicity on that?” Coombes asked.
“You’re the political expert; what do you think?”


“I think it would help. I think it would help us, and I think it would
help Rainsford. Let’s not do it ourselves, though. Suppose I talk to Gus
Brannhard, and have him advise Jack Holloway to leak it to the press?”
“Press is going to be after Mrs. Pendarvis for a statement. She knows
what the facts are. Let her tell it.”
“He make talk about Fuzzies?” Diamond, who had been watching
Hugo Ingermann fascinatedly, inquired.
“Yes. Not like Fuzzies. Bad Big One; tosh-ki Hagga. Pappy Vic not like
him.”
“Neither,” Coombes said, “does Unka Leslie.”
Ahmed Khadra blew cigarette smoke insultingly at the face in the
screen. Hugo Ingermann was saying:
“Well, if few politicians and Company executives are getting all the
Fuzzies, why not make them pay for it, instead of the common people of
the planet? Why not charge a fee for adoption papers, say five hundred
to a thousand sols? Everybody who’s gotten Fuzzies so far could easily
pay that. It wouldn’t begin to meet the cost of maintaining the Native
Affairs Commission, but it would be something... ”
So that was what the whole thing had been pointed toward. Make it
expensive to adopt Fuzzies legally. A black market couldn’t compete with


free Fuzzies, but let the Adoption Bureau charge five hundred sols
apiece for them...
“So that’s what you’re after, you son of a Khooghra? A competitive
market.”


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
“YOU GOT THIS from one of my laboratory workers,” Jan Christiaan
Hoenveld accused. “Charlotte Tresca, wasn’t it?”
He was calling from his private cubical in the corner of the
biochemistry lab; through the glass partition behind him Juan Jimenez
could see people working at benches, including, he thought, his
informant. For the moment, he disregarded the older man’s tone and
manner.
“That’s correct, Dr. Hoenveld. I met Miss Tresca at a cocktail party
last evening. She and some other Science Center people were discussing
the different phases of the Fuzzy research, and she mentioned having
found hokfusine, or something very similar to it, in the digestive tracts of
land-prawns. That had been a week ago; she had reported her findings
to you immediately, and assumed that you had reported them to me.
Now, I want to know why you didn’t.”
“Because it wasn’t worth reporting,” Hoenveld snapped. “In the first
place, she wasn’t supposed to be working on land-prawns, or
hokfusine”—he almost spat the word in contempt—“at all. She was
supposed to be looking for NFMp in this mess of guts and tripes you’ve


been dumping into my laboratory from all over the planet. And in the
second place, it was merely a trace-presence of titanium, with which she
had probably contaminated the test herself. The girl is an incurably
careless and untidy worker. And finally,” Hoenveld raged, “I want to
know by what right you question my laboratory workers behind my
back... ”
“Oh, you do? Well, they are not your laboratory workers, Dr.
Hoenveld; they are employees of the Zarathustra Company, the same as
you. Or I. And the biochemistry laboratory is not your private empire. It
is a part of Science Center, of which I am division chief, and from where
I sit the difference between you and Charlotte Tresca is barely
perceptible to the naked eye. Is that clear, Dr. Hoenveld?”
Hoenveld was looking at him as though a pistol had blown up in his
hand. He was, in fact, mildly surprised at himself. A month ago, he
wouldn’t have dreamed of talking so to anybody, least of all a man as
much older than himself as Hoenveld, and one with Hoenveld’s imposing
reputation.
But as division chief, he had to get things done, and there could be
only one chief in the division.


“I am quite well aware of your recent and sudden promotion, Dr.
Jimenez,” Hoenveld retorted acidly. “Over the heads of a dozen of your
seniors.”
“Including yourself; well, you’ve just demonstrated the reason why
you were passed over. Now, I want some work done, and if you can’t or
won’t do it, I can promote somebody to replace you very easily.”
“What do you think we’ve been doing? Every ranger and hunter on
the company payroll has been shooting everything from damnthings and
wild veldbeest to ground-mice and dumping the digestive and
reproductive tracts in my—I beg your pardon, I mean the Charterless
Zarathustra Company’s—laboratory.”
“Have you found any trace of NFMp in any of them?”
“Negative. They don’t have the glands to secrete it; I have that on
the authority of the comparative mammalian anatomists.”
“Then stop looking for it; I’ll order the specimen collecting stopped at
once. Now, I want analyses of land-prawns made, and I want to know
just what Miss Tresca found in them; whether it was really hokfusine, or
anything similar to it, or just trace-presences of titanium, and I want to
know how it gets into the land-prawns’ systems and where it
concentrates there. I would suggest—correction, I direct—that Miss


Tresca be put to work on that herself, and that she report directly to
me.”

“WHAT’S YOUR OPINION of Chris Hoenveld, Ernst?” Victor Grego asked.
Mallin frowned—his standard think-seriously-and-weigh-every-word
frown.
“Dr. Hoenveld is a most distinguished scientist. He has an
encyclopedic grasp on his subject, an infallible memory, and an infinite
capacity for taking pains.”
“Is that all?”
“Isn’t that enough?”
“No. A computer has all that, to a much higher degree, and a
computer couldn’t make an original scientific discovery in a hundred
million years. A computer has no imagination, and neither has
Hoenveld.”
“Well, he has very little, I’ll admit. Why do you ask about him?”
“Juan Jimenez is having trouble with him.”
“I can believe it,” Mallin said. “Hoenveld has one characteristic a
computer lacks. Egotism. Has Jimenez complained to you?”


“Nifflheim, no; he’s running Science Center without yelling to Big
Brother for help. I got this off the powder-room and coffee-stand
telegraph, to which I have excellent taps. Juan cut him down to size;
he’s doing all right.”
“Well, how about the NFMp problem?”
“Nowhere, on hyperdrive. The Fuzzies just manufacture it inside
themselves, and nobody knows why. It seems mainly to be associated
with the digestive system, and gets from there into the blood-stream,
and into the gonads, in both sexes, from there. Thirty-six births, so far;
three viable.”
From the terrace outside came the happy babble of Fuzzy voices.
They were using their Fuzzyphones to talk to one another; wanted to
talk like the Hagga. Poor little tail-enders of a doomed race.

THE WHOLE DAMNED thing was getting too big for comfort, Jack
Holloway thought. A month ago, there’d only been Gerd and Ruth and
Lynne Andrews and Pancho Ybarra, and George Lunt, and the men
George had brought when he’d transferred from the Constabulary. They
all had cocktails together before dinner, and ate at one table, and had
bull-sessions in the evenings, and everybody had known what everybody


else was doing. And there had only been forty or fifty Fuzzies, beside his
and George’s and Gerd’s and Ruth’s.
Now Gerd had three assistants, and Ruth had dropped work on Fuzzy
psychology and was helping him with whatever he was doing, and what
that was he wasn’t quite sure. He wasn’t quite sure what anybody was
doing, anymore. And Pancho was practically commuting to and from
Mallorysport, and Ernst Mallin was out at least once a week. Funny, too;
he used to think Mallin was a solid, three-dimensional bastard, and now
he found he rather liked him. Even Victor Grego was out, one weekend,
and everybody liked him.
Lynne had a couple of helpers, too, and a hospital and clinic, and
there was a Fuzzy school, where they were taught Lingua Terra and
how to use Fuzzyphones and about the strange customs of the Hagga.
Some old hen Ruth had kidnapped from the Mallorysport schools was in
charge of it, or thought she was; actually Little Fuzzy and Ko-Ko and
Cinderella and Lizzie Borden and Dillinger were running it.
And he and George Lunt couldn’t yell back and forth to each other
any more, because their offices, at opposite ends of the long hut, were
partitioned off and separated by a hundred and twenty feet of middle
office, full of desks and business machines and roboclerks, and humans


working with them. And he had a secretary, now, and she had a
secretary, or at least a stenographer, of her own.
Gerd van Riebeek came in from the outside, tossing his hat on top of
a microbook-case and unbuckling his pistol.
“Hi, Jack. Anything new?” he asked.
Gerd and Ruth had been away for a little over a week, in the country
to the south. It must have been fun, just the two of them and Complex
and Superego and Dr. Crippen and Calamity Jane, camping in Gerd’s
airboat and visiting the posts Lunt had strung out along the edge of the
big woods.
“I was going to ask you that. Where’s Ruth?”
“She’s staying another week, at the Kirtland plantation, with
Superego and Complex; there must be fifty to seventy-five Fuzzies
there; she’s helping the Kirtland people with them, teaching them not to
destroy young sugarplant shoots. Kirtland’s been taking a lot of damage
to his shoots from zatku. What’s the latest from Mallorysport?”
“Well, nowhere on the NFMp, but they seem to have found something
interesting about the land-prawns.”
“More on that?” Gerd had heard about the alleged hokfusine. “Have
they found out what it is?”


“It isn’t hokfusine, it’s just a rather complicated titanium salt. The
land-prawns eat titanium, mostly in moss and fungus and stuff like that.
It probably grades about ten atoms to the ton on what they eat. But
they fix it, apparently in that middle intestine that they have. I have a
big long write-up on what it does there. The Fuzzies seem to convert it
to something else in their own digestive system. Whatever it does,
hokfusine seems to do it a lot better. They’re still working on it.”
“They ate land-prawns all along, but it was only since this new
generation hatched, this Spring, that they really got all they wanted of
them. I wonder what they ate before, up north.”
“Well, we know what all they eat beside zatku and the stuff we give
them. Animals small enough to kill with those little sticks, fruit, bird
eggs, those little yellow lizards, grubs.”
“What are Paine’s Marines doing up north now, beside looking for
nonexistent Fuzzy catchers?”
“That’s about all. Flying patrol, taking photos, mapping. They say
there are lots of Fuzzies north of the Divide that haven’t started south
yet, probably haven’t heard about the big zatku bonanza yet.”
“I’m going up there, Jack. I want to look at them, see what they live
on.”


“Don’t go right away; wait a week, and I’ll go along with you. I still
have a lot of this damn stuff to clear up, and I have to go in to
Mallorysport tomorrow. Casagra’s talking about recalling Paine and his
men and vehicles. You know where that would put us.”
Gerd nodded. “We’d have to double the ZNPF. It’s all George can do
to maintain those posts along the edge of the big woods and fly
inspections in the farm country, without having to patrol in the north
too.”
“I don’t know how we could pay or equip them, even if we could
recruit them. We’re operating on next year’s budget now. That’s another
thing I’ll have to talk to Ben about. He’ll have to allocate us more
money.”

“GOD DAMN IT, there’s no money to give him!”
Ben Rainsford spoke aloud and bitterly, and then caught himself and
puffed furiously on his pipe, the smoke reddening in the sunset
afterglow. Have to watch that; people hear him talking to himself, it
would be all over Government House, and all over Mallorysport in the
next day, that Governor Rainsford was going crazy. Not that it would be
any wonder if he were.


The three Fuzzies, Flora and Fauna and their friend Diamond, who
had gotten hold of a lot of wooden strips of the sort the gardeners used
for trelliswork and were building a little arbor of their own, looked up
quickly and then realized that he wasn’t speaking to them and went on
with what they were doing. The sun had gone to bed already, and the
sky-light was fading, and they wanted to get whatever it was they were
making finished before it got dark. Fuzzies, like Colonial Governors,
found time running out on them occasionally.
Time was running out fast for him. The ninety days the CZC had
allowed him to take over all the public services they were no longer
obliged to maintain were more than half gone now, and nothing had
been done. The election for delegates to a constitutional convention was
still a month in the future, and he had no idea how long it would take
the elected delegates, whoever they’d be, to argue out a constitution,
and how long thereafter it would take to get a Colonial Legislature set
up, and how long after tax laws were enacted it would be before the
Government would begin collecting money.
He wished he’d been able to borrow that half billion sols from the
Banking Cartel that Hugo Ingermann had been yakking about.
Ingermann had later been forced to back down to something closer to


the actual figure of fifty million, just as he had been forced to retreat
from some of his exaggerated statements about the Adoption Bureau,
but it seemed that the public still believed his original statements and
were disregarding the hedging and weasel-worded retractions. Fifty
million sounded like a lot of money, too—till you had to run a planetary
government on it, and everything was going to cost so much more than
he had expected.
The Native Affairs Commission, for instance. He and Jack had both
believed that a hundred and fifty men would be ample for the Native
Protection Force; now they were finding that three times that number
wouldn’t be enough. They had thought that Gerd and Ruth van Riebeek
and Lynne Andrews, and Pancho Ybarra, on loan from the Navy, would
be able to do all the study and research work; now that was spread out
to Mallorysport Hospital and Science Center, for which the CZC was
paying and would expect compensation. And the Adoption Bureau was
costing as much, now, as the whole original Native Affairs Commission
estimate.
At least, he’d been able to do one thing for Jack. Alex Napier had
agreed that protection and/or policing of natives on Class-IV planets was


a proper function of the Armed Forces, and instead of recalling his fifty
men, Casagra had been ordered to reinforce them with twenty more.
The Fuzzies suddenly stopped what they were doing and turned.
Diamond drew his Fuzzyphone. “Pappy Vic!” he called, in delighted
surprise. “Come; look what we make!” Flora and Fauna were whooping
greetings, too.
He rose, and saw behind him the short, compactly-built man, familiar
from news-screen views, whom he had so far avoided meeting
personally. Victor Grego greeted the Fuzzies, and then said, “Good
evening, Governor. Sorry to intrude, but Miss Glenn has a dinner-anddancing date, and I told her I’d get Diamond myself.”
“Good evening, Mr. Grego.” Somehow, he didn’t feel the hostility to
the man that he had expected. “Could you wait a little while? They have
an important project, here, and they want to finish it while there’s still
daylight.”
“Well, so I see.” Grego spoke to the Fuzzies in their own language,
and listened while they explained what they were doing. “Of course; we
can’t interfere with that.”
The Fuzzies went back to their trellis-building. He and Grego sat
down in lawn-chairs; Grego lit a cigarette. He watched the CZC


manager-in-chief as the latter sat watching the Fuzzies. This couldn’t be
Victor Grego; “Victor Grego” was a label for a personification of blackhearted villainy and ruthless selfishness; this was a pleasant-spoken,
courteous gentleman who loved Fuzzies, and was considerate of his
employees.
“Miss Glenn’s date was with Captain Ahmed Khadra,” Grego was
saying, to make conversation. “The fifth in the last two weeks. I’m afraid
I’m just before losing a good Fuzzy sitter by marriage.”
“I’m afraid so; they seem quite serious about each other. If so, she’ll
be getting a good husband. I’ve known Ahmed for some time; he was at
the Constabulary post near my camp, on Beta. It’s too bad,” he added,
“that he seems to be getting nowhere on this Herckerd-Novaes
investigation. It’s certainly not from lack of trying.”
“My police chief, Harry Steefer, is getting nowhere just as rapidly,”
Grego said. “He’s ready to give the whole thing up, and when Harry
Steefer gives up, it’s hopeless.”
“Do you think there is anything to this theory that somebody is
training those Fuzzies to help catch other Fuzzies?”
Grego shook his head. “You know Fuzzies at least as well as I do,
Governor. Almost two months; anything you can train a Fuzzy to do, you


can train him to do it in less than that,” he said. “And I don’t see why
anybody would try to catch wild Fuzzies, not with the bloodthirsty laws
you’ve enacted. Criminals only take chances in proportion to profits, and
almost anybody who wants a Fuzzy can get one free.”
That was true. And there was no indication of any black market in
Fuzzies here, and Jack’s patrols over northern Beta Continent hadn’t
found any evidence that anybody was live trapping Fuzzies there.
“Ahmed had an idea, for a while, that they were going into the export
business; catching Fuzzies to smuggle out for sale off-planet.”
“He mentioned that to Harry Steefer. Jack Holloway was talking to
me about that, too; wanted to know what could be done to prevent it. I
told him it would be impossible to get Fuzzies onto a ship from Darius,
or onto Darius from Mallorysport Space Terminal. As long as we keep
our ‘flagrant and heinous space-traffic monopoly,’ you can be sure no
Fuzzies are going to be shipped off-planet.”
“You think Ingermann really has anything to do with it?” he asked
hopefully, recognizing the source of the quotation.
“If there is a black market in Fuzzies, Ingermann’s back of it,” Grego
said, as though stating a natural law. “In the six or so years he’s


infected this planet, I’ve learned a lot about the soi-disant Honorable
Hugo Ingermann, and none of it’s been good.”
“Ahmed Khadra thinks his attacks on the CZC space-monopoly may
stem from a desire to get some way around your controls at the ground
terminal here and on Darius. Of course, he’s talking about a Government
spaceport, and that would be just as tightly controlled... ”
Grego hesitated for a moment, then dropped his cigarette to the
ground and heeled it out. He leaned toward Rainsford in his chair.
“Governor, you know, yourself, that as things stand you can’t build a
second spaceport here,” he said. “Ingermann knows that, too. He’s
making that issue to embarrass you and to attack the CZC at the same
time. He has no expectation that your Government would build any
spaceport facilities here. He certainly hopes not; he wants to do that
himself.”
“Where the devil would he get the money?”
“He could get it. Unless I miss my guess, he’s getting it now, or as
soon as a ship can get in, on Marduk. There are a number of shipping
companies who would like to get in here in competition with TerraBaldur-Marduk Spacelines, and there are quite a few import-export
houses there who would like to trade on Zarathustra in competition with


CZC. Inside six months somebody will be trying to put in a spaceport
here. If they can get land to set it on. And due to a great error in my
judgment eight years ago, the land’s available.”
“Where?”
“Right here on Alpha Continent, less than a hundred miles from
where we’re sitting. A wonderful place for a spaceport. You weren’t
here, then, were you, Governor?”
“No. I came here, I blush to say, on the same ship that brought
Ingermann, six and a half years ago.”
“Well, you got here, and so did he, after it was over, but just before
that we had a big immigration boom. At that time, the company wasn’t
interested in local business, just offplanet trade in veldbeest meat. A lot
of independent concerns started, manufacturing, food production, that
sort of thing that we didn’t want to bother with. We sold land north of
the city, in mile and two-mile square blocks, about two thousand square
miles of it. Then the immigrants stopped coming, and a lot of them
moved away. There simply wasn’t employment for them. Most of the
companies that had been organized went broke. Some of the factories
that were finished operated for a while; most of them were left
unfinished. The banks took over some of the land; most of it got into


the hands of the shylocks; and since the Fuzzy Trial Ingermann has
been acquiring title to a lot of it. Since the Fuzzy Trial, nobody else has
been spending money for real-estate; everybody expects to get all the
free land they want.”
“Well, he’ll probably make some money out of that, but the people
who come in here with the capital will be the ones to control it, won’t
they?”
“Of course they will, but that’s honest business; Ingermann isn’t
interested. He’s expecting an increase of about two to three hundred
percent in the planetary population in the next five years. With eighty
percent of the land-surface in public domain, that’s probably an
underestimate. Most of them will be voters; Ingermann’s going to try to
control that vote.”
And if he did... His own position was secure; Colonial Governors were
appointed, and it took something like the military intervention which had
put him into office to unseat one. But a Colonial Governor had to govern
through and with the consent of a Legislature. He wasn’t looking
forward happily to a Legislature controlled by Hugo Ingermann. Neither,
he knew, was Grego.


He’d have to be careful, though. Grego wanted to put the company
back in its old pre-Fuzzy position of planetary dominance. He was still
violently opposed to that.
It was almost dark, now. The Fuzzies had put the final touches to the
lacy trellis they had built, and came crowding over, wanting Pappy Ben
and Pappy Vic to come look. They went and examined it, and spoke
commendation. Grego picked up Diamond; Flora and Fauna were
wanting him to go and sit down and furnish them a lap to sit on.
“I’ve been worrying about just that,” he said, when he was back in
his chair, with the Fuzzies climbing up onto him. “A lot of the older
planets are beginning to overpopulate, and there’s never room enough
for everybody on Terra. There’ll be a rush here in about a year. If I can
only get things stabilized before then... ”
Grego was silent for a moment. “If you’re worried about all those
public-health and welfare and service functions, forget about them for a
while,” he said. “I know, I said the company would discontinue them in
ninety days, but that was right after the Pendarvis Decisions, and
nobody knew what the situation was going to be. We can keep them
going for a year, at least.”


“The Government won’t have any more money a year from now,” he
said. “And you’ll expect compensation.”
“Of course we will, but we won’t demand gold or Federation notes.
Tax-script, bonds, land script... ”
Land-script, of course; the law required a Colonial Government to
make land available to Federation citizens, but it did not require such
land to be given free. That might be one way to finance the
Government.
It could also be a way for the Zarathustra Company, having gotten
the Government deeply into debt, to regain what had been lost in the
aftermath of the Fuzzy Trial.
“Suppose you have Gus Brannhard talk it over with Leslie Coombes,”
Grego was suggesting. “You can trust Gus not to stick the Government’s
foot into any bear trap, can’t you?”
“Why, of course, Mr. Grego. I want to thank you, very much, for this.
That public services takeover was worrying me more than anything
else.”
Yet he couldn’t feel relieved, and he couldn’t feel grateful at all. He
felt discomfited, and angry at himself more than at Grego.



CHAPTER NINETEEN
GERD VAN RIEBEEK crouched at the edge of the low cliff, slowly twisting
the selector-knob of a small screen in front of him. The view changed;
this time he was looking through the eye of a pickup fifty feet below and
five hundred yards to the left. Nothing in it moved except a wind-stirred
branch that jiggled a spray of ragged leaves in the foreground. The only
thing from the sound-outlet was a soft drone of insects, and the tweettwonk, tweet-twonk of a presumably love-hungry banjo-bird. Then
something just out of sight scuffled softly among the dead leaves. He
turned up the sound-volume slightly.
“What do you think it is?”
Jack Holloway, beside him, rose to one knee, raising his binoculars.
“I can’t see anything. Try the next one.”
Gerd twisted the knob again. This pickup was closer the ground; it
showed a vista of woods lit by shafts of sunlight falling between trees.
Now he could hear rustling and scampering, and with ultrasonic
earphone, Fuzzy voices:
“This way. Not far. Find hatta-zosa.”
Jack was looking down at the open slope below the cliff.


“If that’s what they call goofers, I see six of them from here,” he
said. “Probably a dozen more I can’t see.” He watched, listening. “Here
they come, now.”
The Fuzzies had stopped talking and were making very little noise;
then they came into view; eight of them, in single file. The weapons
they carried were longer and heavier than the prawn killers of the
southern Fuzzies, knobbed instead of paddle-shaped, and sharp-pointed
on the other end. All of them had picked up stones which they carried in
their free hands. They all stopped, then three of them backed away into
the brush again. The other five spread out in a skirmish line and waited.
He shut off the screen and crawled over beside Jack to peep over the
edge of the cliff.
There were seven goofers, now; rodent-looking things with dark gray
fur, a foot and a half long and six inches high at the shoulder, all
industriously tearing off bark and digging at the roots of young trees. No
wonder the woods were so thin, around here; if there were any number
of them it was a wonder there were any trees at all. He picked up a
camera and aimed it, getting some shots of them.
“Something else figuring on getting some lunch here,” Jack said,
sweeping the sky with his glasses. “Harpy, a couple of miles off. Ah,


another one. We’ll stick around a while; we may have to help our friends
out.”
The five Fuzzies at the edge of the brush stood waiting. The goofers
hadn’t heard them, and were still tearing and chewing at the bark and
digging at the roots. Then, having circled around, the other three burst
out suddenly, hurling their stones and running forward with their clubs.
One stone hit a goofer and knocked it down; instantly, one of the
Fuzzies ran forward and brained it with his club. The other two rushed a
second goofer, felling and dispatching it with their clubs. The other fled,
into the skirmish line on the other side. Two were hit with stones, and
finished off on the ground. The others got away. The eight Fuzzies
gathered in a clump, seemed to debate pursuit for a moment, and then
abandoned the idea. They had four goofers, a half-goofer apiece. That
was a good meal for them.
They dragged their game together and began tearing the carcasses
apart, using teeth and fingers, helping one another dismember them,
tearing off skin and pulling meat loose, using stones to break bones.
Gerd kept his camera going, filming the feast.
“Our gang’s got better table manners,” he commented.


“Our gang have the knives we make for them. Beside, our gang
mostly eats zatku, and they break off the mandibles and make little
lobster-picks out of them. They’re ahead of our gang in one way,
though. The Fuzzies south of the Divide don’t hunt cooperatively,” Jack
said.
The two dots in the sky were larger and closer; a third had appeared.
“We better do something about that,” he advised, reaching for his
rifle.
“Yes.” Jack put down the binoculars and secured his own rifle,
checking it. “Let them eat as long as they can; they’ll get a big surprise
in a minute or so.”
The Fuzzies seemed to be aware of the presence of the harpies.
Maybe there were ultrasonic wing-vibration sounds they could hear; he
couldn’t be sure, even with the hearing aid. There was so much
ultrasonic noise in the woods, and he hadn’t learned, yet, to distinguish.
The Fuzzies were eating more rapidly. Finally, one pointed and cried,
“Gotza bizzo!” Gotza was another native zoological name he had
learned, though the Fuzzies at Holloway’s Camp mostly said, “Hah’py,”
now. The diners grabbed their weapons and what meat they could carry
and dashed into the woods. One of the big pterodactyl-things was


almost overhead, another was within a few hundred yards, and the third
was coming in behind him. Jack sat up, put his left arm through his riflesling, cuddled the butt to his cheek and propped his elbows on his
knees. The nearest harpy must have caught a movement in the brush
below; it banked and started to dive. Jack’s 9.7 magnum bellowed. The
harpy made a graceless flop-over in the air and dropped. The one
behind banked quickly and tried to gain altitude; Gerd shot it. Jack’s rifle
thundered again, and the third harpy thrashed leathery wings and
dropped.
From below, there was silence, and then a clamor of Fuzzy voices:
“Harpies dead; what make do?”
“Thunder; maybe kill harpies! Maybe kill us next!”
“Bad place, this! Bizzo, fazzu!”
Roughly, fazzu meant, “Scram.”
Jack was laughing. “Little Fuzzy took it a lot calmer the first time he
saw me shoot a harpy,” he said. “By that time, though, he’d seen so
much he wasn’t surprised at anything.” He replaced the two fired rounds
in the magazine of his rifle. “Well, bizzo, fazzu; we won’t get any more
movies around here.”


They went around with the car, collecting the pickups they had
planted, then lifted out, turning south toward the horizon-line of the
Divide, the mountain range that stretched like the cross-stroke of an H
between the West Coast Range and the Eastern Cordilleras. Evidently
the Fuzzies never crossed it much; the language of the northern Fuzzies,
while comprehensible, differed distinguishably from that spoken by the
ones who had come in to the camp. Apparently the news of the bumper
crop of zatku hadn’t gotten up here at all.
They talked about that, cruising south at five thousand feet, with the
foothills of the Divide sliding away under them and the line of sheer
mountains drawing closer. They’d have to establish a permanent camp
up here; contact these Fuzzies and make friends with them, give them
tools and weapons, learn about them.
That was, if the Native Commission budget would permit. They talked
about that, too.
Then they argued about whether to stay up here for another few
days, or start back to the camp.
“I think we’d better go back,” Jack said, somewhat regretfully. “We’ve
been away for a week. I want to see what’s going on, now.”
“They’d screen us if anything was wrong.”


“I know. I still think we’d better go back. Let’s cross the Divide and
camp somewhere on the other side, and go on in tomorrow morning.”
“Hokay; bizzo.” He swung the aircar left a trifle. “We’ll follow that
river to the source and cross over there.”
The river came down through a wide valley, narrowing and growing
more rapid as they ascended it. Finally, they came to where it emerged,
a white mountain torrent, from the mouth of a canyon that cut into the
main range of the Divide. He took the car down to within a few hundred
feet and cut speed, entering the canyon. At first, it was wide, with a
sandy beach on either side of the stream and trees back to the
mountain face and up the steep talus at the foot of it. Granite at the
bottom, and then weathered sandstone, and then, for a couple of
hundred feet, gray, almost unweathered flint.
“Gerd,” Jack said, at length, “take her up a little, and get a little
closer to the side of the canyon.” He shifted in his seat, and got his
binoculars. “I want a close look at that.”
He wondered why, briefly. Then it struck him.
“You think that’s what I think it is?” he asked.


“Yeah. Sunstone-flint.” Jack didn’t seem particularly happy about it.
“See that little bench, about halfway up? Set her down there. I’m going
to take a look at that.”
The bench, little more than a wide ledge, was covered with thin soil;
a few small trees and sparse brush grew on it. A sheer face of gray flint
rose for a hundred feet above it. They had no blasting explosives, but
there was a microray scanner and a small vibrohammer in the toolkit.
They set the aircar down and went to work, cracking and scanning flint,
and after two hours they had a couple of sunstones. They were nothing
spectacular—an irregular globe seven or eight millimeters in diameter
and a small ellipsoid not quite twice as big. However, when Jack held
them against the hot bowl of his pipe, they began to glow.
“What are they worth, Jack?”
“I don’t know. Some of these freelance gem-buyers would probably
give as much as six or eight hundred for the big one. When the
Company still had the monopoly, they’d have paid about four-fifty. Be
worth twenty-five hundred on Terra. But look around. This layer’s three
hundred feet thick; it runs all the way up the canyon, and probably for
ten or fifteen miles along the mountain on either side.” He knocked out


his pipe, blew through the stem, and pocketed it. “And it all belongs to
the Fuzzies.”
He started to laugh at that, and then remembered. This was, by
executive decree, the Fuzzy Reservation. The Fuzzies owned it and
everything on it, and the Government and the Native Commission were
only trustees. Then he began laughing again.
“But, Jack! The Fuzzies can’t mine sunstones, and they wouldn’t
know what to do with them if they could.”
“No. But this is their country. They were born here, and they have a
right to live here, and beside that, we gave it to them, didn’t we? It
belongs to them, sunstones and all.”
“But Jack... ” He looked up and down the canyon at the gray flint on
either side; as Jack said, it would extend for miles back into the
mountain on either side. Even allowing one sunstone to ten cubic feet of
flint, and even allowing for the enormous labor of digging them
out... “You mean, just let a few Fuzzies scamper around over it and
chase goofers, and not do anything with it?” The idea horrified him.
“Why, they don’t even know this is the Fuzzy Reservation.”
“They know it’s their home. Gerd, this has happened on other ClassIV planets we’ve moved in on. We give the natives a reservation; we tell


them it’ll be theirs forever, Terran’s word of honor. Then we find
something valuable on it—gold on Loki, platinum on Thor, vanadium and
wolfram on Hathor, nitrates on Yggdrasil, uranium on Gimli. So the
natives get shoved off onto another reservation, where there isn’t
anything anybody wants, and finally they just get shoved off, period. We
aren’t going to do that here, to the Fuzzies.”
“What are you going to do? Try to keep it a secret?” he asked. “If
that’s what you want, we’ll just throw those two sunstones in the river
and forget about it,” he agreed. “But how long do you think it’ll be
before somebody else finds out about it?”
“We can keep other people out of here. That’s what the Fuzzy
Reservation’s for, isn’t it?”
“We need people to keep people out; Paine’s Marines, George Lunt’s
Protection Force. I think we can trust George. I wouldn’t know about
Paine. Anybody below them I wouldn’t trust at all. Sooner or later
somebody’ll fly up this canyon and see this, and then it’ll be out. And
you know what’ll happen then.” He thought for a moment. “Are you
going to tell Ben Rainsford?”
“I wish you hadn’t asked me that, Gerd.” Jack fumbled his pipe and
tobacco out of his pocket. “I suppose I’ll have to. Have to give him these


stones; they’re Government property. Well, bizzo; we’ll go straight to
camp.” He looked up at the sun. “Make it in about three hours.
Tomorrow I’ll go to Mallorysport.”

“I’M AFRAID TO believe it, Dr. Jimenez,” Ernst Mallin said. “It would be
so wonderful if it were true. Can you be certain?”
“We’re all certain, now, that this hormone, NFMp, is what prevents
normal embryonic development,” Juan Jimenez, in the screen, replied.
“We’re certain, now, that hokfusine combines destructively with NFMp;
even Chris Hoenveld, he’s seen it happen in a test tube, and he has to
believe it whether he wants to or not. It appears that hokfusine also has
an inhibitory effect on the glands secreting NFMp. But to be certain, we’ll
have to wait four more months, until the infants conceived after the
mothers began eating Extee-Three are born. Ideally, we should wait
until the females we have begun giving daily doses of pure hokfusine
conceive and bear children. But if I’m not certain now, I’m confident.”
“What put your people onto this, Dr. Jimenez?”
“A hunch,” the younger man smiled. “A hunch by the girl in Dr.
Hoenveld’s lab, Charlotte Tresca.” The smile became an audible laugh.
“Hoenveld is simply furious about it. No sound theoretical basis, just a


lot of unsupported surmises. You know how he talks. He did have to
grant her results; they’ve been duplicated. But he rejects her whole line
of reasoning.”
He would; Jan Christiaan Hoenveld’s mind plodded obstinately along,
step by step, from A to B to C to D; it wasn’t fair for somebody suddenly
to leap to W or X and run from there to Z. For his own part, Ernst Mallin
respected hunches; he knew how much mental activity went on below
the level of consciousness and with what seemingly irrationality
fragments of it rose to the conscious mind. His only regret was that he
had so few good hunches, himself.
“Well, what was her reasoning?” he asked. “Or was it pure intuition?”
“Well, she just got the idea that hokfusine would neutralize the NFMp
hormone, and worked from there,” Jimenez said. “As she rationalizes it,
all Fuzzies have a craving for land-prawn meat, without exception. This
is a racial constant with them. Right?”
“Yes, as far as we can tell. I hate to use the word loosely, but I’d say,
instinctual.”
“And all Fuzzies, for which read, all studied individuals, have a craving
for Extee-Three. Once they taste the stuff, they eat it at every
opportunity. This isn’t a learned taste, like our taste for, say, coffee or


tobacco or alcohol; every human has to learn to like all three. The
Fuzzy’s response to Extee-Three is immediate and automatic. Still with
it, Doctor?”
“Oh, yes; I’ve seen quite a few Fuzzies taking their first taste of
Extee-Three. It’s just what you call it; a physical response.” He gave
that a moment’s thought, adding: “If it’s an instinct, it’s the result of
natural selection.”
“Yes. She reasoned that a taste for the titanium-molecule compound
present both in land-prawns and Extee-Three contributed to racial
survival; that Fuzzies lacking it died out, and Fuzzies having it to a
pronounced degree survived and transmitted it. So she went to work
over Hoenveld’s vehement objections that she was wasting her time—
and showed the effect of hokfusine on the NFMp hormone. Now, the
physiologists who had that theory about cyclic production of NFMp
getting out of phase with the menstrual cycle and permitting an
occasional viable birth are finding that the NFMp fluctuations aren’t cyclic
at all but related to hokfusine consumption.”
“Well, you have a fine circumstantial case there. Everything seems to
fit together with everything else. As you say, you’ll have to wait about a
year before you can really prove a one-to-one relationship between


hokfusine and viable births, but if I were inclined to gamble I’d risk a
small wager on it.”
Jimenez grinned. “I have, already, with Dr. Hoenveld. I think it’s
money in the bank now.”

BENNETT RAINSFORD WARMED the two sunstones between his palms,
then rolled them, like a pair of dice, on the desk in front of him. He had
been so happy, ever since Victor Grego had called him to tell him what
had been discovered at Science Center about the hokfusine and the
NFMp hormone. They were on the right track, he was sure of it, and in a
few years all the Fuzzy children would be born alive and normal.
And then, just after lunch, Jack Holloway had come dropping out of
the sky from Beta Continent with this.
“You can’t keep it a secret, Jack. You can’t keep any discovery a
secret, because anything anybody discovers, somebody else can, and
will, discover later. Look how the power interests tried to suppress the
discovery of direct conversion of nuclear energy to electric current, back
in the First Century. Look how they tried to suppress the Abbot Drive.”


“This is different,” Jack Holloway argued, bullheadedly. “This isn’t a
scientific principle anybody, anywhere, can discover. This is something
at a certain place, and if we can keep people away from it... ”
“Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?” Then, realizing that Latin was terra
incognita to Jack, he translated: “Who’ll watch the watchmen?”
Jack nodded. “That’s what Gerd said. A thing like that would be an
awful strain on anybody’s moral fiber. And you know what’ll happen as
soon as it gets out.
“There’d be pressure on me to open the Fuzzy Reservation. Hugo
Ingermann’s John Doe and Richard Roe and all. I suppose I could stall it
off till a legislature was elected, but after that... ”
“I wasn’t talking about political pressure. I was talking about a
sunstone rush. There’d be twenty thousand men stampeding up there,
with everything they could put onto contragravity. And everything they
could find to shoot with, too. And the longer it’s stalled off, the worse
it’ll be, because in six months the off-planet immigrants’ll start coming
in.”
He hadn’t thought of that. He should have; he’d been on other
frontier planets where rich deposits of mineral wealth had been


discovered. And there was nothing in the Galaxy that concentrated more
value in less bulk than sunstones.
“Ben, I’ve been thinking,” Jack continued. “I don’t like the idea, but
it’s the only idea I have. Those sunstones are in a little section about
fifty miles square on the north side of the Divide. Suppose the
Government makes that a sort of reservation-inside-the-reservation, and
operates the sunstone mines. You do it before anything leaks out—
announce that the Government has discovered sunstones on the Fuzzy
Reservation, that the Government claims all the sunstones on Fuzzy land
in the name of the Fuzzies, and that the Government is operating all
sunstone mines, and it’ll head off the rush, or the worst of it. And the
Fuzzies’ll get out of that immediate area; they won’t stay around where
there’s underground blasting. And the money the Government gets out
of it can go to the Fuzzies in protection and welfare and medical aid and
shoppo-diggo and shodda-bag and Estee-fee.”
“Have you any idea what it would cost to start an operation like that,
before we could even begin getting out sunstones in paying quantities?”
“Yes. I’ve been digging sunstones as long as anybody knew there
were sunstones. But this is a good thing, Ben, and if you have a good
thing you can always finance it.”


“It would protect the Fuzzies’ rights, and they’d benefit enormously.
But the initial expense... ”
“Well, lease the mineral rights to somebody who could finance it. The
Government would get a royalty, the Fuzzies would benefit, the
Reservation would be kept intact.”
“But who? Who would be able to lease it?”
He knew, even as he asked the question. The Charterless Zarathustra
Company; they could operate that mine. Why, that mine would be
something on the odd-jobs level, compared to what they’d done on the
Big Blackwater Swamp. Lease them the entire mineral rights for the
Reservation; that would keep everybody else out.
But it would put the Company back where they’d been before the
Pendarvis Decisions; it would give them back their sunstone monopoly;
it would... Why, it was unthinkable!
Unthinkable, hell. He was thinking about it now, wasn’t he?

VICTOR GREGO CRUSHED out his cigarette and leaned back in his
relaxer-chair, closing his eyes. From the Fuzzy-room, he could hear
muted voices, and the frequent popping of shots. Diamond was enjoying
a screen-play. He was very good about keeping the volume turned


down, so as not to bother Pappy Vic, but he’d get some weird ideas
about life among the Hagga from some of those shows. Well, the good
Hagga always licked the bad Hagga in the end, that was one thing.
He went back to thinking about bad Hagga, four of them in particular.
Ivan Bowlby, Spike Hennan, Raul Laporte, Leo Thaxter.
Mallorysport was full of bad Hagga, on the lower echelons, but those
four were the General Staff. Bowlby was the entertainment business.
Beside the telecast show which Diamond was watching at the moment,
that included prize-fights, nightclubs, prostitution and, without doubt,
dope. Maybe he’d like to get Fuzzies as attractions at his night-spots,
and through that part of his business he could make contacts with well
to do people who wanted Fuzzies, couldn’t adopt them, and would pay
fancy prices for them. If there really were a black market, he’d be in it.
Spike

Hennan was gambling; crap-games, numbers racket, bookmaking. On sport-betting, his lines and Bowlby’s would cross with
mutual profit. Laporte was racketeering, extortion, plain old-fashioned
country-style crime. And stolen goods, of course, and, while there’d
been money in it, illicit gem-buying.
Leo Thaxter was the biggest, and the most respectably fronted, of
the four. L. Thaxter, Loan Broker & Private Financier. He loaned money


publicly at a righteously legal seven percent; he also loaned, at much
higher rates, to all the shylocks in town, who, in turn, loaned it at sixfor-five to people who could not borrow elsewhere, including suckers
who went broke in Spike Hennan’s crap-games, and he used Raul
Laporte’s hoodlums to do his collecting.
And, notoriously but unprovably, behind them stood Hugo Ingermann, Mallorysport’s unconvicted underworld generalissimo.
Maybe they were just before proving it, now. Leslie Coombes’s
investigators had established that all four of them, and especially
Thaxter, were the dummy owners behind whom Ingermann controlled
most of the land the company had unwisely sold eight years ago, the
section north of Mallorysport that was now dotted with abandoned
factories and commercial buildings. And it was pretty well established
that those four had been the John Doe, Richard Roe, et alii, who had
been represented in court by Ingermann just after the Pendarvis Decisions.
Strains of music were now coming from the Fuzzy-room; the
melodrama was evidently over. He opened his eyes, lit another
cigarette, and began going over what he knew about Ingermann’s four
chief henchmen. Thaxter; he’d come to Zarathustra a few years before


Ingermann. Small-time racketeer, at first, and then he’d tried to
organize labor unions, but labor unions organized by outsiders had been
frowned upon by the company, and he’d been shown the wisdom of
stopping that. Then he’d organized an independent planters’ marketing
cooperative, and from that he’d gotten into shylocking. There’d been
some woman with him, at first, wife or reasonable facsimile. Maybe she
was still around; have Coombes look into that. She might be willing to
talk.
Diamond strolled in from the Fuzzy-room.
“Pappy Vic! Make talk with Diamond, plis.”

LIEUTENANT FITZ MORTLAKE, acting-in-charge of company detective
bureau for the 1800-2400 shift, yawned. Twenty more minutes; less
than that if Bert Eggers got in early to relieve him. He riffled through the
stack of complaint sheet copies on the desk and put a paperweight on
them. In the squadroom outside the mechanical noises of card-machines
and teleprinters and the occasional howl of a sixty-speed audiovisual
transmission were being replaced by human sounds, voices and laughter
and the scraping of chairs, as the midnight-to-six shift began filtering in.
He was wondering whether to go home and read till he became sleepy,


or drift around the bars to see if he could pick up a girl, when Bert
Eggers pushed past a couple of sergeants at the door and entered.
“Hi, Fitz; how’s it going?”
“Oh, quiet. We found out where Jayser hid that stuff; we have all of
it, now. And Millman and Nogahara caught those kids who were stealing
engine parts out of Warehouse Ten. We have them in detention; we
haven’t questioned them yet.”
“We’ll take care of that. They work for the Company?”
“Two of them do. The third is just a kid, seventeen. Juvenile Court
can have him. We think they were selling the stuff to Honest Hymie.”
“Uhuh. I’ll suspect anybody they all call Honest Anybody or anything,”
Eggers said, sitting down as he vacated the chair.
He took off his coat, pulled his shoulder holster and pistol from the
bottom drawer and put it on, resuming the coat. He gathered up his
lighter and tobacco pouch, and then discovered that his pipe was
missing, and hunted the desk-top for it, unearthing it from under some
teleprinted photographs.
“What are these?” Eggers asked, looking at them.
“Herckerd and Novaes, false alarm number ’steen thousand. A couple
of woods-tramps who turned up on Epsilon.”


Eggers made a sour face. “Those damn Fuzzies have made more
work for us,” he began. “And now, my kids are after me to get them
one. So’s my wife. You know what? Fuzzies are a status-symbol, now. If
you don’t have a Fuzzy, you might as well move to Junktown with the
rest of the bums.”
“I don’t have a Fuzzy, and I haven’t moved to Junktown yet.”
“You don’t have kids in high school.”
“No, thank God!”
“Bet he doesn’t have finance-company trouble, either,” one of the
sergeants in the doorway said.
Bert was going to make some retort to that. Before he could, another
voice spoke up:
“Yeeek! “
“Speak of the devil,” somebody said.
“You have that Fuzzy in here, Fitz?” Eggers demanded. “Where the
hell...?”
“There he is,” one of the men in the doorway said, pointing.
The Fuzzy, who had been behind the desk-chair, came out into view.
He pulled the bottom of Eggers’s coat, yeeking again. He looked like a
hunchback Fuzzy.


“What’s he got on his back?” Eggers reached down. “Whatta you got
there, anyhow?”
It was a little rucksack, with leather shoulder-straps and a drawstring
top. As soon as Eggers displayed an interest in it, the Fuzzy climbed out
of it as though glad to be rid of it. Mortlake picked it up and put it on
the desk; over ten pounds, must weigh almost as much as the Fuzzy.
Eggers opened the drawstrings and put his hand into it.
“It’s full of gravel,” he said, and brought out a handful.
The gravel was glowing faintly. Eggers let go of it as though it were
as hot as it looked.
“Holy God!” It was the first time he ever heard anybody screaming in
baritone. “The damn things are sunstones!”



CHAPTER TWENTY
“BUT WHAT FOR?” Diamond was insisting. “What for Big Ones first,
bang, bang, make dead? Not good. What for not make friend, make
help, have fun?”
“Well, some Big Ones bad, make trouble. Other Big Ones fight to stop
trouble.”
“But what for Big Ones be bad? Why not everybody make friend,
have fun, make help, be good?”
Now how in Nifflheim could you answer a question like that? Maybe
that was what Ernst Mallin meant when he said Fuzzies were the sanest
people he’d ever seen. Maybe they were too sane to be bad, and how
could a non-sane human explain to them?
“Pappy Vic not know. Maybe Unka Ernst, Unka Panko, know.”
The bell of the private communication screen began its slow tolling.
Diamond looked around; this was something that didn’t happen often.
He rose, taking Diamond from his lap and setting him on the chair, then
went to the wall and put the screen on. It was Captain Morgan Lansky,
at Chief Steefer’s desk. He looked as though a planet buster had just
dropped in front of him and hadn’t exploded yet.


“Mr. Grego; the gem-vault! Fuzzies in it, robbing it!”
He conquered the impulse to ask Lansky if he were drunk or crazy.
Lansky was neither; he was just frightened.
“Take it easy, Morgan. Tell me about it. First, what you know’s
happened, and then what you think is happening.”
“Yes, sir.” Lansky got hold of himself; for an instant he was silent.
“Ten minutes ago, in the captain’s office at detective bureau; the shifts
were changing, and both lieutenants were there. A Fuzzy came out of a
storeroom in back of the office; he had a little knapsack on his back,
with about twelve pounds of sunstones in it. The Fuzzy’s here now, so
are the sunstones. Do you want to see them?”
“Later; go ahead.” Then, before Lansky could speak, he asked: “Sure
he came out of this storeroom?”
“Yes, sir. There was five-six men in the doorway to the squadroom,
he couldn’t of come through that way. And the only way he could of got
into this storeroom was out a ventilation duct there. The grating over it
was open.”
“That sounds reasonable. He could have gotten into the gem-vault
through the ventilation system too.”


The entrance to the gem-vault stairway was on the same floor as the
detective bureau. The inlet and outlet screens were hinged, and the
latch worked from either side to allow any outlet screen to be put on
anywhere. And the sunstones couldn’t have come from anywhere else;
just yesterday he’d had to go down and let Evins in to put away what
had accumulated in his office safe.
“Ten minutes; what’s been done since?”
“Carlos Hurtado’s here, he hadn’t gone home. He’s staying, and so
are most of the pre-midnight men. We put out a quiet alert to all the
police in the building. We’re blocking off everything from the top of the
fourteenth level down, and a second block around the fifteenth. I called
the Chief; he’s coming in. Hurtado’s calling the Constabulary and the
Mallorysport police for men and vehicles to blockade the building from
the outside. I’ve sent calls out for Dr. Mallin, and for Mr. E. Evins, and
I’ve sent out for as many hearing aids as I can get.”
“That was good. Now, have a jeep or something up here for me right
away; I’ll have to open the gem-vault. And have men there to meet me.
With sono-stunners; there may be more Fuzzies inside. And get hold of
the building superintendent and the ventilation engineer, and get plans
of the ventilation system.”


“Right. Anything else, Mr. Grego?”
“Not that I can think of now. Be seeing you.”
He blanked the screen. Diamond, in the chair, was looking at him
wide-eyed.
“Pappy Vic; what make do?”
He looked at Diamond for a moment. “Diamond, you remember when
bad Big Ones bring you, other Fuzzies, here?” he asked. “You know
other Fuzzies again, you see them?”
“Yeh, ’tsure. Good friend; know again.”
“Hokay. Stay put; Pappy Vic be back.”
He ran into the kitchenette and gathered a couple of tins of ExteeThree. Returning, he found a hearing aid—Diamond was using his
Fuzzyphone, and he hadn’t needed it—and pocketed it. Then, swinging
Diamond to his shoulder, he went outside. Just as he emerged onto the
terrace, a silver-trimmed maroon company airjeep, lettered POLICE, lifted above the edge of the terrace, turned, and glided down. He thought,
again, that police vehicles should have some distinctive color-scheme to
distinguish them from ordinary Company cars. Talk about that with
Harry Steefer, some time. Then the jeep was down and the pilot had


opened the door. He climbed in and held Diamond on his lap, while the
pilot reported him aboard. Then he took the radio handphone himself.
“Grego; who’s there?” he asked.
“Hurtado. We have everything from the fourteenth level down to the
sixteenth sealed off, inside and out. Captain Lansky and Lieutenant
Eggers have gone to meet you at the gem vault. Dr. Mallin’s coming in;
so’s Miss Glenn and Captain Khadra of the ZNPF. Maybe they can get
something out of this Fuzzy.” He muttered something bitterly.
“Questioning Fuzzies; what’s police work coming to next?”
“Teaching Fuzzies to crack safes; what’s crime coming to next? You
get the ventilation system plans yet?”
“They’re coming up; so’s the ventilation engineer. You think there’s
more Fuzzies than this one?”
“Four more. And two men, named Phil Novaes and Moses Herckerd.”
Hurtado was silent for a moment, then cursed. “Now why in Nifflheim
didn’t I think of that?” he demanded. “Sure!”
They went inside from a landing-stage on the third level down. There
were police there, with portable machine guns, and a couple of cars.
Work was going on in some of the offices along the horizontal vehicleway, but no excitement. They encountered a police car in the vertical

shaft just above the fourteenth level down; the jeep pilot put on his redand-white blinker and picked up the handphone of his loudspeaker,
saying, “Mr. Grego here; please don’t delay us.” The car moved out of
the way.
The fifteenth level down was police country. Everything was
superficially quiet, but a number of vehicles were concentrated around
the horizontal ways from the vertical shaft. The pilot set the jeep down
at the entrance to the gem-buyer’s offices. Morgan Lansky and a
detective were waiting there. He got out, holding Diamond, and the pilot
handed the tins of Extee-Three to the detective. Lansky, who seemed to
have recovered his aplomb, grinned.
“Interpreter, Mr. Grego?” he asked.
“Yes, and maybe he can make identification. I think he knows these
Fuzzies.”
It took Lansky two seconds to get that. Then he nodded.
“Sure. That would explain everything.”
They went through the door, and, inside, it was immediately evident
that the security regulation book had gone out the airlock. The portcullis
was raised, though a couple of submachine-gunners loitered watchfully
in front of it. Half a dozen men, all carrying sono-stunners, short


carbines with flaring muzzles like ancient blunderbusses, fell in behind
them. The door at the end of the short hall was open, too, and nobody
was bothering with identity checks.
Nobody was supposed to be within sight of him when he opened the
vault, but he ignored that, too. Lansky, Eggers, the man who was
carrying the two tins of Extee-Three, and the men with the stunners all
crowded down the stairway after him. Quickly he punched the nonsense
sentence out on the keyboard. Ten seconds later the door receded and
slid aside.
Inside, the lights were on, as always; bright as they were, they could
not dim the many colored glow on the black velvet tabletop, where two
Fuzzies were playing concentratedly with a thousand or so sunstones. A
little rope ladder, just big enough for a Fuzzy, dangled past the lightshade from the air-outlet above.
Both Fuzzies looked up, startled. One said in accusing complaint,
“You not say stones make shine; you say just stones, like always.” His
companion looked at them for a moment, and then cried: “Not know
these Big Ones! How come this place?”
Lansky, who had been holding Diamond while he had been using the
keyboard, followed him in. Diamond saw the two on the table and


jabbered in excited recognition. He took Diamond and set him on the
table with the others.
“Not be afraid,” he said. “I not hurt. He friend; show him pretty
things.”
Recognition was mutual; the other Fuzzies were hugging Diamond
and talking rapidly. Lansky had gone to a communication screen and
was punching a call-number.
“You get away from bad Big Ones, too?” Diamond was asking. “How
you come this place?”
“Big Ones bring us. Make us go through long little hole. Tell us, get
stones, like at other place.”
What other place, he wondered. The other strange Fuzzy was saying:
“All-time, Big Ones make us go through long little holes, get stones.
We get stones, Big Ones give us good things to eat. Not get stones, Big
Ones angry. Make hurt, put us in dark place, not give anything to eat,
make us do again.”
“Who has the Extee-Three?” he asked. “Open a tin for me.”
“Estee-fee!” Diamond, hearing him, repeated. “Pappy Vic give Esteefee; hoksu-fusso.”


Lansky had Hurtado in the screen; he was standing aside to allow the
latter to see what was going on in the gem-vault. Hurtado was
swearing.
“Now, we gotta make everything in the building Fuzzy-proof,” he was
saying. “The Chief’s just come in.” He turned. “Hey, Chief, come and
look at this!”
Eggers had the Extee-Three; he got the tin open. Taking the cake
from him, he broke it in three, then shoved a couple of million sols in
sunstones out of the way and gave a piece to each of the Fuzzies. The
two little jewel-thieves knew just what it was, and began eating at once.
Telling Eggers to keep an eye on them, he went to the screen. In it,
Harry Steefer was cursing even more fluently than Hurtado. He broke off
and greeted:
“Hello, Mr. Grego. Beside what’s on the table, are there any
sunstones left?”
“I haven’t checked, yet.”
He looked around. All the drawers had been pulled out of the cabinet;
the Fuzzies had evidently gotten at the upper rows by stacking and
standing on the ones from below. Lansky was examining a couple of
small canvas rucksacks he had found.


“What’s it look like, Captain?”
“Don’t come around the table, anybody,” Lansky warned. “The floor’s
all over stones, here.”
“Then we have some left. Has Conrad Evins come in yet?”
“We’re still trying to contact him,” Steefer said. “Dr. Mallin’s here, and
Captain Khadra and Miss Glenn are on the way here. I’m going over to
operation-command room, now; I’ll leave somebody here.”
“Suppose you leave the Fuzzy in your office, too. I’ll bring this pair
up, and Diamond can help question them all.”
Steefer assented, then excused himself to talk to somebody in the
room with him. One of the detectives, who had gone out, returned with
a broom and dustpan; he held the pan while Lansky swept the scattered
sunstones up. There were more than he had expected, perhaps as many
as half of them. He poured them into drawers, regardless of size or
grade; they could be sorted out later. All the Fuzzies protested
strenuously when he began gathering up the ones on the table; even
Diamond wanted to play with them. He consoled them with the other
cake of Extee-Three, and assured Diamond, who assured his friends,
that Pappy Vic would provide other pretties.


“Captain, you and Lieutenant Eggers and a couple of men stay here,”
he said. “I think we have two more Fuzzies, and they may be back for
more stones. Catch them by hand if you can, stun them if you have to.
Try not to hurt them, but get them, and bring them to the Chief’s office.
That’s where I’m going now.”

“CHRIST, I WISH they’d hurry! What do you think’s keeping them?”
That was the tenth or twelfth time Phil Novaes had said that in the
last twenty minutes. Phil was getting on edge. Been on edge ever since
they’d come here, and getting edgier every minute. Moses Herckerd was
beginning to worry just a little about that. Losing your nerve was the
surest way to disaster in a spot like this, and it would be disaster to both
of them. Phil had been a little overconfident, at the beginning; that had
been bad, too.
Getting the car hidden, on the unoccupied ninth level down, had been
easy enough; they’d stowed it in one of the unfinished main office
rooms close to where they’d kept the Fuzzies, two months ago. He knew
the company police had started patrolling the unoccupied levels after
that one damned Fuzzy had gotten away from them and, of all places,


into Victor Grego’s own apartment. Still, the place where they’d left the
car was safe enough.
The long descent, nearly a thousand feet, among the water mains
and ventilation mains to the fifteenth level down, had been hard and
dangerous, clinging to the contragravity lifter with the Fuzzies jostling
about in the box. Once this was over, he hoped he’d never see another
damned Fuzzy as long as he lived. Phil had been all right then; he’d had
to keep his mind on what he was doing, keep the lifter from swinging
out and carrying them away from the hand-holds. It had been after they
had gotten onto this ledge at the ventilation duct outlet that Phil’s
nerves had begun to get away from him.
“Take it easy, Phil,” he whispered. “They have half a mile, coming
and going, through those ducts. And they have to fill their packs in the
vault, and they always poke around doing that. Never can teach the
buggers to hurry.”
“Well, something could have happened. Maybe they took a wrong
turn and got lost. That place is a lot more complicated than the practice
setup.”

“Oh, they’ll get out all right. They all made three trips already without
anything going wrong, didn’t they?” he said. “And don’t talk so damned
loud.”
That was what he was worried about, as much as anything. The
whole company police force was concentrated around the place where
he and Novaes were waiting. They were outside the actual police zone,
but all the other emergency services—fire protection, radiation safety,
the first-aid dispensaries and the ambulance hangars—were all around
them, and sound carried an incredible distance through these shafts and
air ducts and conduits.
“We have enough, now,” Phil said. “Let’s just pick up and go, now.
Why, we must have fifty million already.”
“Bug out and leave the Fuzzies?”
“Hell with the Fuzzies,” Phil said.
“Hell with the Fuzzies, hell! Haven’t you found out yet that Fuzzies
can talk? We’ve spent two months, now, cooped up indoors, because
that Fuzzy Grego found put the finger on us. We’ve got to get all five
back, and we’ve got to finish them off. If we don’t and the police get
hold of them, they’ll finish us.”
Phil, who was stooping by the rectangular outlet, looked up.


“I hear something. A couple of them, talking.”
He turned on his hearing aid and put his head to the opening beside
Phil’s. Yes, a couple of Fuzzies talking; arguing about how far it was yet.
“As soon as they come out, let’s just shove them into the chute,” Phil
argued, nodding toward the access-port to the trash-chute, that went
seven hundred feet down to the mass-energy converters.
That was where the Fuzzies would go, all of them, when the
sunstones were all out of the vault. But the sunstones weren’t all out.
He doubted if they had more than half of them, yet.
“No, not yet. Here they come; grab the first one.”
Novaes caught the Fuzzy as he came out. He caught the second.
They were both carrying loaded packs. He slipped the straps down over
the Fuzzy’s arms and gave him to Novaes to hold, then loosened the
drawstrings, emptying the stones into the open suitcase along with the
other gems. Then he put the rucksack onto the Fuzzy’s back.
“All right. In with you. Go get stones.”
The Fuzzy said something, he wasn’t sure what, in a complaining
tone. Fusso; that meant food, or eat. Important word to a Fuzzy.


“No. You get stone; then I give fusso.” He shoved the Fuzzy back into
the ventilation duct. “Let’s unload yours and send him back. As long as
there’s sunstones in there, we want them.”

A UNIFORMED SERGEANT was holding down Chief Steefer’s desk,
smoking what was probably one of the Chief’s cigars and talking to a girl
in another screen. Across the room, Ernst Mallin, Ahmed Khadra and
Sandra Glenn were talking to a Fuzzy who sat on the edge of a table,
contentedly munching Extee-Three. Khadra was in evening clothes, and
Sandra was wearing something glamorous with a lot of black lace. She
was also wearing a sunstone which he hadn’t noticed before, on the
third finger of her left hand. Wanted, Fuzzy-Sitter. Apply Victor Grego.
They set Diamond and his friends on the floor; he thanked and
dismissed the men who had helped him with them. As soon as they saw
the Fuzzy on the table, they raised an outcry and ran forward; the Fuzzy
on the table dropped to the floor and hurried to meet them.
“What did you get from him?” he asked.
“Herckerd and Novaes, natch,” Khadra said, disgustedly. “All the time
I was looking for a black market that wasn’t there, they were right here

in town somewhere, being taught to steal sunstones. Fagin-racket, by
God!”
“Herckerd and Novaes and who else?”
“Two other men, and one woman. And just the five Fuzzies Herckerd
and Novaes brought in along with Diamond. They were somewhere not
more than fifteen minutes by air from Company House all the time. This
gang taught them to go through ventilator ducts, and open the screencovers on the inlets, and use rope ladders and get stones out of
cabinets. They must have had a mockup of the gem-vault and the
ventilation system. They had to practice all the time. If they cleaned out
the cabinets and brought the stones, river-gravel, I suppose, out, they
got Extee-Three. If they goofed, they were punished, electric shock, I
suppose, and shoved in a dungeon with nothing to eat. You know, they
could be shot for that.”
“They oughtn’t to be shot; they ought to be burned at the stake!”
Sandra cried angrily.
Gentler sex, indeed! “Well, I’ll settle for shooting, if we can catch
them. Done anything in aid of that yet?”
“Not too much,” Mallin regretted. “His vocabulary is limited, and he
hasn’t words for much that he experienced. We’ve been trying to learn


his route through the ventilation system. He knows how he went in to
the gem-vault, but he simply can’t verbalize it.”
“Diamond; you help Pappy Vic. Make talk for Unka Ernst, Unka
Ahmed, Auntie Sandra; help other Fuzzies make talk about bad Big
Ones, about place where were, about what make do, about how go
through long little holes.” He turned to Khadra. “Has he seen Herckerd
and Novaes on screen?”
“Not yet; we’ve just been talking to him, so far.”
“Better let all three of them see those audiovisuals; get identifications
made. And keep on about the ventilation ducts. See if any of them can
tell which way they went toward the gem vault, and what kind of a place
they went in at.”



CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
CROSSING THE HALL, he found the operation-command room busy, in a
quiet and almost leisurely manner. Everybody knew what to do, and was
getting it done with a minimum of fuss. A group of men, policemen and
engineers, were huddled at a big table, going over plans, on big sheets
and on photoprint screens. More men, police and maintenance people,
gathered around a big solidigraph model of the fourteenth, fifteenth and
sixteenth levels, projected in a tri-di screen. The thing was transparent,
and looked almost anatomical; well, Company House was an organism
of a sort. Respiratory system; the ventilation, in which everybody was
interested. Circulatory system; the water-lines. Excretory system;
sewage disposal.
And now it had been invaded by a couple of inimical microbes,
named Phil Novaes and Moses Herckerd, whom the police leucocytes
were seeking to neutralize.
He looked at it for a while, then strolled on to the banks of
viewscreens. Views of halls and vehicle-ways, mostly empty, patrolled
here and there by police or hastily mobilized and armed maintenance
workers. Views of landing stages, occupied by police and observed from


aircars. A view from a car a thousand feet over the building, in which a
few Constabulary and city police vehicles circled slowly, blockading the
building from outside. He nodded in satisfaction; they couldn’t get out of
the building, and as soon as enough of the fifty-odd widely scattered
locations from which they might be operating could be eliminated, the
police would close in on them.
In one screen from a pickup installed over the door in the gem-vault,
he could see Morgan Lansky, Bert Eggers and two detectives, coatless
and perspiring, around the electrically warmed tabletop, staring at the
little rope ladder that dangled down around the light-shade. In another
screen, from a high pickup in a corner of Harry Steefer’s office, the
uniformed sergeant at the desk watched Ernst Mallin and Ahmed Khadra
fussing with a screen, while Sandra Glenn sat on the floor talking to
Diamond and his three friends.
Harry Steefer sat alone at the command desk, keeping track of
everything at once. He went over and sat down beside him.
“Mr. Grego. We don’t seem to be making too much progress,” the
Chief said. “Everything’s secure so far, though.”
“Have the news services gotten hold of it yet?”


“I don’t believe so. Planetwide News called the city police to find out
what all the cars were doing around Company House; somebody told
them that it was a shipment of valuables being taken under guard to the
space terminal. They seemed to accept that.”
“We can’t sit on it indefinitely.”
“I hope we can till we catch these people.”
“Have you contacted Conrad Evins yet?”
“No. He’s not at home; here, I’ll show you.”
Steefer punched out a call on one of his communication screens.
When it lighted, the chief gem buyer’s wide-browed, narrow chinned
face looked out of it.
“This is a recording, made at 2100, Conrad Evins speaking. Mrs. Evins
and I are going out; we will not be home until after midnight,” Evins’s
voice said. Then the screen flickered, and the recording began again.
“I could put out an emergency call for him, but I don’t want to,”
Steefer said. “We don’t know how many people outside the building are
involved in this, and we don’t want to alarm them.”
“No. Four men and one woman; the Fuzzies say there were only two
men, presumably Herckerd and Novaes, brought them here. That means
two men and a woman somewhere outside waiting for them. And we


don’t really need Evins, at present. It’s after midnight now; we can keep
calling at his home.”
Evins and his wife had probably gone to a show, or visiting. Evins’s
wife; he couldn’t seem to recall ever having met her. He’d heard
something or other about her... He shoved that aside.
“Don’t they have little robo-snoopers they use to go through the
ventilation ducts?” he asked.
“Yes. Mr. Guerrin, the ventilation engineer, has a dozen of them. He
suggested using them, but I vetoed it till I could see what you thought.
Those things float on contragravity, and even a miniature Abbot-drive
generator makes quite an ultrasonic noise. We still have two Fuzzies
loose in the ventilation system; we don’t want to scare them, do we?”
“No. Let them carry on. There’s a chance they may come out in the
gem-vault, if we don’t frighten them.”
He looked across the room at the viewscreens. Khadra and Mallin had
their screen set up, Sandra had brought the Fuzzies over in front of it,
and Diamond seemed to be explaining about viewscreens and
audiovisual screens to the others. In the gem-vault screen, Lansky and
the others were leaning forward across the table, listening. They had a
couple of hearing aids, now, which Eggers and one of his detectives


were using. Lansky turned to make frantic gestures at the pickup.
Steefer picked up a speaker-phone and advised everybody to pay
attention to the gem-vault screen.
For one of those ten-second eternities nothing happened in the
screen. A moment later, a Fuzzy came climbing down the ladder. One of
the detectives would have grabbed him; Eggers stopped him. A moment
later, another Fuzzy appeared.
Eggers caught him by the feet with both hands and pulled him off the
ladder; the Fuzzy hit Eggers in the face with his fist. The first Fuzzy,
having dropped to the table, tried to get up the ladder again; Lansky
grabbed him. One of the detectives came to Eggers’s assistance. Then
the struggle was over, and the two prisoners had been secured. Lansky
was yelling:
“We got them both! We’re bringing them up.”
Steefer yelled to the girl who was monitoring the screen to cut in
sound transmission and tell Lansky and one man to remain on guard;
Lansky acknowledged, and Eggers and one of the detectives left the
vault, each carrying a Fuzzy. In the screen from Steefer’s office, they
had an audiovisual of Moses Herckerd on the screen; it was the
employment interview film, and Herckerd was talking about his


educational background and former job experience. Steefer was talking
to the sergeant at his desk; the latter beckoned Ahmed Khadra over.
“Good,” Khadra said, when Steefer told him what had happened.
“That’s all of them. We’ll run Herckerd over for them when they come
up, and show them Novaes. They’re the two who brought them here
tonight, the three we have here all say so.”
“They’re still in here,” Steefer said. “That leaves two men and a
woman outside. I wonder... ”
“I think I know who they are, Chief.”
It was just a guess, of course, but it fitted. He had suddenly
remembered what he knew about Mrs. Conrad Evins.
When Leo Thaxter, now Loan Broker & Private Financier, first came
to Zarathustra ten years ago, a woman had come with him, but she
hadn’t been a wife or reasonable facsimile, she had been a sister or
reasonable facsimile. Rose Thaxter. After a while, she had left Thaxter
and married a company minerologist named Conrad Evins, who, after
the discovery of the sunstones, had become chief company gem-buyer.
“What’s that call-number of Evins?” he asked Steefer, and when
Steefer gave it, he repeated it to Khadra. “When those other Fuzzies


come in, call it. It’ll be answered by an audiovisual recording. See if the
kids recognize him.”
Steefer looked at him, more amused than surprised. “I wouldn’t have
thought of that, myself, Mr. Grego. It seems to fit, though.”
“Hunch.” If anybody respected hunches, it would be a cop. “I just
remembered who Evins was married to. Rose Thaxter.”
“Yeh!” Steefer muttered something else. “I know that, too; I just
never connected it. It all hangs together, too.”
For a couple of minutes, they were both talking at the same time,
telling one another just how it did hang together, and watching the
screen from Steefer’s office. Eggers and the detective were coming in,
still coatless, carrying a Fuzzy apiece; the one Eggers was carrying was
trying to get the gun out of the lieutenant’s shoulder-holster.
Of course it hung together. Somebody in the gang had to have exact
knowledge of the layout of the gem-vault, which Evins, and very few
others, could provide. The arrangement of the ventilation-ducts wasn’t
classified top-secret; anybody in Evins’s position could have gotten that.
They had to have a place to keep the Fuzzies, big enough to build a
replica of the gem vault and of the ventilation system. Well, there were
all those vacant factories and warehouses out in the district everybody


called Mortgageville. The ones Hugo Ingermann had been acquiring title
to, with Thaxter as dummy buyer. How Herckerd and Novaes had been
roped in wasn’t immediately important; catch them and question them
and that would emerge. Ten to one, Rose Thaxter, Mrs. Conrad Evins,
was the connecting link and mainspring.
The Fuzzies in Steefer’s office were having a reunion. Khadra and
Mallin and Sandra were trying to get them to look at the communication
screen. He turned to Steefer.
“Get some men to Conrad Evins’s place; make a thorough search, for
anything that might look like evidence of anything.”
“They won’t be there.”
“No. They’ll be in one of those buildings over in Mortgageville, and
we don’t know which one. I’m going to call Ian Ferguson.”
He told Ferguson quickly what he suspected. The Constabulary
commandant nodded.
“Reasonable,” he agreed. “I’ll call the city police for help; we’ll close
the place off so nobody can get in or out and then we’ll start making a
search. It’s only about two thousand square miles, and there are only
about three hundred buildings on it,” he added. “I think I’ll call Casagra,
too, and see how many Marines he can give me.”


“Well, take your time searching; just make sure anybody who’s there
now stays there. We’ll give you what help we can as soon as we can.”
He looked up at the screen from Steefer’s office. Khadra had called
Evins’s home, now, and he could hear Evins’s recorded voice stating that
he wouldn’t be home before midnight. The Fuzzies evidently recognized
him. It was also evident that they didn’t like him.
“And put out a general alert to pick up Evins, Mrs. Evins, and Leo
Thaxter, and I don’t think you need to worry about how much noise you
make doing it.”
“And Ivan Bowlby, and Raul Laporte, and Spike Heenan,” Ferguson
added. “And any or all of their hoods.” He thought for a moment. “And
Hugo Ingermann. We may finally have grounds for interrogating him as
a suspect. I’ll call Gus Brannhard, too.”
“And Leslie Coombes; he’ll be a help.”
“All right, everybody!” Steefer was calling out with his loudspeaker.
“We have all the Fuzzies out; now let’s get the show started!” Then he
rose and went around the desk.
Khadra was on the communication screen from the Chief’s desk:
“They made that fellow Evins, all right. He was one of the gang. Who
is he?”


“Well, he used to be the Company’s chief gem-buyer, up to fifteen
minutes ago, but now he has been discharged, without notice,
severance pay or recommendation.” He thought for a moment. “Captain,
are those Fuzzies’ feet dirty?” he asked.
“Huh?” Khadra stared at him for an instant, then nodded. “Yes, they
are; gray-brown dust. Same kind of dust on their fur.”
“Uhuh; that’s good.” He rose and went to the big table and the
solidigraph, where Steefer was already talking to a dozen or so men. He
saw Niles Guerrin, the ventilation engineer, and pulled him aside.
“Niles, the insides of those ducts are dusty?” he asked.
“The ones that carry stale air to the reconditioners,” Guerrin replied.
“Dust from the air in the rooms... ”
“They’re the ones we’re interested in. Now, these snoopers, roboinspectors; could they pick up tracks the Fuzzies make, or traces where
they’ve brushed against the sides of the ducts?”
“Yes, sure. They have a full optical reception and transmission system
for visible light and infra-red light, and controllable magnifying vision... ”
“How soon can you get them started, from the gem-vault and from
the captain’s office in detective headquarters?”


“Right away; we’ve set up screens and controls for them in here; did
that right at the start.”
“Good.” He raised his voice. “Chief! Captain Hurtado, Lieutenant
Mortlake; do-bizzo. We’re going to fill the ventilation system with
snoopers, now.”

PHIL NOVAES LOOKED at his watch. It was still 0130, the damned thing
must have stopped, and he was sure he’d wound it. Holding his wrist to
catch the dim light from above he squinted at the second-hand. It was
still making its slow circuit around the dial. It must have been only a few
seconds since he had looked at it last.
“Herk, let’s get the hell out of here,” he urged. “They aren’t coming
out at all. It’s been an hour since the last two went in.”
“Thirty-five minutes,” Herckerd said.
“Well, it’s been over an hour since the other three went in.
Something’s gone wrong; we’ll wait here till hell freezes over... ”
“We’ll wait here a little longer, Phil. We still have fifty million in
sunstones to wait for, and we want to get those Fuzzies and shut them
up for good.”


“We have better than fifty million already. All we’ll get’ll be a hole in
the head if we stay around here any longer. I know what’s happened,
those Fuzzies have gone out some other way; they’re running around
loose, packing sunstones... ”
“Be quiet, Phil.” Herckerd reached to his shirt pocket to turn on his
hearing aid and put his head to the ventilation duct opening. “I hear
something in there.” He snapped off the hearing aid, listened, and
snapped it on again. “It’s ultrasonic, whatever it is. Probably vibration in
the walls of the duct. Now just take it easy, Phil. Nobody knows there’s
anything happening at all. Grego’s the only man in Company House that
can open that vault, and he won’t open it for a couple of weeks, at least.
All the stones from Evins’s office were put away yesterday. It’ll take that
long before anybody knows they’re gone.”
“Suppose those Fuzzies got out somewhere else. My God, they could
have come out right in the police area.” That could have happened; he
wished he hadn’t thought of it, but now that he had, he was sure that
was what had happened. “If they did, everybody in the building’s
looking for us.”
Herckerd wasn’t listening to him. He’d turned off his hearing aid, and
was squatting by the intake port, peeling the wrapper from a chewing-


gum stick and putting the wrapper carefully in his pocket. Another piece
of foolishness; no reason at all why they couldn’t smoke here. He
listened with his hearing aid again. The noise, whatever it was, was
louder.
“There’s something in there.” He pulled the goggles down from his
cap and took out his infrared flashlight.
“Don’t do that,” Herckerd said sharply.
He disregarded the warning and turned the invisible light into the
duct. There was something moving forward toward the opening; it
wasn’t a Fuzzy. It was a bulbous-nosed metallic thing, floating slowly
toward him.
“It’s a snooper! Look, Herk; somebody’s wise to us. They have a
snooper in the duct... ”
“Get the stones in the box! Right away!” Herckerd ordered.
“Ah, so there was something went wrong!”
He snapped the suitcase shut, shoved it into the box on the
contragravity lifter, and fastened the lid, then snapped the hook of his
safety-belt onto one of the rings on the lifter. There was a crash behind
him, and when he turned, Herckerd was holstering his pistol. Then he,
too, snapped his safety-strap to the lifter, and pulled loose the two poles


with hooked and spiked tips, passing one over and slipping the thong of
the other over his wrist.
“Full lift,” he said. “Let’s go.”
He fumbled for a second or so at the switch, then turned it on. The
whole thing, lifter, box, and he and Herckerd, were pulled up from the
ledge and swung out into the shaft.
“What did you have to shoot for?” he demanded, pushing with his
boathook-like pole. “Everybody in the place heard you.”
“You want that thing following us?” Herckerd asked. “Watch out;
watermain right above!”
Maybe the snooper was just making a routine inspection; maybe
Herckerd had finally panicked, after all his pretense of calmness. No.
Something had gone wrong. Those damned Fuzzies had gone out the
wrong way, somebody’d found them... There were more pipes and
conduits and things in the way; he remembered the trouble they’d had
getting past them on the way down. He and Herckerd had to push and
pull with their poles and for a moment he thought they were inextricably
stuck, they’d never get loose, they were wedged in here... Then the
lifter was rising again, and he could see the network of obstructions
receding below, and the white XV’s on the sides of the shaft had


become XIV’s, so they were off the fifteenth level. Only five more levels
and a couple of floors to go.
But he could hear voices, from loudspeakers, all around:
“Cars P-18, P-19, P-20; fourteenth level, fourth floor, location DA231.”
“Riot-car 12, up to thirteen, sixth floor... ”
He swore at Herckerd. “Sure, it’ll be a month before they find out
what’s happened!”
“Shut up. We get out of the shaft two floors up, to the left. They
have the shaft plugged at the top.”
“Yes, and walk right into them,” he argued.
“We’ll lift into them if we keep on here; we’ll have a chance if we get
out of this.”
They worked the lifter around the central clump of water and sewer
and ventilation mains, pushing away from it and then hooking onto
handholds and drawing the lifter into a lateral passage, floating along it
for a hundred feet before Herckerd could get at the lifter controls and
set it down. Then he unsnapped his safety-strap and staggered for a
moment before he found his footing.


It was a service-passage, wide enough for one of the little hall-cars,
or for a jeep; maintenance workers used it to get at air-fans and waterpumps. They started along it, towing the lifter after them, looking to
right and left for some means of egress. There should be other vertical
shafts, but they would be covered, too.
“How are we going to get out of this?”
“How the hell do I know?” Herckerd retorted. “How do I know we’re
going to get out at all?” He stopped for a moment and then pointed to
an open doorway on the left. “Stairway; we’ll go up there.”
They crossed to it. From somewhere down the bare, dimly-lighted
passage, an amplified voice was shouting indistinguishable words. The
passage connected with another, or a hallway. They couldn’t go ahead;
that was sure.
“We can’t get the lifter through.” He knew it, and still tried; the lifter
wouldn’t go through the narrow door. “We’ll have to carry the suitcase.”
“Get the box off the lifter,” Herckerd said. “We can’t carry that
suitcase ourselves; they’d catch us in no time. Get the suitcase out of
it.”
The box, four feet by four by three, with airholes at the top, had
been necessary when they had the Fuzzies to carry; they didn’t have to


bother with them now. He opened it and lifted out the suitcase. No; they
couldn’t carry that, not and do any running. It was fastened with screws
to the contragravity-lifter. Herckerd had his pocket-knife out, with the
screwdriver blade open, and was working to remove the brackets.
“Well, where’ll we go...?”
“Don’t argue, goddamit; get to work. Is there any extra rope ladder
in that box? If there is, we’ll use it to tie the suitcase on... ”
Over Herckerd’s shoulder, he saw the jeep enter the passage from
the intersecting hall a hundred feet away. For an instant, he was frozen
with fright. Then he screamed, “Behind you!” and threw himself through
the open doorway, stumbling to the foot of a flight of narrow steel steps
and then running up them. A pistol roared twice just outside the door,
and then a submachine gun let go, a ripping two-second burst, a second
of silence, and then another. Then voices shouted.
They got Herckerd. They got the sunstones, too. Then he forgot
about both. Just get away, get far away, get away fast.
There was a steel door at the head of the stairs. Oh, God, please
don’t let it be locked! He flung himself at it, gripping the latch-handle.


It wasn’t. The door swung open, and he stumbled through and closed
it behind him, hearing, as he did, voices coming up from below. Then he
turned, in the lighted hallway beyond.
There was a policeman standing not fifteen feet away, holding a
short carbine with a thick, flaring muzzle, a stunner. He crouched,
grabbing for his pistol. Then the blunderbuss muzzle of the stunner
swung toward him at the policeman’s hip. He had the pistol half drawn
when the lights all went out and a crushing shock hit him, shaking and
jarring him into oblivion.

THE OPERATION-COMMAND ROOM was silent. When the voice from the
screen speaker ceased, there was not a sound for an instant. Then there
was a soft susurration; everybody in the place was exhaling at once.
Grego found that he had been holding his own breath. So had Harry
Steefer; he was exhaling noisily.
“Well, that’s it,” the Chief said. “I’m glad they took Novaes alive,
anyhow. It’ll be a couple of hours before he’s able to talk.” He picked up
his cigarette pack, shook one out for himself and offered it.
Moses Herckerd wouldn’t do any talking; he’d taken a dozen
submachine gun bullets.


“What’ll we do with the sunstones?” the voice from the screen asked.
“Take them to the gem-vault; we’ll sort them over tomorrow or when
we have time.” He turned to the open screens to city police and Colonial
Constabulary. The non-coms who had been on them were replaced by
Ralph Earlie and Ian Ferguson, respectively. “You hear what was going
on?” he asked.
“We got most of it,” Ferguson said, and Earlie said, “You got them,
and you got the stones back, but just what did happen?”
“They had a contragravity-lifter; they used it to get up one of the
main conduit shafts, and then they got into a maintenance passage on
the fourteenth level down. One of our jeeps caught them; Herckerd tried
to put up a fight and got shot to hamburger; Novaes ran up a flight of
stairs and came out in a hall right in front of a cop with a sono-stunner.
When he comes to, we’ll question him and check his story with the
Fuzzies,” he said. “How are you doing at Mortgageville?”
“We have the place surrounded,” Ferguson said. “They might get out
on foot; they won’t in a vehicle. We have three Navy landing-craft
loaded with detection equipment circling overhead, and Casagra has a
hundred Marines along with my men.”

"I can’t help on that, at all,” the Mallorysport police chief said. “I have
all my men out making raids, and if you don’t need that blockade
around Company House any more, I want the men who are there. We
have Ivan Bowlby, Spike Heenan and Raul Laporte, and we’re pulling in
everybody that’s ever had anything to do with any of them, or Leo
Thaxter. We don’t have Thaxter, yet. I suppose he’s at Mortgageville,
along with the Evinses, waiting for Herckerd and Novaes to bring in the
loot. And we have Hugo Ingermann, and this time he can’t talk himself
out. We got Judge Pendarvis out of bed, and he signed warrants for all
of them; reasonable grounds for suspicion and authority to veridicate.
We’re saving him for last; we’ve just started on the small-fry.”
There wasn’t any question in his mind that Leo Thaxter was involved
in the attempt on the gem-vault. Whether Bowlby or Heenan or Laporte
had anything to do with it was more or less immaterial. They could be
questioned, not only about that but about anything else, and anything
they admitted under veridication was admissible as evidence against
them, self incriminatory or not.
“Well, I’m going over and see what they’ve been getting from the
Fuzzies,” he said. “There ought to be quite a little, by now.” He glanced
up at the screen from Steefer’s office; half a dozen people were there


now, and he was surprised to see Jack Holloway among them. He
couldn’t have flown in from Beta Continent since this had started. “I’ll
call back, or have somebody call, later.”
Crossing the hall, he joined the group who were interviewing the five
Herckerd-Novaes-Evins-Thaxter Fuzzies. Juan Jimenez was there, so
were a couple of doctors who had been working with Fuzzies at the
reception center. So was Claudette Pendarvis. Jack Holloway met him as
he entered, and they shook hands.
“I thought there might be something I could do to help,” he said.
“Listen, Mr. Grego, you’re not going to bring any charges against these
Fuzzies, are you?”
“Good Lord, no!”
“Well, they’re sapient beings, and they broke the law,” Holloway said.
“They are legally ten-year-old children,” Judge Pendarvis’s wife said.
“They are not morally responsible; they were taught to do this by
humans.”
“Yes, faginy, along with enslavement,” Ahmed Khadra said.
“Mandatory death by shooting for that, too.”


“And I hope they shoot that Evins woman first of all; she’s the worst
of the lot,” Sandra Glenn said. “She’s the one who used the electric
shock-rod on them when they made mistakes.”
“Mr. Grego,” Ernst Mallin interrupted. “I don’t understand this. These
Fuzzyphones are simple enough for any Fuzzy to operate; all they need
to do is hold the little pistol-grip and the switch works automatically.
Diamond can talk audibly, but he simply cannot teach any of these other
Fuzzies to use it. You don’t have your hearing aid on, do you? Well,
listen to this.”
Diamond used his Fuzzyphone; he spoke quite audibly. When he gave
it to any of the others, all they produced was, “Yeek.”
“Let me see that thing.” He took it from Diamond and carried it over
to the desk; rummaging in the top middle drawer, he found a little
screwdriver and took it apart. The mechanism seemed to be all right. He
removed the tiny power-unit and exchanged it for a similar one from a
flashlight he found in the Chief’s desk. The flashlight wouldn’t light. He
handed the Fuzzyphone to Mallin.
“Give this to one of the others, not Diamond. Have him say
something.”


Mallin handed the Fuzzyphone to one of the pair whom Lansky and
Eggers had captured in the vault, and asked him a question. Holding the
Fuzzyphone to his mouth, the Fuzzy answered quite audibly. Three or
four of the humans said, “What the hell?” or words to that effect.
“Diamond, you not need talk-thing to make talk like Big One,” he
said. “You make talk like Big One any time. You make talk like Big One
now.”
“Like this?” Diamond asked.
“How does he do it?” Mrs. Pendarvis demanded. “Their voices aren’t
audible, at all.”
“You think the power-unit gave out, and he just went on copying the
sounds he was accustomed to make with the Fuzzyphone?” Mallin
asked.
“That’s right. He heard himself speak in the audible range, and he
just learned to pitch his voice to imitate his own transformed voice. I’ll
bet he’s been talking audibly for weeks, and we never knew it.”
“Bet he didn’t know it, either,” Jack Holloway said. “Mr. Grego, do
you think he could teach other Fuzzies to do that?”
“That would be kind of hard, wouldn’t it?” Mallin asked. “Does he
really know, himself, how he does it?”


“Mr. Grego!” the police sergeant, who was still keeping half an eye on
the communication screen, broke in. The Chief wants to know if you
want to go to the gem-vault and check the contents of that suitcase.”
“Has anybody else checked it?”
“Well, Captain Lansky has, but... ”
“Then lock it up in the vault; I don’t have to do that. The Nifflheim
with it. I’ll check it tomorrow. I’m busy, now.”


CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
“YOU THINK FOUR-FIFTY a carat would be all right?” Victor Grego was
asking.
Bennett Rainsford picked up the lighter from the table in front of him
and carefully relit a pipe that didn’t need relighting. Now that he’d come
to know him, he found that he liked Victor Grego. But he still had to
watch him. Grego was the Charterless Zarathustra Company, and the
company was definitely not a philanthropic institution.
“Sounds all right to me,” Jack Holloway agreed. “You didn’t pay me
any more than that when I was prospecting, and I had to dig them
myself.”
“But four-fifty, Jack. The Terra market price is over a thousand sols a
carat.”
“This isn’t Terra, Ben. Terra’s five hundred light-years, six months
ship-time, away. I think Mr. Grego’s making us a good offer. All we need
to do is bank the money; the company’ll do the rest.”
“Well, how much do you think the Fuzzies will get out of it, a month?”
Grego shrugged. “I haven’t seen it, myself. I’ll take Jack’s word for it.
What do you think?”


“Well, it depends on how much equipment you use, and what kind. If
it’s anything like the diggings I used to work, you’ll get about a sunstone
to the ton.”
“We can move and process an awful lot of tons of flint in a month,
and from Jack’s description I’d say we’ll be working that deposit for
longer than any of us’ll be around. You know, Governor, instead of the
Fuzzies getting handouts from the Government, they’ll be paying the
Government’s bills before long.”
And that would have to be watched, too; it mustn’t be allowed to
become a source of political graft. Inside a month, now, the elections for
delegates to the Constitutional Convention would be held. Make sure the
right men were elected, men who would write a Constitution which
would safeguard the Fuzzies’ rights for all time.
Victor Grego, he was beginning to think, could be counted on to help
in that.

LESLIE COOMBES HELD his glass while Gus Brannhard poured from the
bottle, and said, quickly, “That’s enough, please,” when about fifty or
sixty cc of whisky had been added to the ice. He filled the glass the rest
of the way with soda, himself.

"And Hugo Ingermann,” he said, disgustedly, “is completely
innocent.”
“Well, innocent of the Fuzzy business and the attempt on the
company gem-vault,” Brannhard conceded, pouring into his own glass.
When Gus mixed a highball, he always left out both the ice and the
soda. “It’s probably the only thing he ever was innocent of, in his whole
life. But he isn’t getting away scot-free.” Brannhard took a drink from his
glass, and Coombes shuddered inwardly; the man must have a
collapsium-plated digestive tract. “While we were interrogating this one
and that one about the Fuzzy-sunstone business, we got a lot of
evidence, all veridicated, to connect him with Thaxter’s shylocking and
Bowlby’s call-girl agency and Heenan’s prize-fight fixing and Laporte’s
strong-arm mob. I’m after him with a shotgun; I’m just filling the air all
around him with indictments, and some of them are sure to hit. And
even if I can’t get him convicted of anything, he’ll be disbarred, that’s for
sure. And this Planetary Prosperity Party of his is catching fire, leaking
radiation, blowing up and falling apart all around. Everybody’s calling it
the Fuzzy-Fagin Party, and everybody who had anything to do with it is
getting out as fast as he can.”


“If we work together, we’ll get a good Constitution adopted and a
good Legislature elected. Or can we expect Governor Rainsford to agree
with Victor Grego on what a ‘good’ Constitution and a ‘good’ Legislature
are?”
“We can,” Brannhard said. “We only have a few months before the
off-planet land-grabbers begin coming in, and Ben Rainsford’s as much
worried about that as Victor Grego. Leslie, if you go into court and make
claim to all the unseated land the company has mapped and surveyed, I
am instructed by the Governor not to oppose you. What does that sound
like?”
“That sounds like getting back about everything we lost, with the
sunstone lease on top of it. I am going to propose the election of Little
Fuzzy as an honorary member of the board of directors, with the title of
Company Benefactor Number One.”

LITTLE FUZZY CLIMBED up on Pappy Jack’s lap, squirmed a little, and
cuddled himself comfortably. He was happy to be back. He had had so
much fun in the Big House Place, he and Mamma Fuzzy and Ko-Ko and
Cinderella and Syndrome and Id and Ned Kelly and Dr. Crippen and
Calamity Jane. They had met so many Fuzzies who had been here and


gone away to live with Big Ones of their own, and they had a place
where they all met and played together. And he had met the two lovers,
now they had names of their own, Pierrot and Columbine, and he had
met Diamond, about whom Unka Panko had told him, and Diamond’s
Pappy Vic.
It had been to meet Diamond that Unka Panko and Auntie Lynne had
taken them all in the sky-thing to the Big House Place, because Diamond
had found out how to talk like a Big One without using one of the talkthings, and Diamond had taught all of them how to do it. It had been
hard, very hard; Diamond was very smart to have found it out for
himself, but after a while they had all found that they could do it, too.
And now Mike and Mitzi and Complex and Superego and Dillinger and
Lizzie Borden had gone to the Big House Place with Pappy Gerd and
Mummy Woof, and they would learn to talk so that the Big Ones could
hear them. And Baby Fuzzy was learning from Mamma Fuzzy, and
tomorrow they would all start teaching the others here at Hoksu-Mitto.
“Pretty soon, all Fuzzy learn to talk like Big Ones,” he said. “Not need
talk-thing, Big One not need ear-thing; just talk, like I do now.”
“That’s right,” Pappy Jack said. “Big Ones, Fuzzies, all make talk
together. All be good friends.”

“And Fuzzy learn how to help Big Ones? Many things Fuzzy can do to
help, if Big Ones tell what.”
“Best thing Fuzzy do to help Big Ones is just be Fuzzies,” Pappy Jack
told him.
But what else could they be? Fuzzies were what they were, just as
Big Ones were Big Ones.
“And beside,” Pappy Jack went on talking, “the Fuzzies are all rich,
now.”
“Rich? What is? Something good?”
“Well, most people think it is. When you’re rich, you have money.”
“Is something good to eat?” he asked. “Like Estee-fee?”
He wondered why Pappy Jack laughed. Maybe he was just laughing
because he was happy. Or maybe Pappy Jack thought it was funny that
he didn’t know what money was.
There were still so many things Fuzzies had to learn.

