Earth man Come Home
James Blish


AS John Amalfi emerged onto the narrow, worn granite ledge with its gritty balustrade, his memory encountered one of those brief boggles over the meaning of a word which had once annoyed him constantly, like a bubble in an otherwise smoothly blown French horn solo. Such moments of confusion were very rare now, but they were still a nuisance.

This time he found himself unable to decide on a name for where he was going at the moment. Was it a belfry, or was it a bridge?

It was, of course, only a matter of simple semantics, depending, as the oldest saying goes, on the point of view. The ledge ran around the belfry of City Hall. The city, however, was a spaceship, much of which was sometimes operated from this spot, and from which Amalfi was accustomed to assess the star-seas that the city sailed. That made it a bridge. But the ship was a city, a city of jails and playgrounds, alleys and alley cats, and there was even one bell still in the belfry, though it no longer had a clapper. The city was still called New York, N.Y., too, but that, the old maps showed, was misleading; the city aloft was only Manhattan, or New York County.

Amalfi's step across the threshold struck the granite without perceptible interruption. The minute dilemma was familiar: he had been through others of its kind often in the years immediately after the city had taken to the skies. It was hard to decide the terms in which one thought about customary things and places after they had become utterly transformed by space flight. The difficulty was that, although the belfry of City Hall still looked much as it had in 1850, it was now the bridge of a spaceship, so that neither term could quite express what the composite had become.

Amalfi looked up. The skies, too, looked about as they must have in 1850 on a very clear night. The spindizzy screen which completely englobed the flying city was itself invisible, but it would pass only elliptically polarized light, so that it blurred the points which were stars seen from space, and took them down in brilliance about three magnitudes to boot.

Except for the distant, residual hum of the spindizzies themselves—certainly a much softer noise than the composite traffic roar which had been the city's characteristic tone back in the days before cities could fly—there was no real indication that the city was whirling through the emptiness between stars, a migrant among migrants.



If he chose, Amalfi could remember those days, since he had been mayor of the city—although only for a short time—when the City Fathers had decided that it was time to go aloft. That had been in 3111, decades after every other major city had already left the Earth; Amalfi had been just 117 years old at the time. His first city manager had been a man named deFord, who for a while had shared Amalfi's amused puzzlement about what to call all the familiar things now that they had turned strange—but deFord had been shot by the City Fathers" around 3300 for engineering an egregious violation of the city's contract with a planet called Epoch, which had put a black mark on the city's police record which the cops still had not forgotten.

The new city manager was a youngster less than 400 years old named Mark Hazleton, who was already as little loved by the City Fathers as deFord had been and for about the same reasons, but who had been born after the city had gone aloft and hence had no difficulty in finding the appropriate words for things. Amalfi was prepared to believe that he was the last living man on board the flying city who still had occasional bubbles blown into his stream of consciousness by old Earthbound habits of thinking.

In a way, Amalfi's clinging to City Hall as the center of operations for the city betrayed the mayor's ancient ties to Earth. City Hall was the oldest building on board, and so only a few of the other structures could be seen from it. It wasn't tall enough, and there were too many newer buildings around it. Amalfi didn't care. From the belfry—or bridge, if that was what he had to call it now—he never looked in any direction but straight up, his head tilted all the way back on his bull neck. He had no reason to look at the buildings around Battery Park, after all. He had already seen them.

Straight up, however, was a sun, surrounded by starry sable. It was close enough to show a perceptible disc, and becoming slowly larger. While Amalfi watched it, the microphone in his hand began to emit intermittent squawks.

"It looks good enough to me," Amalfi said, lowering his bald head grudgingly a centimeter or two toward the mike. "It's a type G star, or near to it, and Jake in Astronomy says two of the planets are Earthlike. And Records says that both of 'em are inhabited.

Where there's people, there's work."

The phone quacked anxiously, each syllable evenly weighted, but without any over-all sense of conviction. Amalfi listened impatiently. Then he said, "Politics."

The way he said it made it sound fit only to be scrawled on sidewalks. The phone was silenced; Amalfi hung it on

its hook on the railing and thudded back down the archaic stone steps which led from the belfry/bridge.

Hazleton was waiting for him in the mayor's office, drumming slim fingers upon the desk top. The current city manager was an excessively tall, slender, disjointed sort of man.

Something in the way his limbs were distributed over Amalfi's chair made him also look lazy. If taking devious pains was a sign of laziness, Amalfi was quite willing to call Hazleton the laziest man in the city.

Whether he was lazier than anybody outside the city didn't matter. Nothing that went on outside the city was of real importance any more.

Hazleton said, "Well?"

"Well enough." Amalfi grunted. "It's a nice yellow dwarf star, with all the fixings."



"Sure," Hazleton said with a wry smile. "I don't see why you insist on taking a personal look at every star we go by. There are screens right here in the office, and the City Fathers have all the data. We knew even before we could see this sun what it was like."

"I like a personal look," said Amalfi. "I haven't been mayor here for five hundred years for nothing. I can't really tell about a sun until I see it with my own eyes. Then I know. Images don't mean a thing—no feel to "em."

"Nonsense," Hazleton said, without malice. "And what does your feelership say about this one?"

"It's a good sun; I like it. We'll land."

"All right, suppose I tell you what's going on out there?"

"I know, I know," Amalfi said. His heavy voice took on a finicky, nervous tone, his own exaggerated version of the mechanical speech of the City Fathers. '"THE POLITICAL

SIT-UATION IS VER-Y DISTURBING.' It's the food situation that I'm worried about."

"Oh? Is it so bad, then?"

"It's not bad yet. It will be, unless we land. There's been another mutation in the Chlorella tanks; must have started when we passed through that radiation field near Sigma Draconis. We're getting a yield of about twenty-two hundred kilograms per acre in terms of fats."

"That's not bad."

"Not bad, but it's dropping steadily, and the rate of decrease is accelerating. If it's not arrested, we won't have

any algae crops at all in a year or so. And there's not enough crude-oil reserve to tide us over to the next nearest star. We'd hit there eating each other."

Hazleton shrugged. "That's a big if, boss," he said. "We've never had a mutation we couldn't get under control before. And it's very nasty on those two planets."

"So they're having a war. We've been through that kind of situation before. We don't have to take sides. We land on the planet best suited——"

"If it were an ordinary interplanetary squabble, okay. But as it happens, one of those worlds—the third from the sun—is a sort of free-living polyp of the old Hruntan Empire, and the inner one is a survivor of the Hamiltoni-ans. They've been fighting for a century, on and off, without any contact with Earth. Now—the Earth's found them."

"And?" Amalfi said.

"And it's cleaning them both out," Hazleton said grimly. "We've just received an official police warning to get the hell out of here."

Above the city the yellow sun was now very much smaller. The Okie metropolis, skulking out from the two warm warring worlds under one-quarter drive, crept steadily into hiding within the freezing blue-green shadow of one of the ruined giant planets of the system.

Tiny moons, a quartet of them, circled in a gelid minuet against the chevrons of ammonia-storms that banded the gas giant.

Amalfi watched the vision screens tensely. This kind of close maneuvering, involving the balancing of the city against a whole series of conflicting gravitational fields, was very delicate, and not the kind of thing to which he was accustomed; the city generally gave gas giants a wide berth. His own preternatural "feel" for the spatial condition* in which he spent his life must here be abetted by every electronic resource at his command.



"Too heavy, Twenty-third Street," he said into the mike. "You've got close to a two-degree bulge on your arc of the screen. Trim it.*

"Trim, boss."

Amalft watched the image of the giant planet and its chill hand-maidens. A needle tipped gently.

"Cut!"

The whole city throbbed once and went silent. The

silence was a little frightening: the distant hum of the spindizzies was a part of the expected environment, and when it was damped, one felt a strange shortness of breath, as if the air had gone bad. Amalfl yawned involuntarily, his diaphragm sucking against an illusory shortage of oxygen.

Hazleton yawned, too, but his eyes were glittering. Amalfi knew that the city manager was enjoying himself now; the plan had been his, and so he no longer cared that the city might be in serious danger from here on out. He was taking lazy folks' pains.

Amalfi only hoped that Hazleton was not outsmarting himself and the city at the same time. They had had some narrow squeaks with Hazleton's plans before. There had been, for instance, that episode on Thor V. Of all the planets in the inhabited galaxy on which an Okie might choose to throw his weight around, Thor V was easily the worst. The first Okie city Thor V ever saw had been an outfit which had dropped its city name and taken to calling itself the Interstellar Master Traders. By the time it had left Thor V again, it had earned itself still another appellation: the Mad Dogs. On Thor V, hatred of Okies was downright hereditary, and for good reason ...

"Now we'll sit tight for a week," Hazleton Said, his spatulate fingers shooting the courser of his slide rule back and forth. "Our food will hold out that long. And that was a very convincing orbit Jake gave us. The cops will be sure we're well on our way out of this system by now— and there aren't enough of them to take care of the two warring planets and to comb space for us at the same time, anyhow."

"You hope."

"It stands to reason, doesn't it?" Hazleton said, his eyes gleaming. "Sooner or later, within a matter of weeks, they'll find out that one of those two planets is stronger than the other, and concentrate their forces on that one. When that happens, we'll hightail for the planet with the weaker police investiture. The cops'll be too busy to prevent our landing there, or to block our laying on supplies once we're grounded."

"That's fine as far as it goes. But it also involves us directly with the weaker planet. The cops won't need any better excuse for dispersing the city."

"Not necessarily," Hazleton insisted. "They can't break us up just for violating a Vacate order. They know that as well as we do. If necessary, we can call for a court ruling and show that the Vacate order was inhumane—and hi the meantime, they can't enforce the order while we're under the aegis of an enemy of theirs.

Which reminds me—we've got an 'I want off from a man named Webster, a pile engineer. He's one of the city's original complement, and as good as they come; I hate to see him leave."

"If he wants off, he gets it," Amalfi said. "What does he opt?"

"Next port of call."



"Well, this looks like it. Well———"

The intercom on the flight board emitted a self-deprecatory burp. Amalfi pressed the stud.

"Mr. Mayor?"

"Yep."

"This is Sergeant Anderson at the Cathedral Parkway lookout. There's a whopping big ship just come into view around the bulge of the gas giant. We're trying to contact her now. A warship."

"Thanks," Amalfi said, shooting a glance at Hazleton. "Put her through to here when you do make contact." He dialed the 'visor until he could see the limb of the giant planet opposite the one into which the city was swinging. Sure enough, there was a tiny sliver of light there. The strange ship was still in direct sunlight, but even so, she must have been a whopper to be visible at all so far away. The mayor stepped up the magnification, and was rewarded with a look at a tube about the size of his thumb.

"Not making any attempt to hide," he murmured, "but then you couldn't very well hide a thing that size. She must be all of a thousand feet long. Looks like we didn't fool "em."

Hazleton leaned forward and studied the innocuous-looking cylinder intently. "I don't think that's a police craft," he said. "The police battleships on the clean-up squad are more or less pear-shaped, and have plenty of bumps. This, boat only has four turrets, and they're faired into the hull—what the ancients used to call 'streamlining.' See?"

Amalfi nodded, thrusting out his lower lip speculatively. "Local stuff, then. Designed for fast atmosphere transit. Archaic equipment—Muir engines, maybe."

The intercom burped again. "Ready with the visiting craft, sir," Sergeant Anderson said.

The view of the ship and the blue-green planet was wiped away, and a pleasant-faced young man looked out at them from the screen. "How do you do?" he said formally. The question didn't seem to mean anything, but his tone indicated that he didn't expect an answer to it anyhow. "I am speaking to the commanding officer of the . .. the flying fortress?"

"In effect" Amalfi said. "I'm the mayor here, and this gentleman is the city manager; we're responsible for different aspects of command. Who are you?"

"Captain Savage of the Federal Navy of Utopia," the young man said. He did not smile.

"May we have permission to approach your fort or city or whatever it is? We'd like to land a representative.'

Amalfi snapped the audio switch and looked at Hazleton. "What do you think?" he said.

The Utopian officer politely and pointedly did not watch the movements of his lips.

"It should be safe enough. Still, that's a big ship, even if it is a museum piece. They could as easily send their man in a life craft."

Amalfi opened the circuit agai'n. "Under the circumstances, we'd just as soon you stayed where you are," he said. "You'll understand, I'm sure, Captain. However, you may send a gig if you like: your representative is welcome here. Or we will exchange hostages———"

Savage's hand moved across the screen as if brushing the suggestion away. "Quite unnecessary, sir. We heard the interstellar craft warn you away. Any enemy of theirs must be a friend of ours. We are hoping that you can shed some light on what is at best a confused situation."

"That's possible," Amalfi said. "If that is all for now

"Yes sir. End of transmission."

"Out."

Hazleton arose. "Suppose I meet this emissary. Your office?"

"Okay."

The city manager went out, and Amalfi, after a few moments, followed him, locking up the control tower. The city was in an orbit and would be stable until the time came to put it in flight again. On the street, Amalfi flagged a cab.

It was a fairly long haul from the control tower, which was on Thirty-fourth Street and The Avenue, down to Bowling Green, where City Hall was; and Amalfi lengthened it a bit more by giving the Tin Cabby a route that would have put folding money into the pocket of a live one of another, forgotten age. He settled back, bit the end off a hydroponic cigar, and tried to remember what he had heard about the Hamiltonians. Some sort of a republican sect, they'd been, back in the very earliest days of space travel. There'd been a public furor . . . recruiting . . . government disapproval and then suppression . . .

hm-m-m. It was -all very dim, and Amalfi was not at all sure that he hada't mixed it up with some other event in Terrestrial history.

But there had been an exodus of some sort. Shiploads of Hamiltonians going out to colonize, to set up model planets. Come to think of it, one of the nations then current in the West on Earth had had a sort of Hamiltoni-anism of its own, something called a timocracy. It had all died down after a while, but it had left traces. Nearly every major political wave after space flight had its vestige somewhere in the inhabited part of the galaxy.

Utopia must have been colonized very early. The Hrun-tan Imperials, had they arrived first, would have garrisoned both habitable planets as a matter of course.

It was a little easier to remember the Hruntan Empire, since it was of much more recent vintage than the Hamiltonians; but there was less to remember. The outer margins of exploration had spawned gimcrack empires by the dozen in the days when Earth seemed to be losing her grip. Alois Hrunta had merely been the most successful of the would-be emperors of space. His territory had expanded as far as the limits of communication would allow an absolute autocracy to spread, and then had been destroyed almost before he was assassinated, broken into duchies by his squabbling sons. Eventually the duchies fell in <heir turn to the nominal but irresistible authority of Earth, leaving, as the Hamiltonians had left, a legacy of a few remote colonies^—worlds where a dead dream was served with meaningless pomp.

The cab began to settle, and the facade of City Hall drifted past Amalfi's cab window. The once-golden motto—

MOW YOUR LAWN, LADY?—looked greener than ever in the light of the giant planet.

Amalfi sighed. These political squabbles were dull, and they were guaranteed to make a major project out of the simple matter of earning a square meal.

The first thing that Amalfi noticed upon entering his office Was that Hazleton looked uncomfortable. This was practically a millennial event. Nothing had ever disturbed Hazleton before; he was very nearly the perfect citizen of space: resilient, resourceful, and almost impossible to surprise—or bluff. There was nobody else in the office but a girl whom Amalfi did not recognize; probably one of the parliamentary secretaries whp handled many of the intramural affairs of the city.

"What's the matter, Mark? Where's the Utopian contact man?"

"There," Hazleton said. He didn't exactly point, but there was no doubt about his meaning. Amalfi felt his eyebrows tobogganing over his broad skull. He turned and studied the girl.

She was quite pretty: black hair, with blue lights in it; gray eyes, very frank, and a little amused; a small body, well made, somewhat on the sturdy side. She was dressed in the most curious garment Amalfi had ever seen—she had a sort of sack over her head, with holes for her arms and neck, and the cloth was pulled in tightly above her waist. Her hips and her legs down to just below her knees were covered by a big tube of black fabric, belted at the top. Her legs were sheathed into token stockings of some sleazily woven, quite transparent stuff. Little flecks of color spotted the sack, and around her neck she had a sort of scarf—no, it wasn't a scarf, it was a ribbon—what was it, anyhow? Amalff wondered if even deFord could have named it.

After a moment the girl began to seem impatient of his inspection, and he turned his head away and continued walking toward his desk. Behind him, her voice said gently, "I didn't mean to cause a sensation, sir. Evidently you didn't expect a woman . .. ?"

Her accent was as archaic as her clothes; it was almost Eliotian. Amalfi sat down and collected his scattered impressions. ,

"No, we didn't," he said. "However, we have women in positions of authority here. I suppose we were misled by

Earth custom, which doesn't allow women much hand in the affairs of the military. You're welcome, anyhow. What can we do for you?"

"May I sit down? Thank you. First of all, you can tell us where all these vicious fighting ships come from. Evidently they know you."

"Not personally," Amalfi said. "They know the Okie cities as a class, that's all. They're the Earth police."

The Utopian girl's piquant face dimmed subtly, as though she had expected the answer and had been fighting to believe it would not be given.

"That's what they told us," she said. "We . . . we couldn't accept it. Why are they attacking us then?"

"It was bound to happen sooner or later," Amalfi said as gently as possible. "Earth is incorporating the independent planets as a matter of policy. Your enemies the Hruntans will be taken in, too. I don't suppose we can explain why very convincingly. We aren't exactly in the confidence of Earth's government."

"Oh," the girl said. "Then perhaps you will help us? This immense fortress of yours———"

"I beg your pardon." Hazleton said, smiling ruefully. "The city is no fortress, I assure you.

We are only lightly armed. However, we may be able to help you in other ways—frankly, we're anxious to make a deal."

Amalfi looked at him under his eyelids. It was incautious, and unlike Hazleton, to discuss the city's armament or lack of it with an officer who had just come on board from a strange battleship.

The girl said, "What do you want? If you can teach us how those—those police ships fly, and how you keep your city aloft———"

"You don't have the spindizzy?" Amalfi said. "But you must have had it once, otherwise you'd never have got way out here from Earth."

"The secret of interstellar flight has been lost for nearly a century. We still have the first ship our ancestors flew in our museum; but the motor is a mystery. It doesn't seem to do anything."

Amalfi found himself thinking: Nearly a century? Is that supposed to be a long time? Or do the Utopians lack the anti-agathic drugs, too? But ascomycin was supposed to have been discovered more than half a century before the Hamiltonian Exodus. Curiouser and curiouser.

Hazleton was smiling again. "We can show you What the spindizzy does," he said. "It is too simple to yield its secret lightly. As for us—we need supplies, raw materials. Oil, most of all. Have you that?"

The girl nodded. "Utopia is very, rich in oil, and we haven't needed it in quantity for nearly twenty-five years— ever since we rediscovered molar valence." Amalfi pricked up his ears again. The Utopians lacked the spindizzy and the anti-agathics—but they had something called molar valence. The term told its own story: anyone who could modify molecular bonding beyond the usual adhesion effects would have no need for mechanical lubricants like oil. And if the Utopians thought they had only rediscovered such a technique, so much the better.

"As for us, we can use anything you can give us," the girl went on. Abruptly she looked very weary in spite of her healthy youth. "All our lives we have been fighting these Hruntan barbarians and waiting for the day when help would arrive from Earth. Now Earth has come—and its hand is against both worlds! Things must have changed a great deal."

"The fault doesn't lie in change," Hazleton said quietly, "but in that you people have failed to change. Traveling away from Earth for us is very like traveling in time: different distances from the home planet have different year-dates. Stars remote from Earth, like yours, are historical backwaters. And the situation becomes complicated when the historical periods interpenetrate, as your Hamil-tonian era and the Hruntan Empire have interpenetrated. The two cultures freeze each other the moment they come in conflict, and when history catches up with them—well, naturally it's a shock."

"On a more practical subject," Amalfi said, "we'd prefer to pick our own landing area. If we can send technicians to your planet in advance, they'll find a lie for us."

"A lie?"

"A mining site. That's to be permitted, I presume?"

"I don't know," the girl said uncertainly. "We're very short on metals, steel especially. We have to salvage all our scrap———"

"We use almost no iron or steel," Amalfi assured her. "We reclaim what we need, as you do—steel's nearly indestructible, after all. What we're after is germanium and some other rare-earth metals for instruments. You ought

to have plenty of those to spare." Amalfi saw no point in adding that germanium was the base of the present universal coinage. What he had said was true as far as it went, and in dealing with these backward planets, there were always five or six facts best suppressed until after the city had left.

"May I use your phone?"

Amalfi moved away from the desk, then had to come back again as the girl dabbed helplessly at the 'visor controls. In a moment she was outlining the conversation to the Utopian captain. Amalfi wondered if the Hruntans understood English; not that he was worried about the present interchange being overheard—the giant planet would block that most effectively, since the Utopians used ordinary radio rather than ultraphones or Dirac communicators—but it was of the utmost importance, if Hazleton's scheme was to be made workable, that the Hruntans should have heard and understood the warning the Earth police had issued to the city. It was a point that would have to be checked as unobtrusively as possible.

It might also be just as well to restrict sharply the technical information the city passed out in this star system. If the Hamiltonians—or the Hruntans—suddenly blossomed out with Bethe blasters, field bombs, and the rest of the modern arsenal (or what had been modern the last time the city had been able to update its files, not quite a century ago), the police would be unhappy. They would also know whom to blame. It was comforting to know that nobody in the city knew how to build a Canceller, at least. Amalfi had a sudden disquieting mental picture of a mob of Hruntan barbarians swarming out of this system in spindizzy-powered ships, hijacking their way back to an anachronistic triumph, snuffing out stars like candle flames as they went.

"It is agreed," the girl said. "Captain Savage suggests that I take your technicians back with me in the gig to save time. And is there also someone who understands the interstellar drive———"

"I'll go along," Hazleton said. "I know spindizzies as well as the next man."

"Nothing doing, Mark. I need you here. We've plenty of grease monkeys for that purpose.

We can send them your man Webster; here's his chance to get off the city before we even touch ground." Amalfi spoke rapidly into

the vacated 'visor. "There. You'll find the proper people waiting at your gig, young lady. If Captain Savage will phone us exactly one week from today and tell us where on Utopia we're to land, we'll be out of occultation with this gas planet, and will get the message."

There was a long silence after the Utopian girl had left. At last Amalfi said slowly, "Mark, there is no shortage of women in the city."

Hazleton flushed. "I'm sorry, boss. I knew it was impossible directly the words were out of my mouth. Still, I think we may be able to do something- for them; the Hruntan Empire was a pretty nauseating sort of state, if I remember correctly."

•"That's none of our business," Amalfi said sharply. He disliked having to turn the full force of his authority upon Hazleton; the city manager was for Amalfi the next best thing to that son his position had never permitted him to father—for the laws of all Okie cities include elaborate safeguards against the founding of any possible dynasty. Only Amalfi knew how many times this youngster's elusive, amoral intelligence had brought him close to being deposed and shot by the City Fathers; and a situation like this one was crucial to the survival of the city.



"Look, Mark. We can't afford to have sympathies. We're Okies. What are the Hamiltonians to us? What are they to themselves, for that matter? I was thinking a minute ago of what a disaster it'd be if the Hruntans got a Canceller or some such weapon and blackmailed their way back to a real empire again. But can you see a rebirth of Hamiltonianism any better—in this age? Superficially it would be easier to take, I'll admit, than another Hruntan tyranny—but historically, it'd be just as disastrous. These two planets have been fighting each other over two causes that played themselves out half a millennium ago. They aren't either of them relevant any more."

Amalfi stopped for a breath, taking the mangled cigar out of his mouth and eyeing it with mild surprise. "I knew that the girl was disturbing your judgment the moment I realized that I'd have to read you the riot act like this. Ordinarily you're the best cultural morphologist I've ever had, and every city manager has to be a good one. If you weren't in a sexual uproar, you'd see that these people are the victims of a pseudomorphosis—dead cultures both of

'em, going through the pangs of decay, even though they both do think it's rebirth."

"Th& cops don't see it th^f way," Hazleton said abstractedly.

"How could they? They haven't our point of view. I'm not talking to you as a cop. I'm trying to talk like an Okie. What good does it do you to be an Okie if you're going to mix in on some petty border feud? Mark, you might as well be dead—or back on Earth, it's the same thing in the end."

He stopped again. Eloquence was unnatural to him; it embarrassed him a little. He looked sharply at the city manager, and what he saw choked off the springs of his rare volubility. He felt, not for the first time, the essential loneliness that went with perspective.

Hazleton wasn't listening any more.

There was a battle in progress when the city made its run to Utopia. It was rather spectacular. The Hruntan planet, military in organization and spirit down to the smallest detail of daily living, had not waited for the Earth police to englobe it. The Hruntan ships, though they were nearly of the same vintage as those flown by the Utopians, were being fought to the limit, fought by experienced officers who were unencumbered by any sniveling notions about the intrinsic value of human life. There was not much doubt as to the outcome, but for the time being, the police were unhappy.

The battle was not directly visible from the city; the Hruntan planet was nearly forty degrees away from Utopia now. It was the steady widening of the distance between the two planets that had first given Hazleton his idea for a sneak landing. It had also been Hazleton who had dispatched the proxies—guided missiles less than five meters long—which hung invisibly upon the outskirts of the conflict and watched it with avid television eyes.

It was an instructive dogfight. The police craft, collectively, had not engaged in a major battle for decades; and individually, few of the Earthmen had ever been involved in anything more dangerous than a pushover. The Hruntans, vastly inferior in equipment, were rich in experience, and their tactics were masterly. They had forced the engagement in a heavily mined area, which was equivalent to picking a fight in the heart of a furnace—except that the Hruntans, having sown the mines, knew where the fire was hottest. Their losses, of course, were terrific—nearly five to one. But they had the numbers to waste, and it was obvious that officers whp did not value their own lives would be unlikely to value those of their crews.

After a while, even Hazleton had to turn the screen off and order O'Brien to recall the proxies. The carnage was frightening, not just per se, but in the mental attitude behind it.

Even a hardened killer, after a certain amount of watching men trying to snuff out a fire by leaping into it, might have felt his brains cracking.

The city settled toward Utopia. Outlying police scouts reported the fact—the reports were plainly audible in the city's Communications Room—and those reports would be exhumed later and acted upon. But now, in the midst of the battle, the cops had no time to care about what the city did. When they began to care again, the city hoped to be gone—or invulnerable.

The question of how Utopia had resisted the Hruntan onslaught for nearly a century remained a riddle. It became more of a riddle after the city landed on Utopia. The planet was a death trap of radioactivity. There were no cities; there were seething white-hot pools that would never cool within the lifetime of humanity to show where cities once had stood. One of the continental land masses was not habitable at all. The very air disturbed counters slightly. In the daytime, the radioactivity was just below the dangerous limit; at night, when the drop in temperature released the normal microscopic increase in the radon content—a phenomenon common to the atmospheres of all Earthlike planets—the air was unbreathable.

Utopia had been bombarded with fission bombs and dust canisters at every opposition with the Hruntan planet for the past seventy\Utopian years. The favorable oppositions occurred only once every twelve years—otherwise even the underground liffr of Utopia would have been impossible.

"How have you kept them off?" Amalfi asked. "Those boys are soldiers. If they can put up this much of a battle against the police, they should be able to wipe up the floor with you folks."

Captain Savage, perched uncomfortably in the belfry, blinking at the sun, managed a thin smile. "We know all their tricks. They are very fine strategists—I will grant you that.

But in some respects they are unimaginative.

Necessarily, I suppose; initiative is not encouraged among them." He stirred uneasily.

"Are you going to leave your city out here in plain sight? And at night, too?"

"Yes. I doubt that the Hruntans will attack us; they're busy, and besides, they probably know that the police don't love us, and will be too puzzled to call us an enemy of theirs right off the bat. As for the air—we're maintaining a point naught two per cent spindizzy field. Not enough to be noticeable, but it changes the moment of inertia of our own atmosphere enough to prevent much of your air from getting in."

"I don't think I understand that," Savage said. "But doubtless you know your own resources. I confess, Mayor Amalfi, that your city is a complete mystery to us. What does it do? Why are the police against you? Are you exiled?"

"No," Amalfi said. "And the police aren't against us exactly. We're just rather low in the social scale; we're migratory workers, interstellar hobos, Okies. The police are as obligated to protect us as they are to protect any other citizen—but our mobility makes us possible criminals by their figuring, so we have to be watched."



Savage's summary of his reaction to this was the woeful sentence Amalfi had come to think of as the motto of Utopia. "Things have changed so much," the officer said.

"You should set that to music. I can't say that I understand yet how you've held out so long, either. Haven't you ever been invaded?"

"Frequently," Savage said. His voice was half gloomy and half charged with pride. "But you have seen how we live. At best, we have beaten them off; at worst, we cannot be found. And the Hruntans themselves have made this planet a difficult place to live. Many of their landing parties succumbed to the results of their own bombing."

"Still———"

"Mob psychology," Savage said, "is something of a science with us—as it is with them, but we have developed it in a different direction. Combined with the subsidiary art of camouflage, it is a powerful weapon. By dummy installations, faked weather conditions, false high-radioactivity areas, we have thus far been able to make the Hruntans erect their invasion camps exactly on the spots we have previously chosen for them. It is a form of chess: one persuades, or lures, the enemy into entering an area where one can dispose of him in perfect safety and with a minimum of effort."

He blinked up at the sun, nibbling at his lower lip. After a while he added, "There is another important factor. It is freedom. We have it. The Hruntans do not. They are defending a system which is ascetic in character—that is, it offers few rewards to the individual, even once it has triumphed. We on Utopia are fighting for a system which has personal rewards for us—the rewards of freedom. It makes a difference. The incentive is greater."

"Oh, freedom," Amalfi said. "Yes, that's a great thing, I suppose. Still, it's the old problem.

Nobody is ever free. Our city is vaguely republican, it might even be Hamil-tonian in one sense. But we aren't free of the requirements of our situation, and never can be. As for efficiency hi warfare being increased by freedom—I question that. Your people are not free now. A wartime political economy has to tend toward dictatorship; that's what killed off the West back on Earth. Your people are fighting for steak tomorrow, not steak today.

Well—so are the Hruntans. The difference between you exists as a potential, but—a difference which makes no difference is no difference."

"You are subtle," Savage said, standing up. "I think I can see why you would not understand that part of our history. You have no ties, no faith. You will have to excuse us ours. We cannot afford to be logic-choppers."

He went down the stairs, his shoulders thrown back unnaturally. Amalfi watched him go with a rueful grin. The young man was a character; talking with him was like being brought face to face with a person from a historical play. Except, of course, that a character in a play is ordinarily understandable even at his queerest; Savage had the misfortune to be real, not the product of an artificer with an ax to gind.

Amalfi was reminded abruptly of Hazleton. Where was Hazleton, anyhow? He had gone off hours ago with that girl upon some patently trumped-up errand. If he didn't hurry, he'd be trapped underground overnight. Amalfi did not mind working alone, but there were managerial jobs hi the city which the mayor simply could not handle efficiently—and besides, Hazleton might be committing the city to something inconvenient. Amalfi went down to his office and called the Communications Room.



Hazleton had not reported in. Grumbling, Amalfi went about the business of organizing the work of the city—the work for which it had gone aloft, but which it found so seldom. It disturbed him that there was no official work contract between the city and Utopia; it was not customary, and if Utopia should turn out, as so many ideals-ridden planets had turned out, to be willing to cheat on an astronomical scale for the sake of its obsession, there would be no recourse under the Earth laws. People with Ends in view were quick to justify all kinds of Means, and the city, which was nothing but Means made concrete and visible, had learned to beware of short cuts.

Hazleton, it appeared, was off somewhere on a short cut. Amalfi could only hope that he—and the city—would survive it.

The Earth police did not wait for Hazleton, either. Amalfi was mildy appalled to see how rapidly the Earth forces reformed and were reinforced. Their logistics had been much improved since the city had last seen them in action. The sky sparkled with ships driving in on the Hruntan planet.

That was bad. Amalfi had expected to have several months at least to build up a food reserve on Utopia before making the run to the Hruntan planet that Hazleton's strategy called for. Evidently, however, the Hruntan world would be completely blockaded by that time.

The mayor sent out an emergency warning at once. The thin resistance which the spindizzy field had offered to Utopia's atmosphere became a solid, hard-driven wall. The spindizzies screamed into the highest level of activity they could maintain without snapping the gravitational thread between the city and Utopia. Around the perimeter of that once-invisible field, a flicker of polarization thickened to translucence. Drive-fields were building, and only a few light rays, most of them those to which the human eye was least sensitive, got through the fields and out again. To Utopian onlookers the city went dark blood-color and became frighteningly indistinct.

Calls began to come in at once. Amalfi ignored them; his flight board, a compressed analog of the banks in the control tower, was alive with alarm signals, and all the speakers were chattering at once.

"Mr. Mayor, we've just made a strike in that old till; it's lousy with oil-bearing shale—"

"Stow what you have and make it tight."

"Amalfi! How can we get any thorium out of———"

"More where we're going. Damp your stock on the double."

"Com Room. Still no word from Mr. Hazleton——"

"Keep trying."

"Calling the flying city! Is there something wrong? Call-' ing the flying——"

Amalfi cut them all off with a brutal swipe at the toggles. "Did you think we'd stay here forever? Stand by!"

The spindizzies screamed. The sparkling of the ships coming to invest the Hruntan planet became brighter by the minute. It would be a near thing.

"Whoop it up there on Forty-second Street! What d'you think you're doing, warming up tea? You've got ninety seconds to get that machine to take-off pitch!"

"Take-off? Mr. Mayor, it'll take at least four minutes—

__»



"You're kidding me. I can tell. Dead men don't kid. Move!"

"Calling the flying city——"

The sparks spread over the sky like a Catherine wheel whirling into life. The watery quivering of the single point of light that was the Hruntan planet dimmed among them, shivered, blended into the general glitter. From Astronomy, Jake added his voice to the general complaint.

"Thirty seconds," Amalfi said.

From the speaker which had been broadcasting the puzzled, fearful inquiries of the Utopians, Hazleton's voice said calmly, "Amalfi, are you out of your mind?"

"No," Amalfi said. "It's your plan, Mark. I'm just following through. Twenty-five seconds."

"I'm not pleading for myself. I like it here, I think. I've found something here that the city doesn't have. The city needs it—"

"Do you want off, too?"

"No, hell no," Hazleton said. "I'm not asking for it. But if I had to take it anyhow, I'd take it here———"

A brief constriction made Amalfi's big frame knot up tightly. Nothing emotional:—no, nothing to do with Hazleton; probably some spindizzy operator was hurrying things. He staggered to his feet and threw up in the little wastistand. Hazleton went on talking, but Amalfi could hardly hear him. The clock grinned and rushed on.

"Ten seconds," Amalfi gasped, a little late.

"Amalfi, listen to me!"

"Mark," Amalfi said, choking, "Mark, I haven't time. You made your choice. I ... five seconds ... I can't do anything about that. If you like it there, go ahead and stay. I wish you, I wish you everything, Mark, believe me. But I have to think of———"

The clock brought its thin palms together piously.

". . . the city——"

"Amalfi——"

"Spin!"

The city vaulted skyward. The sparks whirled in around it

CHAPTER TWO: Gort

THE flying of the city normally was in Hazleton's hands. In his absence—though it had never happened before—a youngster named Carrel took charge. Amalfi's own hand rarely touched the stick except in spots where even the instruments could not be trusted.

Running the Earth blockade to the Hruntan planet was no easy job, especially for a green pilot like Carrel, but Amalfi did not greatly care. He huddled in his office and watched the screens through a gray mist, wondering if he would ever be warm again.

The baseboards of the room were pouring out radiant heat, but it didn't seem to do any good. He felt cold and empty.

"Ahoy the Okie city," the ultraphone barked savagely. "You've had one warning. Pay up and clear out of here, or we'll break you up."

Reluctantly Amalfi tripped the toggle. "We can't," he said uninterestedly.

"What?" the cop said. "Don't give me that. You're in a combat area, and you've already landed on Utopia in

defiance of a Vacate order. Pay your fine and beat it, or you'll get hurt."



"Can't," Amalfi said.

"We'll see about that. What's to prevent you?"

"We have a contract with the Hruntans."

There was a long and very dead silence. At last the police vessel said, "You're pretty sharp. All right, proof your contract over on the tape. I suppose you know that we're about to blow the Hruntans to a thin haze."

"Yep."

"All right. Go ahead and land if youVe got a contract. The more fools you. Make sure you stay for the full contract period. If you do get off before we reduce the planet, make sure you can pay your fine. If you don't— good riddance, Okie!"

Amalfi managed a ghost of a grin. "Thanks," he said. "We love you, too, flatfoot."

The ultraphone growled and stopped transmitting. There was a world of frustration in that final growl. The Earth police accepted officially the Okie cities' status as hobos—migratory workers—but unofficially and openly the cities were called tramps in the wardrooms of the police cruisers. Opportunities to break up a city did not come very often, and were met with relish; it must have been quite a blow to the cop to find the vanadium-clad, never-varying Contract in his way.

But now there were the Hruntans to cope with. This was the penultimate and most delicate stage of Hazleton's plan—and Hazleton wasn't on deck to administer it. As a matter of fact, if his Utopian friends had heard Amalfi admit to a contract with the Hruntans, he was probably in the hottest water of his career right now. Amalfi tried not to think about it.

The plan originally had not included signing any contracts with either planet; so long as the city was not committed legally, it could refuse jobs, leave them when it pleased, and generally exercise the freedom of the unemployed. But it hadn't worked out that way.

The speed with which the police had been reinforced had made it impossible even to approach the Hruntan planet without uncrackable legal protection.

At least the city's stay on Utopia had accomplished some part of its purposes. The oil tanks were a little over half full, and the city's treasury was comfortable, though still not exactly bulging. That left the rare-earth and the power metals still to be attended to; collecting and refining them was unavoidably time-consuming, and would take even longer on the Hruntan planet than on Utopia—the Imperial world, farther out from its sun than Utopia, had been given a correspondingly smaller allowance of heavy elements.

But there was no help for it. To stay on Utopia while the Hruntans Were being conquered—or "consolidated," as it was officially called on Earth—would have left the city completely at the mercy of the Earth forces. Even at best, it would have been impossible to leave the system without paying the fine for violating the Vacate order, and Amalfi was constitutionally unwilling to part with the money for which the city had labored. Even at the present state of the treasury, it might easily have bankrupted them, for work had been very scarce lately.

The intercom had been modestly calling attention to itself for several minutes. Answered, it said, "Sergeant Anderson, sir. We've got another visitor."

"Yes," Amalfi said. "That would be the Hruntan delegation. Send 'em up."

While he waited, chewing morosely on a dead cigar, he checked the contract briefly. It was standard, requiring payment in germanium "or equivalent"—the give-away clause which had prevented its use on Utopia. It had been signed by ultraphone—the possession of that tight-beam device alone "placed" the Hruntans as to century—and the work the city was to do was left unspecified. Amalfi hoped devoutly that the Hruntans would in turn give themselves away when it came to being specific on that count.

The buzzer sounded once more, and Amalfi pushed the button that released the door.

The next instant he was not sure it had been a wise move. The Hruntan delegation bore an unmistakable resemblance to a boarding party. First of all, there were an even dozen soldiers, clad in tight-fitting red leather breeches, gleaming breastplates, and scarlet-plumed casques; the breastplates, too, were emblazoned with a huge scarlet sun. The men snapped to attention in two files of six on each side of the door, bringing to

"present arms" weapons which might have been copies of Kammerman's original mesotron rifle.

Between the files, flanked by two lesser lights as gor-

geously and unfunctionally clad as macaws, came a giant carved out of'gold. His clothing was interwoven with golden threads; his breastplate and helmet were gilded; even his complexion was tanned to a deep golden tone; and he sported a luxuriant golden-blond beard and flowing mustache. He was altogether a most unlikely-looking figure.

He spoke two harsh-sounding words, and boot heels and weapons slammed against the floor. Amalfi winced and stood up.

"We," the golden giant said, "are the Margraf Hazca, Vice Regent of the Duchy of Gort under his Eternal Eminence, Arpad Hrunta. Emperor of Space."

"Oh," Amalfi said, blinking. "My name's Amalfi; I'm the mayor here. Do you sit down?"

The Margraf said he sat down, and did. The soldiers remained stiffly "at ease," and the two subsidiary nobles posed themselves behind the Margraf s chair. Amalfi subsided behind his desk with a muffled sigh of relief. "I presume you're here to discuss the contract." "We are. We are told that you have been among the rabble of the second planet."

"An emergency landing only," Amalfi said. "No doubt," the Margraf said dryly. "We do not concern ourselves with the doings of the Hamiltonians; we will add them to our serfs in due time, after we have driven off these upstarts from decadent Earth. In the meantime, we have use for you; any enemy of Earth must be friends with us."

"That's logical," Amalfi said. "Just what can we do for you? We have quite a variety of equipment here——"

"The matter of payment comes first," said the Margraf. He got up and began pacing slowly up and down with enormous strides, his golden cloak streaming out behind him.

"We are not prepared to make any payment in germanium; we need all we have for transistors. The contract speaks of equivalents. What counts as equivalent?"

It was remarkable how the regal manner was snuffed out when it got down to honest haggling. Amalfi said cautiously, "Well, you could allow us to mine for germanium ourselves——"

"Do you think this planet's resources will last forever?

Give us the equivalent, not some roundabout scheme for being paid in the metal itself!"



"Equipment, then," Amalfi said, "or skills, at a mutually agreed valuation. For instance, what are you using for lubrication?"

The big count's eyes glittered. "Ah," he said softly. "You have the secret of the friction-fields, then. That we have long sought, but the generators of the rabble melt when we touch them. Does Earth know this process?"

"No."

"You got it from the Hamiltonians? Excellent." The two minor nobles were beginning to grin wickedly. "We need babble no further of 'mutually agreed valuations,' then." He gestured. Amalfi found himself looking down a dozen rifle barrels.

"What's the idea?"

"You are within our defensive envelope," Hazca said with wolfish gusto. "And you are not likely to survive long among the Earthmen, should you by some miracle break free of us.

You may call your technicians and tell them to prepare a demonstration of the friction-field generator; also, prepare to land. Graf Nand6r here will give you explicit instructions."

He strode toward the door; the soldiers parted deferentially. As Amalfi's hand reached for the button to let him out, the big man whirled. "And you need not attempt to trip any hidden alarms," he growled. "Your city has already been boarded in a dozen places and is under the guns of four cruisers."

"Do you think you can win technical information by force?" Amalfi said.

"Oh yes," said the Margraf, his eyes shining dangerously. "We are—experts."

Carrel, Hazleton's protege1, was a very plausible lecturer, and seemed completely at home in the echoing, barbaric gorgeousness of the Margraf s Council Chamber. He had attached his charts to the nearest tapestry and had propped his blackboard on the arms of the great chair in which, Amalfi supposed, the Margraf usually sat; his chalk traced swift symbols on the slate and squeaked deafening-ly in the groined vault of the room.

The Margraf himself had left; five minutes of Carrel's talk had been enough to arouse his impatience. The Graf

Nand6r was still there, wearing the suffering expression of a man delegated to do the dirty work. So were four or five other nobles. Three of these were chattering in the back of the room with muffled sniggers, and a raucous laugh broke in upon Carrel's dissertation every so often. The remaining peacocks, evidently of subordinate ranks, were seated, Sstening with painful, brow-furrowing concentration, like ham actors overregistering Deep Thought.

"This will be enough to show the analogy between atomic and molecular binding energies," Carrel said smoothly. "The Hamiltonians"—he had seen that the word annoyed the peacocks and used it often—"the Hamiltonians have shown, not only that this binding energy is responsible for the phenomena of cohesion, adhesion, and friction, but also that it is subject to a relationship analogous to valence."

The appearance of concentration of the nobles became so grave as to be outright grotesque. "This phenomenon of molar valence, as the Hamiltonians have aptly named it, is intensified by the friction-fields which they have designed into a condition analogous to ionization.The surface layers of molecules of two contiguous surfaces come into dynamic equilibrium in the field; they change places continuously and rapidly, but without altering the status quo, so that a shear-plane is readily established between the roughest surfaces. It is evident that this equilibrium does not in any sense do away with the binding forces in question, and that a certain amount of drag, or friction, still remains—but only about a tenth of the resistance which obtains even with the best systems of gross lubrication."

The nobles nodded together. Amalfi gave over watching them; the Hruntan technicians worried him most. There were an even dozen of them, a number of which the Margraf seemed fond. Four were humble, frightened-looking creatures who seemed to regard Carrel with more than a little awe. They scribbled frantically, fighting to take down every word, even material which was of no conceivable importance, such as Carrel's frequent pats on the back of the Hamiltonians.

All but one of the rest were well-dressed, hard-faced men who treated the nobles with only perfunctory deference, and who took no notes at all. This type was also quite familiar in a barbarian milieu: head scientists, direc-tors, entirely committed to the regime, entirely aware of how crucial they were to its successes, and already infected with the aristocratic virus of letting lesser men dirty their hands with actual messy laboratory experiments. Probably some of them owed their positions as much to a ruthless skill at court intrigue as to any great scientific ability.

But the twelfth man was of a different order altogether. He was tall, spare, and sparse-haired, and his face as he listened to Carrel was alive with excitement. An active brain, this one, doubtless politically unconscious, hardly caring who ruled it as long as it had equipment and a free hand. The man would be tolerated by the regime for his productivity, but would be under constant suspicion. And he was, by Amalfi's judgment, the only man capable of going beyond what Carrel was saying to what Carrel was leaving unsaid.

"Are there any questions?" Carrel said.

There were some, mostly dim-witted, from the technies— how do you build this, and how do you wire that; no one with any initiative would have wanted to be led by the nose in such a fashion. Carrel answered in detail. The hardfaced men left without a word, as did the nobles, who lingered only long enough to save face. The scientist—he was the scientist for Amalfi's money—was left alone to launch into an ardent stammering dispute over Carrel's math. He seemed to consider Carrel as an equal as a matter of course, and Carrel was beginning to look uncomfortable by the time Amalfi summoned him to the back of the hall.

The scientist left, pocketing his few notes and pulling thoughtfully at his nose. Carrel watched him go.

"I can't hide the kicker from that boy long, sir," he-said. "Believe me, he's got brains. Give him about two days and he'll have the whole thing worked out for himself. He won't get any sleep tonight for thinking about it; I know the type."

"So do I," Amalfi said. "I also know barbarian council halls—the arrases have ears. Just pray you weren't overheard, that's all. Come on."

Amalfi was silent until they were safe within the city and in a cab. Then he said, "You have to be careful, Carrel, in dealing with outsiders. You take to it well, but you're inexperienced. Never say anything outside the city,



even to me, that doesn't fit your part. Now then—I agree with you about that scientist; I was watching him. Atld now he knows you, so I can't use you against him. Is there someone in your organization who's done undercover work for Mark who hasn't been out of the city since we hit Gort? An experienced hand?"

"Sure, four or five, at least. I can put my finger on any of 'em."

"Good. Find a fairly husky one, a-man that could pass for a thug with a minimum of make-up, and send him to Indoctrination for hypnopaedia. In the meantime, you'll have to see that scientist again. Get a picture of him somewhere, a tri-di if they have them here- When you talk to him, answer any questions he asks you."

Carrel looked puzzled. "Any questions?"

"Any technical questions, yes. It won't matter what he knows very shortly. Here's another lesson in practical public relations for you, Carrel. When on a strange planet, you have to use its social system to the best advantage possible. On a world like this one, where the struggle for power is plenty raw, assassination must be very common —and nine chances to one there's a regular Assassins' Guild, or, at least, plenty of free-lance killers for hire."

"You're going to—have Doctor Schloss assassinated?"

The shocked expression on Carrel's face made Amalfi abruptly sodden with weariness.

Training a new city manager up to the point where his election would be endorsed by the City Fathers was a long and heartbreaking task, for so much of the training had to be absorbed the hard way. He felt too old for such a job now, and much too aware of some failure in his methods, the failure which alone had made the job necessary now.

"Yes," he said. "It's a shame, but it has to be done. In other circumstances we'd take the man into the city—he doesn't care who he works for—but the Hruntans would look for him, and find him, too. There has to be an inarguable corpse, and if possible, a local culprit. Your operative, after a suitable course in this Balkanese they speak here, will scout the rivalries among the scientific clique and try to pin the killing on one of those hawk-nosed laboratory chieftains. But the man must be killed— for the survival of the city."

Carrel did not protest, for the final formulation was the be-all and end-all of Okie logic; but it was plain that the

waste of intelligence the plot necessitated upset him. Amalfi decided silently to keep Carrel exceptionally busy in the city for a while—at least until the Hruntans had their anti-friction installation well under way.

Now, anyhow, was the time to put another needle into the cops; Hazleton's timetable called for it, and although Amalfi had already been forced to abandon much of Hazleton's strategy—Hazleton's timetable, for instance, had called for a treacherous Utopian landing on Gort, with the full force of the Hamiltonians thrown behind delivering the Hruntan planet into the hands of the Earth police—the notion of bargaining with the cops for the planet still seemed to have merit.

Dismissing Carrel, Amalfi went to his office, where he took the flexible plastic dust cover off a little-used instrument: the Dirac transmitter. It was the only form of communication which the Hruntans—and, of course, the Hamiltonians—did not have; the want of it had cost them an empire, for it operated instantaneously over any distance. Amalfi thrust a cigar absently between his teeth and sent out a call for the captain of police.

The obsolete model had no screen, but the captain's voice conveyed his feelings graphically. "If you're going to rub my nose in the fact that we're obliged to protect you because the Hruntans have violated the contract," he snarled, "you can save your breath. I've half a mind to blow up the planet anyhow. Some one of these years the Okie laws are going to be changed, and then——"

"You wouldn't have blown up the planet in any case," Amalfi said tranquilly. "The shock wave would have detonated the local sun and destroyed the whole system, and your superiors would have had your scalp. What I'm trying to do is save you some trouble. If you're interested, make me an offer."

The cop laughed.

"All right," Amalfi said. "Laugh, you jackass. In about ten months you'll be yanked back to patrolling a stratosphere beat on Earth that sees a plane once every two years, and braying about how unjust it all is. As soon as the home office hears that you let the Hruntans and the Hamiltonians join forces, and that the war is going to cost Earth two or three hundred billion Oc dollars and last maybe twenty-five years——"

"You're a bum liar, Okie," the cop said. The bravado behind the pun seemed a little strained, however. "They been fighting each other a century now."

"Times change," Amalfi said. "In any event, the merger will be forcible, because if you don't want the Duchy of Gort, I'm going to offer it to Utopia. The combined arsenal will be impresive—each side has some stuff the other hasn't, and we couldn't prevent either of them from learning a few tricks from us. However——"

"Wait a minute," the cop said cautiously. He was quite aware, Amalfi was more than certain, that this conversation was inevitably being overheard by hundreds and perhaps thousands of Dirac receivers throughout the inhabited galaxy, including those in police headquarters on Earth. That was one of the major characteristics of Dirac transmission—whether you called it a flaw or an advan-,tage depended largely on what use you made of it. "You mean you got the upper hand there already? How do I know you can hold it?"

"You don't risk a thing. Either I deliver the planet to you, or I don't. All I want is for you to rescind the fine against the city, wipe the tape of the earlier Vacate order, and give us a safe-conduct out of this system. If we don't deliver, you don't pay."

"Hm-mm." There was a muttering in the background, as though somebody were talking softly over the cop's shoulder. "How'd you pull it off?"

"That," Amalfi said dryly, "would be telling. If you want to play, proof over the agreement."

"No saop. You violated the Vacate order and you'll have to pay the fine—that's flat."

That was good enough for Amalfi. The cop certainly was not going to promise to wipe his tape of evidence of a tort while he was talking on the Dirac; that he had picked this particular point to stick on indicated general agreement, however.

"Just send me a safe-conduct under seal, then. I'll put the whole thing in the Margraf Hazca's strong room; you get it back when you get the planet."

After a short silence, the cop said, "Well ... all right." The tape began to whir at Amalfi's elbow. Satisfied, he broke the contact.



If this coup came off on schedule, it would become legendary—the police would be mighty tight-lipped about

It, but the Okie cities would spread the tale all over the galaxy.

Somehow, the desertion of Hazleton made the prospect navorless.

Someone was shaking him. He wanted very badly to awaken, but his sleep was as deep as death, and it seemed that no possible struggle could bring him up to the rim of the pit.

Shapes and faces whirled about him, and in the blackness he felt the approach of great steel teeth.

"Amalfi! Wake up, man! Amalfi, it's Mark—wake up—

__t»

The steel jaws came together with a terrible snapping report, and the wheeling faces vanished. Bluish light spilled into his eyes.

"Who? What is it?"

"It's me," Hazleton said. Amalfi blinked up at him uncomprehendingly. "Quick, quick.

There's only a little time."

Amalfi sat up slowly and looked at the city manager. He was too stunned to know whether he was pleased or not, and the oppression of his nightmare was still with him, a persistent emotion lingering after dreamed events he could no longer remember.

"I'm glad to see you," he said. Oddly, the statement seemed untrue; he could only hope it would become true later. "How'd you get through the police cordon? I'd have said it couldn't be done."

"By force, and fraud, the old combination. I'll explain later."

"You nearly didn't make it," Amalfi said, feeling a sudden influx of energy. "Is it still night here? Yes. The big blowup isn't due much before noon, otherwise I wouldn't have been asleep. After that, you'd have found no city here."

"Before noon? That isn't according to the timetable. But that can wait. Get up, boss, there's work waiting."

The door to Amalfi's room slid aside suddenly, and the Utopian girl stood at the sill, her face pinched with anxiety. Amalfi reached hastily for his jacket.

"Mark, we must hurry. Captain Savage says he won't wait but fifteen minutes more. And he won't—he hates you underneath, I can tell, and he'd love to leave us here with the barbarians!"

"Right away, Dee," Hazleton said, without turning.

The girl disappeared. Amalfi stared at the prodigal city manager. "Wait a minute," he said. "What is all this, anyhow? Mark, you haven't sold yourself on some idiotic personal rescue mission?"

"Personal? No." Hazleton grinned. "We're getting the whole-city out of here, right on the timetable. I wanted to get word to you that we were following through as planned, but the Utopians have no Diracs, and I didn't want to tip off the cops. Get dressed, that's a good fellow, and I'll explain as we go. These Hamiltonians have been working like demons, installing spindizzies in every available ship. They'd about decided to surrender to the cops— after all, they've more in common with Earth than with the Hruntans—but when I told them what we planned, and showed them how the spindizzy works, it was like giving them all new hearts."



"They believed you as quickly as that?"

Hazleton shrugged. "No, of course not. To be on the safe side, they made up an escape fleet of twenty-five ships—reconverted light cruisers—and sent them out on this mission.

They're upstairs now."

"Over the city?"

"Yes. I heard the hijacking of the city—I gather you had the radio on for the benefit of the cops, but it came through pretty clearly on Utopia, too. So I sold them on combining their escape project with a sneak raid to escort the city out. It took some selling, but I convinced them that they'd get out of this system easier if the cops had two things to think about at once. And so here we are, right on the timetable." Hazleton grinned again.

"The cops had no notion that there were any Utopian ships anywhere near this planet, and they keep a sloppy watch. They know now, of course, but it'll take them a little while to mass here—and by that time, we'll be gone."

"Mark, you're a romantic ass," Amalfi said. "Twenty-five light cruisers—archaic ones at that, spindizzies or not!"

"There's nothing archaic about Savage's plans," Hazleton said. "He hates my guts for swiping Dee from him, but he knows space combat. This is a survival fleet, for Hamiltonianism, not just people. As soon as we're attacked, all twenty-five of them are going to take off in different directions, putting up a stiff battle and doing their best to turn the affair into a series of individual dogfights.

That insures the survival of some of them, of their ideology—and of the city."

"I expected something more from you than a gesture out of a bad stereo," Amalfi said.

"Napoleonism! Heedless of danger, young hero leads devoted band into enemy stronghold, snatching beloved sovereign from enraged infidel! Pah! The city's staying where it is. If you want to go off with this suicide squadron, go ahead."

"Amalfi, you don't understand———"

"You underestimate me," Amalfi said harshly. He strode across the room to the balcony, Hazleton at his heels. "Sensible Hamiltonians stayed home, that's a cinch. Giving them the spindizzy was a smart idea—it made them fight longer and kept the cops busy when we needed the time. But these people who are trying to escape toward the edge of the galaxy—they're the incurables, the fanatics. Do you know how they'll wind up? You should, and you would if there wasn't a woman in your head addling your brains with a long-handled spoon. After a few generations on the rim, none of 'em will remember Hamiltonianism. Making a new planet livable is a job for a carefully prepared, fully manned expedition. These people are the tatters of a military debacle—and you want 'us to help set up the debacle! No thanks."

He threw the door to the balcony open so hard that Hazleton had to jump to avoid being hit, and went out. It was a clear night, bitterly cold as always on Gort, and hundreds of stars glared through the glow the city cast upon the sky. The Utopian ships, of course, could not be seen: they were too high, and probably were as well near to invisible and undetectable, even close up, as Utopian science could make them.

"I'll have a job explaining this to the Hruntans," he »aid, his voice charged with suppressed rage. "The best I'll be able to do is to claim the Hamiltonians were trying to destroy us before we could finish giving away the friction-field plans. And to do that, I'll have to yell to the Hruntans for help right away."

"You gave the Hruntans———"

"Certainly!" Amalfi said. "It was the only weapon we had left after we had to sign a contract with them. The possibility of a Utopian landing in force here vanished the moment the police beat us to the punch. And here you are •till trying to use the blunted tool!"

"Mark!" the girl's voice drifted out from the room, frantic with anxiety. "Mark! Where are you?"

"Go along," Amalfi said, without turning his head. "After a while they'll have no time to cherish their ritual beliefs, and you can have a nice frontier home, on the ox-bone plow level. The city is staying there. By noon tomorrow, the Utopians who stayed will be put in an excellent position to bargain with Earth for rights, the Hruntans will be horn-swoggled, and we'll be on our way."

The girl, evidently having noticed the open door, came through it in time to hear the last two sentences. "Mark!" she cried "What does he mean? Savage says———"

Hazleton sighed. "Savage is an idiot and so am I. Amalfi's right; I've been acting like a child. You'd better get aloft while you have the chance, Dee."

She came forward to the railing and took his arm, looking up at him. Her face was so full of puzzlement and hurt that Amalfi had to look away; that look reminded him of too many things best forgotten—some of them not exactly remote. He heard her say, "Do you—do you want me to go, Mark? You're staying with the city?"

"Yes," Hazleton muttered. "I mean, no. I've made a terrific mess of things, it appears.

Maybe I can help now—maybe not. But I've got to stay. You'd be better off with your own people———"

"Mayor Amalfi," the girl said. Amalfi turned unwillingly. "You said when I first met you that there was a place for women in this city. Do you remember?"

"I remember," Amalfi said. "But you wouldn't like our politics, I'm sure. This is not a Hamiltonian state. It's stable, self-sufficient, static—a beachcomber by the seas of history. We're Okies. Not a nice name."

The girl said, "It may not always be so."

"I'm afraid it will. Even the people don't change much, Dee. I suspect that you haven't been told this before, but the great majority of them are well over a century old. I myself am nearly seven hundred. And you would live as long if you joined us."

Dee's face was a study in mixed shock and incredulity, but she said doggedly, "I'll stay."

The sky began to pale slightly. No one spoke. Aloft, the stars were dimming, and there was no sign to show that a

tiny fleet of ships was dwindling away into the boundless universe.

Hazleton cleared his throat. "What's for me to do, boss?" he said hoarsely.

"Plenty. I've been making do with Carrel, but though he's willing, he lacks experience.

First of all, make us ready to take off at the very first notice. Then cudgel your brains to think up something to tell the Hruntans about this Utopian fleet. You can fancy up my excuse, or think up one of your own—I don't care which. You're better at that kind of thing than I ever was."

"So what's supposed to happen at noon?"



Amalfi grinned. He realized with a subdued shock that he felt good. Getting Hazleton back was like finding a flawed diamond that you'd thought you'd lost—the flaw was still there and would never go away, but still the diamond had been the cleanest-cutting tool in the house, and had had a certain sentimental value.

"It goes like this. Carrel sold the Hruntans on building a master friction-field generator for the whole planet—said it would make their machines consume less power, or some such nonsense. The plans he gave them call for a generator at least twice as powerful as the Hruntans think it is, and with nearly all the controls left off. It will run only one way: full positive. Tomorrow at noon they're scheduled to give it a trial run.

"In the meantime, there's a Hruntan named Schloss who probably has the machine tabbed for what it actually is, and we've set up the old double-knife trick to get him out of the picture. It's my guess that this should start a big enough rhubarb among the scientists to keep them from prying until it's too late. Since this whole deal looked as though it would work out the same way that the Utopian landing would have, I also called the cops according to your timetable and got a safe-conduct. Simple?"

Halfway through the explanation, Hazleton was far enough back to normal to begin looking amused. When it was over, he was chuckling.

"That's a honey," he said. "Still, I can see why you weren't too satisfied with Carrel.

Amalfi, you're a prime bluffer. Telling me to go off with Savage in that dramatic fashion!

Do you know that your fancy plot isn't going to come off?"

"Why, Mark?" Dee said. "It sounds perfect to me."

"It's clever, but it's full of loose ends. You have to look at these things like a dramatist; a climax that almost comes off is no climax. We'd better———"

In the bedroom, Amalfi's private phone chimed melodiously, and a neon bulb went on over^the balcony doorway. Amalfi frowned and flicked a switch'on the railing.

"Mr.- Mayor?" a concealed speaker said nervously. "Sorry to wake you up, but there's trouble. First of all, at least twenty ships were over here a while back; we were going to call you for that, but they went away on their own. But now we've got a sort of a refugee, a Hruntan who calls himself Doctor Schloss. He claims the other Hruntans are all out to get him and he wants to work for us. Shall I send him to Psych or what? It might just be true."

"Of course it's true," Hazleton said. "There's your first loose end, Amalfi."

The affair of Dr. Schloss proved difficult to untangle; Amalfi had not studied his man closely enough. Carrel's agent had done a thorough job of counterfeiting local politics. It was always preferable, when the city needed a man's death, to so arrange matters that the actual killing was done by an outsider, and in this case that had proven absurdly easy to arrange. There were four separate cliques within the scientific hierarchy of Gort, all of them undercutting each other with fanatical perseverance, like shipmates trying to do for each other by boring holes in the hull. In addition, the court itself did not trust Dr. Schloss, and took sides sporadically when the throat-cutting became overt.

It had been simple enough to set currents in motion which would sweep Dr. Schloss away, but Schloss had declined to be swept. The moment he became aware of any threat, he had come with disconcerting directness to the city.

"The trouble is," Carrel reported, "that he didn't realize what was flying until it was almost too late. He's a peculiarly sane character and would never dream that anybody was 'out to get him' until the knife actually pricked him."

Hazelton nodded. "It's my bet that it was the court itself that finally alarmed him—they wouldn't bother trying to sneak up on him."

"That's correct, sir."

"Which means that we'll have Bathless Hazca and his dandies here looking for him,"

Amalfi growled. "I don't suppose he bothered to cover his tracks. What are you going to do, Mark? We can't count on their starting the anti-friction fields early enough to get us out of this."

"No," Hazleton agreed. "Carrel, does your man still have contact with the group that was going to punch Schloss's ticket?"

"Sure."

"Have him rub out the top man in that group, then. The time is past for delicate measures."

"What do you propose to gain by that?" Amalfi asked.

"Time. Schloss has disappeared. Hazca may guess that he's come here, but most of the cliques will think he's been killed. This will look like a vengeance killing by some member of Schloss's group—he has no real clique of his own, of course, but there must be several men who thought they stood to gain by keeping him alive. We'll start a vendetta.

Confusion is what counts in a fight like this."

"Perhaps so," Amalfi said. "In that case I'd better tackle Graf Nandor right away with a fistful of accusations and complaints. The more confusion, the more delay—and it's less than four hours to noon now. In the meantime, we'll have to hide Schloss as best we can, before he's spotted by one of Hazca's guards here. That invisibility machine in the old West Side subway tunnel seems like the best place ... do you remember the one? The Lyrans sold it to us, and it just whirled and blinked and buzzed and didn't do a thing."

"That was what my predecessor got shot for," Hazleton said. "Or was it for that fiasco on Epoch? But I know where the machine is, yes. I'll arrange to have the gadget do a little whirling and blinking—Hazca's soldiery is afraid of machinery and would never think of looking inside one that's working, even if they did suspect a fugitive inside it. Which they won't, I'm sure. And . . . gods of all stars, what was that?"

The long, terrifying metallic roar died away into a mutter. Amalfi was grinning.

"Thunder," he said. "Planets have a phenomenon called weather, Mark; a nasty habit of theirs. I think we're due for a storm."

Hazleton shuddered. "It makes me want to hide under the bed. Well, let's get to work."

He went out, with Dee trailing. Amain, reflecting on the merits of attack as a defensive measure, waved a cab up to the balcony and had himself ferried to the first setback of the. mid-town RCA building. He would have liked to have landed at the top, where the penthouse was, but the cornices of the building now bristled with pompoms and mesotron rifles; Graf Nandor was taking no chances.

The elevator operator was not allowed to take Amalfi beyond the seventieth floor.

Swearing, he climbed the last five flights of steps; the blue rage he was working up was not going to be counterfeit by the time he reached the penthouse. At every landing he was inspected with insolent suspicion by lounging groups of soldiers.



There was music in the penthouse, and it reeked of the combination of perfume and unwashed bodies which was the personal trademark of Hruntan nobility. Nand6r was sprawled in a chair, surrounded by women, listening to a harpist sing a ballad of unspeakable obscenity in a quavering, emotionless voice. In one jeweled hand he held a heavy goblet half full of fuming Rigellian wine—it must have come from the city's stores, for the Hruntans had had no contact with Rigel for centuries—which he passed back and forth underneath his substantial nose, inhaling the vapors delicately.

He lifted his eyes over the rim of the goblet as Amalfi came in, but did not otherwise bother to acknowledge him. Amalfi felt his blood pressure mounting and his wrists growing cold and numb, and tried to control himself. It was all very well to be properly angry, but he needed some mastery over what he said and did.

"Well?" Nandor said at last.

"Are you aware of the fact that you've just escaped being blown into a rarified gas?"

Amalfi demanded.

"Oh, my dear fellow, don't tell me you've just circumvented an assassination attempt on my behalf," Nandor said. His English seemed to have been picked up from a Liverpudlian—only the men of that Okie city spoke through their adenoids in that strange fashion. "Really, that's a bit thick."

"There were twenty-five Hamiltonian ships over the city," Amalfi said grimly. "We beat

'em off, but it was a close shave. Evidently the whole business didn't even wake you or your bosses up. What good are we going to be to you if you can't even protect us?"

Nandor looked alarmed. He pulled a mike from among the pillows and spoke into it for a moment in his own tongue. The answer was inaudible to Amalfi, but after it came, the Hruntan looked less anxious, though his face was still clouded.

"What are you selling me, my man?" he said querulously. "There was no battle. The ships dropped no bombs, did no damage; they have been pursued out as far as the police englobement."

"Does a deaf man recognize an argument?" Amalfi said. "And how do you dazzle a blind man? You people think that all weapons have to go 'bang!' to be deadly. If you'll look at our power boards, you'll see records of a million megawatt drain over one half hour at dawn—and we don't chew up energy at that rate making soup!"

"That's of no moment," the Graf murmured. "Such records can be faked, and there are a good many ways of consuming energy anyhow—or wasting it. Let us suppose instead that these ships who 'attacked' you landed a spy— eh? And that subsequently a Hruntan scientist, a traitor to his emperor, was taken from your city, perhaps in the hope of carrying him back to Utopia?"

His face darkened suddenly. "You interstellar tramps are childishly stupid. Obviously the Hamiltonian rabble hoped to rescue your city, and were frightened off by our warriors.

Schloss may have gone with them—or he may be hiding in the city somewhere. We will have our answer directly."

He waved at the silent women, who crowded hastily out through the curtained doorway.

"Do you care to tell me now where he is?"

"I keep no tabs on Hruntans," Amalfi said evenly. "Sorting garbage is no part of my duties."

Coolly Nandor threw the remainder of his wine in Amalfi's face. The fuming stuff turned his eye sockets into fire. With a roar he stumbled forward, groping for the Hruntan's throat. The man's laughter retreated from him mockingly; then he felt heavy hands dragging his arms behind his back.

"Enough," the Graf said. "Hazca's chief questioner will make some underling babble, if we have to hang them all

up by their noses." A blast of thunder interrupted him; outside the penthouse, rain roared along the walls like surf, the first such shower the city had experienced in more than thirty years. Through a haze of pain, Amalfi found that he could see the lights again, although the rest of the.world was a red blur. "But I think we'd best shoot this one at once—he talks rather more freely than pleases me. Give me your pistol, you there with the lance-corporal's collar."

Something moved across Amalfi's clearing vision, a long shadow with a knot at the end of it—an arm with a pistol. "Any last words?" Nandor said pleasantly, "No? Tsk. Well, then——"

A thousand bumblebees took flight in the room. Amalfi felt his whole body jerk upward.

Oddly, there was no pain, and he could still see—things continued to take on definition all around him. The clear sight of the dying?...

"Proszdchd!" Nandor roared. "Egz prd strasticzek Maria, do———"

The thunder cut him off again. Somewhere in the room one of the soldiers was whimpering with fright. To Amalfi's fire-racked sight, everyone and everything seemed to be floating in mid-air. Nandor sprawled rigidly, half-erect, his body an inch or so off the cushions, his clothing standing away from him. The pistol was still pointed at Amalfi, but Nand6r was not holding it; it hung immobile above the carpet, an inch away from his frozen fingers. The carpet itself was not on the floor but above it, a sea of fur, every filament of which bristled straight up. Pictures had sprung away from the walls and were suspended. The cushions had risen from the chair and moved away from each other a little, then stopped, as if caught by a stroboscopic camera in the first stages of an explosion; the chair itself was an inch above the rug. At the far side of the room, a bookshelf had burst, and the cans of microfilm were ranked neatly in front of the case, evenly spaced, supported by nothing but the empty air.

Amalfi took a cautious breath. His jacket, which, like Nandor's, had ballooned away from his chest, creaked a little, but the fabric was elastic enough to stretch. Nandor saw the movement and made a frantic snatch for the pistol. His left forearm was glued to its position above the chair and could not be moved at all. The gun retreated from his free hand, then followed it back obediently as Nandor pulled back for another try.

The second try was an even greater fiasco. Nand6r's arm brushed one of the arms of the chair, and then it, too, was held firmly, an inch away from the wood. Amalfi chuckled.

"I would advise you not to move any more than you can help," he said. "If you should bring your head too close to so"me other object, for instance, you would have to spend the rest of your time looking at the ceiling."

"What ... have you done?" Nandor said, choking. "When I get free——"



"You can't, not as long as your friends have their friction-field in operation," Amalfi said.

"The plans we gave you were accurate enough, except in one respect: your generator can be operated only in reverse. Instead of allowing molecular valence full play, it freezes molecular relationships as they stand, and creates adherence between all surfaces. If you had been able to put full power into that generator, you would have stopped molecular movement in place, and frozen all of us to death in a split second—but your power sources are rather puny."

He realized suddenly that his feet were aching violently; the plastic membrances of his shoes were trying to stand away from his flesh, and pressing heavily against his skin. His jaw muscles were aching, too; only the fact that the field traveled over surfaces had protected him from having his teeth jammed away from each other, and even at that it was an effort to part his lips to talk against the pressure.

He inhaled slowly. The jacket creaked again. His ribs ground against his sternum. Then, suddenly, the fabric gave way, and the silver belt which had been stitched into it snapped into a tense hoop around his body. His soles hit the straining carpet heavily, and the air puffed out of his shoes.

He swung his arms experimentally, brushing his hands past his thighs. They moved freely. Only the silver belt maintained its implausible position, girdling the keg of his chest like a stave, soaking up the field.

"Good-by," he said. "Remember not to move. The cops will let you go in a little while."

Nandor was not listening. He was watching with bulging eyes the slow amputation of six of his fingers by the rings he was wearing.

There was now, Amalfi knew, no longer than fifteen minutes before the overdriven friction-field would begin to have more serious effects. Normal molecular cohesion could not be disturbed; homogeneous objects—stones, girders, planks—would remain as they were, but things which were made up of fitted parts would soon begin to yield to the pressure driving them away from each other. After that, structures joined by binders of smaller coherence than the coherence of their parts would begin to give way; older buildings, such as City Hall, would become taller and of greater volume as the ancient bricks pulled away from each other—and would collapse the moment the influence of the friction-field was removed. More modern constructions and machines would last only a little longer. By the time the cops inherited Gort, the planet would be a mass of rubble.

And eventually the human body, assembled of a thousand tubes, tunnels, caverns, and pockets, would strain, and swell, and burst—and only a few city men had the silver belt; there had not been time.

Puffing, Amalfi threw himself down the stairs, dodging among the paralyzed, floating guards. The bumblebee sound was very hard on the nerves. At the seventieth floor he found an unexpected problem; the lights x>n the elevator board told him that the car had been sealed in' the shaft, probably by the action of the safety mechanisms when it had been derailed by the friction-field.

Going down by the stairs was out of the question. Even under normal conditions he could never have traveled seventy flights of stairs, and in the influence of the field, his feet moved as if in thick mud, for the belt could not entirely protect his extremities. Tentatively he touched the wall. The same nauseous sucking sensation enfolded his hand, and he pulled it away.

Gravity ... the quickest way down ...

He entered the nearest office, threading his way among the four suspended, moaning figures who belonged there, and kicked the window out. It was impossible to open it against the field, which had sprung it an inch from its lands; only the amazing lateral strength of glass had preserved the pane, but against a cross-sectional blow, it shattered at once. He climbed out.

It was twenty stories down to the next setback. He planted his feet against the metal, and then his hands. As

an afterthought, he also laid his forehead against the wall. He began to slide.

The air whispered in his ears, and windows blinked past him. His palms were beginning to feel warm; they were not actually touching the metal, but the reluctant binding energies were exacting a toll. It was the penalty he had to pay for the heightened pull of friction.

As the setback rushed up to him, he flattened his whole body against the side of the building. The impact of the deck was heavy, but it did not seem to break any bones. He staggered to the parapet and climbed over, without allowing a split second for second thoughts. The long, whistling slide began again.

For a moment after he fell against the concrete of the sidewalk, he was ready to get up and throw himself over Still another cliff. His hands and his forehead were as seared as if they had been dipped in boiling oil, and inside his teflon shoes his feet seemed to be bubbling like lumps of fat in a rendering vat. On the solid ground, a belated vertigo knotted him helplessly for long, valuable minutes.

The building whose flank he had traversed began to groan.

All along the street, men stood in contorted attitudes. It was like the lowest circle of hell.

Amalfi got up, retching, and lurched toward the control tower. The bumblebee sound filled the universe.

"Amalfi! Gods of all stars, what happened to you——"

Someone took Amalfi's arm. Serum from the enormous blister which was his forehead flooded his eyes.

"Mark———"

"Yes, yes. What's the matter—how did you——"

"Get aloft. Get——"

Pain wrenched him into a ringing darkness.

After a while he felt his head and his hands being laved with something cool. The touch was very delicate and soothing. He swallowed and tried to breathe.

"Easy, John. Easy."

John. No one called him that. A woman's voice. A woman's hands.

"Easy."

He managed a croaking sound, and then a word or two. The hands stroked the coolness across his forehead, gently, monotonously. "Easy, John. It's all right."

"Aloft?"

"Yes."

"Who's ... that? Mark-



"No," said the voice. It laughed, surprisingly, a musical sound. "This is Dee, John.

Hazleton's girl."

"The Hamiltonian girl." He allowed himself to be silent for a while, savoring the coolness.

But there were too many things that needed to be done. "The cops. They should have the planet."

"They have it. They almost had us. They don't keep their bargains very well. They charged us with aiding Utopia; that was treason, they said."

"What happened?"

"Doctor Schloss made the invisibility machine work Mark says the machine must have been damaged in tran sit, so the Lyrans didn't cheat you after all. He hid Docto Schloss in it—that was your idea, wasn't it?—and Schloss got bored and amused himself trying to figure out what the machine was for; nobody had told him. He found out. He made the whole city invisible for nearly half an hour before his patchwork connections burned out."

"Invisible? Not just opaque?" Amalfi tried to think about it. And he had nearly had Schloss killed! "If we can use that——"

"We did. We sailed right through the police ring, and they looked right through us. We're on our way to the next star system."

"Not far enough," Amalfi said, stirring uneasily. "Not if we're charged with technical treason. Cops will detect us, follow us. Tell Mark to head for the Rift."

"What is the Rift, John?"

At the word, the bottom seemed to fall out of things, and Amalfi was again sinking into that same pit in which he had been floundering in dream the night that Hazleton had come back to the city. How do you tell a planetbound colonial girl what the Rift is? How do you teach her, in just a few words, that there is a place in the universe so empty and lightless that even an Okie dreams about it? Let it go.

"The Rift is a hole. It's a place where there aren't any stars. I can't explain it any better.

Tell Mark we have to go there, Dee."

There was a long silence. She was frightened, that much was plain. But at last she said,

"The Rift. I'll tell him."

"He'll argue. Say it's an order."

"Yes, John. The Rift; it's an order."

And then she was silent. Somehow she had accepted it. Amalfi was surprised; but the steady, uneventful passage of the cool hands was putting him to sleep. Yet there was Still something more ...

"Dee?"

"Yes, John."

"You said—we're on our way."

"Yes, John."

"You, too? Even to the Rift?"

The girl made her fingertips trace a smile upon his forehead. "Me, too," she said. "Even to the Rift. The Hamiltonian girl."

"No," Amalfi said. He sighed. "Not any more, Dee. Now you're an Okie."

There was no answer, but the movement of the cool fingers did not hesitate. Under Amalfi the city soared outward, humming like a bee, into the raw night.



CHAPTER THREE: The Rift

EVEN to the men of the flying city, the Rift was awesome beyond all human experience.

Loneliness was natural between the stars, and starmen of all kinds were used to it—the star-density of the average cluster was more than enough to give a veteran Okie claustrophobia. But the enormous empty loneliness of the Rift was unique.

To the best of Amalfi's knowledge, no human being, let alone a city, had ever crossed the Rift before. The City Fathers, who knew everything, agreed. Amalfi was none too sure that it was wise, for once, to be a pioneer.

Ahead and behind, the walls of the Rift shimmered, a haze of stars too far away to resolve into individual points of light. The walls curved gently toward a starry floor, so many parsecs "beneath" the granite keel of the city that it seemed to be hidden in a rising haze of star dust.

"Above" there was nothing; a nothing as final as the slamming of a door. It was the empty ocean of space that washes between galaxies.

The Rift was, in effect, a valley cut in the face of the galaxy. A few stars swam in it, light millennia apart—stars which the tide of human colonization could never have reached.

Only on the far side was there likely to be any inhabited planet, and, consequently, work for the city.

On the near side there was still the police. It was not, of course, the same contingent which had consolidated Utopia and the Duchy of Gort; such persistence by a single squadron of cops, over a trail which had spanned nearly three centuries, would have been incredible for so small a series of offenses on the city's part. Nevertheless, there was a violation of a Vacate order still on the books, and a little matter of a trick . . . and the word had been passed. To turn back was out of the question for the city.

Whether or not the police would follow the city even as far as the Rift, Amalfl did not know. It was, however, a good gamble. Crossing a desert of this size would probably be impossible for so small an object as a ship, out of a sheer inability to carry enough supplies; only a city which could grow its own had much chance of surviving such a crossing.

Soberly Amalfi contemplated the oppressive chasm which the screens showed him. The picture came in from a string of proxies, the leader of which was already parsecs out across the gap. And still the far wall was featureless, just beginning to show a faintly granular texture which gave promise of resolution into individual stars at top magnification.

"I hope the food holds out," he muttered. "If we make this one, it'll make the most colossal story any Okie ever had to tell. They'll be calling us the Rifters from one end of the galaxy to the other."

Beside him, Hazleton drummed delicately upon the arm of his chair. "And if we don't," he said, "they'll be calling us the biggest damned fools that ever got off the ground— but we won't be in a position to care. Still, we do seem to be in good shape for it, boss. The oil tanks are almost full, and the Chlorella crops are flourishing. Both breeders are running, so there'll be no fuel problem. And I doubt that we'll have any mutation trouble in the crops out here— isn't free-field incidence supposed to vary directly with star-density?"

"Sure," Amalfi said, irritated. "We won't starve if everything goes right." He paused; there had been a stir behind him, and he turned around. Then he smiled.

There was something about Dee Hazleton that relaxed him. She had not yet seen enough actual space cruising to acquire the characteristic deep Okie star-burn, nor yet to lose the wonder of being now, by Utopian standards, virtually immortal, and so she seemed still very pink and young and unharried.

Someday, perhaps, the constant strain of wandering from star to star, from crisis to crisis, would tell on her, as it did upon all Okies. She would not lose the wanderlust, but the wanderlust would take its toll.

Or perhaps her resiliency was too great even for that. Amalfi hoped so.

"Go ahead," she said. "I'm only kibitzing."

The word, like a great part of Dee's vocabulary, was a mystery to Amalfi. He grinned and turned back to Hazleton. "If we hadn't been sound enough to risk crossing," he went on,

"I'd have let us be captured; we could have paid the fine on the Vacate violation, just barely, and with luck we could have gotten a show-cause injunction against breaking us up slapped on the cops for that 'treason' charge. But just look at that damned canyon, Mark. We've never been as long as fifty years without a planet-fall before, and this crossing is going to take all of the hundred and four the Fathers predicted. The slightest accident, and we'll be beyond help—well be out where no ship could reach us."

"There'll be no accident," Hazleton said confidently.

"There's fuel decomposition—we've never had a flash fire before, but there's always a first time. And if that Twenty-third Street spindizzy conks out again, it'll damn near double the time of the crossing——"

He stopped abruptly. Through the corner of his eye, a minute pinprick of brightness poked insistently into his brain. When he looked directly at the screen, it was still there, though somewhat dimmed as its image moved off the fovea centralis of his retina. He pointed.

"Look—is that a cluster? No, it's too small and sharp. If that's a single free-floating star, it's close."

He snatched up a phone. "Give me Astronomy. Hello, Jake. Can you figure me the distance of a star from the source of an ultraphone videocast?"

"Why, yes," the voice on the phone said. "Wait, and I'll pick up your image. Ah—I see what you're after: something at ten o'clock, can't tell what yet. Dinwiddlie pickups on your proxies? Intensity will tell the tale." The astronomer chuckled like a parrot on the rim of a cracker barrel. "Now if you'll just tell me how many proxies you have ahead, and how far they——"

"Five. Full interval."

"Hm-m. A big correction, then." There was a long, itching silence. Amalfi knew that there would be no hurrying Jake. He was not the city's original astronomer; that man had fallen victim to a native of a planet called St. Rita's after he had insisted once too often to said native that St. Rita's was not the center of the universe. Jake had been swapped from another city for an atomic-pile engineer and two minor protosynthetics technicians under the traditional "rule of discretion," and he had turned out to be interested only in the behavior of the more remote galaxies. Persuading him to think about the immediate astronomical situation of the city was usually a hopeless struggle; he seemed to feel that problems of so local a nature were nearly beneath notice.

The "rule of discretion" was an Okie tradition which Amalfi had never before invoked, and never since, for it seemed to him to smell suspiciously of peonage. It had evolved, the City Fathers said, from the trading of baseball players, a term which meant nothing to Amalfi. The results of his one violation of his own attitude toward the rule sometimes seemed to him to smack of divine retribution.

"Amalfi?"

"Yeah."

"About ten parsecs, give or take four-tenths. That's from the proxies, not from us. I'd say you've found a floater, my boy."

"Thanks." Amalfi put the phone back and drew a deep breath. "Just a few years' travel.

What a relief."

"You won't find any colonists on a star that isolated," Hazleton reminded him.

"I don't care. It's a landing point, possibly a fuel or even a food source. Most stars have planets; a freak like this might not, or it might have dozens. Just cross your fingers."

He stared at the tiny sun, his eyes aching from sympathetic strain. A star in the middle of the Rift—almost certainly a wild star, moving at four hundred or five hundred kilometers per second, but not, as such stars usually were, a white dwarf; by eye alone, Amalfi estimated it to be an F star like Canopus. It occurred to him that a people living on a planet of that star might remember the moment when it burst through the near wall of the Rift and embarked upon its journey into the emptiness.

"There might be people there," he said. "The Rift was swept clean of stars once, somehow. Jake claims that this is an overdramatic way of putting it, that the mean motions of the stars probably opened the gap naturally. But either way, that sun must be a recent arrival, going at quite a clip, since it's moving counter to the general tendency. It could have been colonized while it was still passing through a populated area. Runaway stars tend to collect hunted criminals as they go by, Mark."

"Possibly," Hazleton admitted. "Though I'll bet that if that star ever was among the others, it was way back before space flight. By the way, that image is coming in from your lead proxy, out across the valley. Don't you have any outriggers? I ordered them sent."

"Sure. But I don't use them except for routine. Cruising the Rift lengthwise would really be suicide."

"I know. But where there's one isolated star, there may be another. Maybe a nearer one."

Amalfi shrugged. "We'll take a look if you like."

He touched the board. On the screen, the far wall of the Rift was wiped away. Nothing was left but what looked like a thin haze; down at that end, the Rift turned and eventually faded out into a rill of emptiness, soaking into the sands of the stars.

"Nothing on that side. Lots of nothing."

Amalfi moved the switch again.

On the screen, apparently almost within hallooing distance, a city was burning.

It was all over in a few minutes. The city bucked and toppled in a maelstrom of lightning.

Feeble flickers of resistance spat around its edges—and then it no longer had any edges. Sections of it broke off and melted like wraiths. From its ardent center, a few hopeless life craft shot out into the gap; whatever was causing the destruc-



tion let them go. No conceivable life ship could live long enough to get out of the Rift.

Dee cried out. Amalfi cut in the audio circuit, filling the control room with a howl of static.

Far behind the wild blasts of sound, a tiny voice was shouting desperately, "Rebroadcast if anyone hears us. Repeat: We have the fuelless drive. We're destroying our model and evacuating our passenger. Pick him up if you can. We're being blown up by a bindlestiff.

Rebroadcast if———"

Then there was nothing left but the skeleton of the city, glowing whitely, evaporating in the blackness. The pale, innocent light of the guide beam for a Bethe blaster played over it, but it was still impossible to see who was wielding the weapon. The Dinwiddie circuits in the proxies were compensating for the glare, so that nothing was coming through to the screen that did not shine with its own light.

The terrible fire died slowly, and the stars brightened. As the last spark flared and went out, a shadow loomed against the distant star-wall. Hazleton drew his breath in sharply.

"Another city! So some outfits really do go bindlestiff! And we thought we were the first ones out here!"

"Mark," Dee said in a small voice. "Mark, what is a bindlestiff?"

"A tramp," Hazleton said, his eyes still on the screen. "The kind of outfit that gives all Okies a bad name. Most Okies are true hobos, Dee; they work for their living wherever they can find work. The bindlestiff lives by robbery—and murder."

His voice was bitter. Amalfi himself felt a little sick. That one city should destroy another was bad enough; but it was even more of a wrench to realize that the whole scene was virtually ancient history. Ultrawave transmission was somewhat faster than light, but only by about 25 per cent; unlike the Dirac transmitter, the ultraphone was by no means an instantaneous communicator. The dark city had destroyed its counterpart years ago, and must now be beyond pursuit. It was even beyond identification, for no orders could be sent now to the lead proxy which would result in any action until still more years had passed.

"Some outfits go bindlestiff, all right," he said. "And I think the number must have been increasing lately. Why that should be, I don't know, but evidently it's happening.

We've been losing a lot of legitimate, honest cities lately— getting no answer to Dirac casts, missing them at rendezvous, and so on. Maybe now we know why."

"I've noticed," Hazleton said. "But I don't see how there could be enough piracy to account for all the losses. For all we know, the Vegan orbital fort may be out here, picking off anybody who's venturesome enough to leave the usual commerce lanes."

"I didn't know the Vegans flew cities," Dee said.

"They don't," Amalfi said abstractedly. He considered describing the legendary fort, then rejected the idea. "But they dominated the galaxy once, before Earth took to space flight.

At their peak they owned more planets than Earth does right now, but they were knocked out a hell of a long time ago. . . . I'm still worried about that bindlestiff, Mark. You'd think that some heavy thinker on Earth would have figured out a way to make Diracs compact enough to be mounted in a proxy. They haven't got anything better to do back there."

Hazleton had no difficulty in penetrating to the real core of Amalfi's grumbling. He said,

"Maybe we can still smoke 'em out, boss."

"Not a chance. We can't afford a side jaunt."



"Well, I'll send out a general warning on the Dirac," Hazleton said. "It's barely possible that the cops will be able to invest this part of the Rift before the 'stiff gets out of it."

"That'll trap us neatly, won't it? Besides, that bindlestiff isn't going to leave the Rift, at least not until it's picked up those life craft."

"Eh? How do you know?"

"Did you hear what the SOS said about a fuelless drive?"

"Sure," Hazleton said uneasily, "but the man who knows how to build it must be dead by now, even if he escaped when his city was blasted."

"We can't be sure of that—and that's the one thing that the 'stiff has to make sure of. If the 'stiffs get ahold of that drive, there'll be all hell to pay. After that, 'stiffs won't be a rarity any more. If there isn't widespread piracy in the galaxy now, there will be—if we let the

'stiffs get that no-fuel drive."

"Why?" Dee said.

"I wish you knew more history, Dee. I don't suppose

there were ever any pirates on Utopia, but Earth once had plenty of them. They eventually died out, thousands of years ago, when sailing ships were replaced by fueled ships. The fueled ships were faster than sailing vessels— b.ut they couldn't themselves become pirates because they had to touch civilized ports regularly to coal up. They could always get food off some uninhabited island, but for coal they had to visit a real port. The Okie cities are in the same position now; they're fueled ships. But if that bindlestiff can actually get its hands on a no-fuel drive—so he can sail space without having to touch civilized planets for power metals—well, we just can't allow it to happen, that's all. We've got to get that drive away from them."

Hazleton stood up, kneading his hands nervously. "That's perfectly true—and that's why the 'stiff will knock itself out to recapture those lifeships. You're right, Amalfi. Well, there's only one place in the Rift where a lifeship could go, and that's to the wild star. So the 'stiff is probably there, too, by now—or on the way there." He looked thoughtfully at the screen, once more glittering only with anonymous stars. "That changes things. Shall I send out the Dirac warning, or not?"

"Yes, send it out. It's the law. But I think it's up to us to deal with the 'stiff; we're familiar with ways of manipulating strange cultures, and we know how Okies think— even 'stiffs.

Whereas the cops would just smash things up if they did manage to get here in time."

"Check. Our course as before, then."

"Necessarily."

Still the city manager did not go. "Boss," he said at last, "the outfit is heavily armed. They could muscle in on us with no trouble."

"Mark, I'd call you yellow if I didn't know you were just lazy," Amalfi growled. He stopped suddenly and peered up the length of Hazleton's figure to his sardonic, horselike face.

"Or are you leading up to something?"

Hazleton grinned like a small boy caught stealing jam. "Well, I did have something in mind. I don't like 'stiffs, especially killers. Are you willing to entertain a small scheme?"

"Ah," Amalfi said, relaxing. "That's better. Let's hear it."

"It centers on women. Women are the best possible bindlestiff bait."

"I grant you that," Amalfi said. "But what women would you use? Ours? Nix."



"No, no," Hazleton said. "This is predicated on there being an inhabited planet going around that star. Are you still with me?"

"I think," Amalfi said slowly, "that I may even be a meter or so ahead of you."

The wild star, hurling itself through the Rift on a course that would not bring it to the far wall for another ten thousand Earth years, carried with it six planets, of which only one was even remotely Earthlike. That planet shone deep chlorophyll green on the screens long before it had grown enough to assume a recognizable disc shape. The proxies, called in now, arrived one by one, circling the new world like a swarm of five-meter footballs, eyeing it avidly.

It was everywhere the same: savagely tropical, in the throes of a geological period roughly comparable to Earth's Carboniferous Era, Plainly, the only habitable planet would be nothing but a way station; there would be no work for pay there.

Then the proxies began to pick up weak radio signals.

Nothing, of course, could be made of the language; Amalfi turned that problem over to the City Fathers at once. Nevertheless, he continued' to listen to the strange gabble while he warped the city into an orbit. The voices sounded ritualistic, somehow.

The City Fathers said:

"THIS LANGUAGE IS A VARIANT OF HU-MANOID PATTERN G, BUT THE

SITUATION IS AMBIGUOUS. GENERALLY WE WOULD SAY THAT THE RACE

WHICH SPEAKS IT IS INDIGENOUS TO THE PLANET, A RARE OCCURRENCE, BUT

BY NO MEANS UNHEARD OF. THERE ARE TRACES OF FORMS WHICH MIGHT BE

DEGENERATES OF ENGLISH, HOWEVER, AS WELL AS STRONG EVIDENCES OF

DIALECT MIXTURES SUGGESTING A TRIBAL SOCIETY. THIS LATTER FACT IS

NOT CONSONANT WITH THE POSSESSION OF RADIO NOR WITH THE

UNDERLYING SAMENESS OF THE PATTERN. UNDER

THE CIRCUMSTANCES, WE MUST POSITIVELY FORBID ANY MACHINATION BY

MR. HAZLETON ON THIS VENTURE."

"I didn't ask them for advice," Amalfi said. "And what good is a lesson in etymology at this point? Still, Mark, watch your step———"

" 'Remember Thor Five,'" Hazleton said, mimicking the mayor's father-bear voice to perfection. "All right. Do we land?"

For answer, Amalfi grasped the space stick, and the city began to settle. Nothing that appeared to answer as a ready-made landing area offered itself, and the mayor had already decided that nothing would. He sidled the city downward gently, guiding himself mainly by the increasingly loud chanting in his earphones.

At four thousand meters there was a brief glitter from amid the dark green waves of the treetops. The proxies converged on it slowly, cautious of their prim electronic lives, and on the screens a turreted roof showed—then two, four, a dozen. There was a city there—not an Okie, but a homebody, grown from the earth. Closer views showed it to be walled, the wall standing just inside a clear ring where nothing grew; the greenery between the towers was camouflage.

At three thousand, a flight of small ships burst from the native city like frightened birds, molting feathers of flame. "Gunners!" Hazleton snapped into his mike. "Posts!"

Amalfi shook his head, and continued to bring his city closer to the ground. The fire-tailed birds wheeled around them, weaving a pattern in smoky plumes; yet an Earth-man would have thought, not of birds, but of the nuptial flight of drone bees.

Amalfi,, who had not seen an Earthly bird or bee for nearly a millennium now, nevertheless sensed the ceremony in the darting cortege. With fitting solemnity, he brought the city to a stop not far from its jungle counterpart, hovering just above the tops of the giant cycads. Then, instead of clearing a landing area with the usual quick scythe of the mesotron rifles, he polarized the spin-dizzy screen.

The base and apex of the Okie city grew dim. What happened to the giant ferns and horsetails directly beneath it could not be seen—they were flattened into synthetic fossils in the muck in a split second—but those just beyond the rim of the city were stripped of their fronds and splintered, and farther out, in a vast circle, the whole forest bowed low away from the city to a clap of sunlit thunder.

Unfortunately, the Twenty-third Street spindizzy blew out under the strain at the last minute, and the city dropped the last 150 meters in free fall. It arrived on the surface of the planet rather more cataclysmically than Amalfi had intended. Hazleton hung on to his bucket seat until the control tower had stopped swaying, and then wiped blood from his nose with a judicious handkerchief.

"That," he said, "was one dramatic touch too many. I'd best go have that spindizzy fixed again, just in case. Someday that machine is going to sour for good and all, boss."

Amalfi shut off the-controls with a'contented gesture. "If that bindlestiff should show now," he said, "they'll have a tough time amassing any prestige here for a while. But go ahead, Mark, it'll keep you busy."

The major eased his barrel-shaped bulk into the lift shaft and let himself be slithered through the friction-field to the street. It was certainly a much faster and pleasanter way of traveling than elevators—or skidding down the face of a building using your forehead for a brake shoe. Outside, the face of the control tower shone with hot sunlight, reminding Amalfi that the front of City Hall faced the same way, and that on it the city's motto would be clear even under its incrustation of verdigris. He hoped that the legend could not be read by any of the local folk—it would spoil the effect of the landing.

Suddenly he was aware that the chanting he had been hearing for so long through his earphones was thrilling through the air around him. Here and there the sober workaday faces of the Okie citizens were turning to look down The Avenue, and traces of wonder, mixed with amusement and an unaccountable sadness, were in those faces. Amalfi turned.

A procession of children was coming toward him— children wound in mummylike swatches of cloth down to their hips, the strips alternately red and white. Several free-swinging panels of many-colored fabric, as heavy as silk, swirled about their legs as they moved.

Each step was followed by a low bend, hands outstretched and fluttering, heads rolling from shoulder to shoulder, feet moving in and out, toe-heel-toe, the whole body turning and turning again. Bracelets of objects like dried pods rattled at wrists and bare ankles.

Over it all, the voices chanted like water flutes.

Amalfi's first wild reaction was to wonder why the City Fathers had been puzzled about the language. These were human children. Nothing about them showed any trace of alienage.

Behind them, tall black-haired men moved in less agile procession, sounding in chorus a single word which boomed through the skitl and pitter of the children's dance at widespaced intervals. The men were human, too: their hands, stretched immovably out before them, palms up, had five fingers, with fingernails on them; their beards had the same topography as human beards; their chests, bared to the sun by a symbolic rent which was torn at the same place in each garment, and marked identically by a symbolic wound rubbed on with red chalk, showed ribs where ribs ought to be, and the telltale tracings of clavicles beneath the skin.

About the women there might have been some doubt. They came at the end of the procession, all together in a huge cage drawn by lizards. They were all naked and sick, and could have been any kind of primate. They made no sound, but only stared out of purulent eyes, as indifferent to the Okie city and its owners as to their captors.

Occasionally they scratched, reluctantly, wincing from their own claws.

The children deployed around Amalfi, evidently picking him out as the leader because he was the biggest. He had expected as much; it was but one more confirmation of their humanity. He stood still while they made a circle and sat down, still chanting and swaying and shaking their wrists. The men, too, made a circle, keeping their faces toward Amalfi, their hands outstretched. At last that reeking cage was drawn into the double ring, virtually to Amalfi's feet. Two male attendants unhitched the docile lizards and led them away.

Abruptly the chanting stopped. The tallest and most impressive of the men came forward and bent, making that strange gesture with fluttering hands over the asphalt of The Avenue. Before Amalfi quite realized what was intended, the stranger had straightened, placed some heavy object in his hand, and retreated, calling aloud the single word the men had been intoning before. Men and children responded together in one terrific shout, and then there was silence.

Amalfi was alone with the cage in the middle of the double circle. He looked down at the thing in his hand.

It was an ornate wrought-metal key.

CHAPTER FOUR: He

MIRAMON shifted nervously in the chair, the great black saw-toothed feather stuck into Ijis topknot bobbing uncertainly. It was a testimonial to his confidence in Amalfi that he sat in it at all, for in the beginning he had squatted, as was customary on his planet.

Chairs were the uncomfortable prerogatives of the gods.





"I myself do not believe in the gods," he explained to Amalfi, bobbing the feather. "It would be plain to a technician, you understand, that your city is simply a product of a technology superior to ours, and you yourselves are men such as we are. But on this planet, religion has a terrible force, a very immediate force. It is not expedient to run counter to public sentiment in such matters."

Amalfi nodded. "From what you tell me, I can believe that. Your situation is unique, to the best of our knowledge. What, precisely, happened when your civilization fell?"

Miramon shrugged. "We do not know. It was over eight thousand years ago, and nothing is left but legend. There was a high culture here then—the priests and the scientists agree on that. And the climate was different; it got cold regularly every year, I am told, although how men could survive such a period is difficult to understand. Besides, there were many more stars—the ancient carvings show thousands of them, although they fail to agree on the details."

"Naturally. You're not aware that your sun is moving at an abnormally fast relative speed?"

"Moving?" Miramon laughed shortly. "Some of our more mystical scientists are of that opinion—they maintain that if the planets move, so must the sun. It is an imperfect analogy, in my opinion; after all, planets and suns are not otherwise alike as far as we can see. And would we still be in this trough of nothingness if we were moving?"

"Yes, you would—you are. You underestimate the size of the Rift. It's impossible to detect any parallax at this distance, although in a few thousand years you'll begin to suspect it. But while you were actually among the other stars, your ancestors could see the motion very well, by the changing positions of the neighboring suns."

Miramon looked dubious. "I bow to your superior knowledge, of course. But, be that as it may—the legends have it that for some sin of our people, the gods plunged us into this starless desert, and changed our climate to perpetual heat. This is why our priests say that we are in hell, and that to be put back among the cool stars again, we must redeem our sins. We have no heaven as you have defined the term; when we die, we die damned; we must win 'salvation' right here in the mud while we are still alive. The doctrine has its attractive features under the circumstances."

Amalfi meditated. It was reasonably clear, now, what had happened, but he despaired of explaining it to Miramon—hard common sense sometimes has a way of being impenetrable. This planet's axis had a pronounced tilt, and the concomitant amount of liberation. This meant that, like Earth, it had a Draysonian cycle: every so often the top wobbled, and then resumed spinning at a new angle. The result was a disastrous climatic change. Such a thing happened on Earth roughly once every twenty-five thousand years, and the first one in recorded history had given birth to some extraordinarily silly legends and faiths—sillier than those the Hevians now entertained, on the whole.

Still, it was miserably bad luck for the Hevians that a Draysonian overturn had occurred almost at the same time that the planet had begun its journey across the Rift. It had thrown a very high civilization, a culture just

entering its ripest phase, forcibly back into the Inter-destructional period without the slightest transition.

The planet of He was a strange mixture now. Politically the regression had stopped just before barbarism—a measure of the lofty summits this race had scaled before the catastrophe—and was now in reverse, clawing through the stage of warring city-states.

Yet the basics of the scientific techniques of eight thousand years ago had not been forgotten; now they were exfoliating, bearing "new" fruits.

Properly, city-states should fight each other with swords, not with missile weapons, chemical explosives, and supersonics—and flying should be still in the dream stage, a dream of flapping wings at that, not already a jet-propelled fact. Astronomical and geological accident had mixed history up for fair.



"What would have happened to me if I'd unlocked that cage?" Amalfi demanded abruptly.

Miramon looked sick. "Probably you would have been killed—or they would have tried to kill you, anyhow," he said, with considerable reluctance. "That would have been releasing Evil again upon us. The priests say that it was women who brought about the sins of the Great Age. In the bandit cities, to be sure, that savage creed is no longer maintained—which is one reason why we have so many deserters to the bandit cities.

You can have no idea of what it is like to do your duty to the race each year as our law requires. Madness!"

He sounded very bitter. "This is why it is hard to make our people see how suicidal the bandit cities are. Everyone on this world is weary of fighting the jungle, sick of trying to rebuild the Great Age with handfuls of mud, sick of maintaining social codes which ignore the presence of the jungle—but most of all, sick of serving in the Temple of the Future. In the bandit cities the women are clean, and do not scratch one."

"The bandit cities don't fight the jungle?" Amalfi asked.

"No. They prey on those who do. They have given up the religion entirely—the first act of a city which revolts is to slay its priests. Unfortunately, the priesthood is essential; and our beast-women must be borne, since we cannot modify one tenet without casting doubt upon all—or so they tell us. It is only the priesthood which teaches us that it is better to be men than mud-puppies. So we—the technicians—follow the rituals with great strictness, stupid

though some of them are, and consider it a matter of no moment that we ourselves do not believe in the gods."

"Sense in that," Amalfi admitted. Miramon, in all conscience, was a shrewd apple. If he was representative of as large a section of Hevian thought as he believed himself to be, much might yet be done on this wild runaway world.

"It amazes me that you knew to accept the key as a trust," Miramon said. "It was precisely the proper move— but how could you have guessed that?"

Amalfi grinned. "That wasn't hard. I know how a man looks when he's dropping a hot potato. Your priest made all the gestures of a man passing on a great gift, but he could hardly wait until he'd got it over with. Incidentally, some of those women are quite presentable now that Dee's bathed 'em and Medical has taken off the under layers. Don't look so alarmed, We won't tell your priests— I gather that we're the foster fathers of He from here on out."

"You are thought to be emissaries from the Great Age," Miramon agreed gravely. "What you actually are, you have not said."

"True. Do you have migratory workers here? The phrase comes easily in your language, yet I can't quite see how——"

"Surely, surely. The singers, the soldiers, the fruit-pickers—all go from city to city, selling their services." Then, much faster than Amalfi had expected, the Hevian reached bottom. "Do you ... do you imply ... that your resources are for sale? For sale to us?"

"Exactly, Miramon."

"But how shall we pay you?" Miramon gasped. "All of what we call wealth, all that we have, could not buy a length of the cloth in your sash!"



Amalfi thought about it, wondering principally how much of the real situation Miramon could be expected to understand. It occurred to him that he had persistently underestimated the Hevian so far. It might be profitable to try the full dose—and hope that it wouldn't prove lethal.

"It's this way," Amalfi said. "In the culture we belong to, a certain metal serves for money.

You have enormous amounts of it on your planet, but it's very hard to refine, and I'm sure you've never done more than detect it. One of the things we would like is your permission to mine for that metal."

Miramon's pop-eyed skepticism was close to comical. "Permission?" he repeated.

"Please, Mayor Amalfi—is your ethical code as foolish as ours? Why do you not mine this metal without permission and be done with it?"

"Our law-enforcement agencies would not allow it. Mining your planet would make us rich—almost unbelievably rich. Our assays show, not only fabulous amounts of germanium on He, but also the presence of certain drugs in your jungle—drugs which are known to be anti-agathics."

"Sir?"

"Sorry. I mean that, used properly, these drugs indefinitely postpone death."

Miramon rose with great dignity.

"You are mocking me," he said. "I will return at a later date, and perhaps we may talk again."

"Sit down, please," Amalfi said contritely. "I had forgotten that aging is not everywhere known to be an anomaly, a decrease in the cell-building efficiency of the body which can be circumvented if you know how. It was conquered a long time ago—before interstellar flight, in fact. But the phtarmaceuticals involved have always been in very short supply, shorter and shorter as man spread through the galaxy. Less than a two-thousandth of one per cent of our present population can get the treatment now, and most of the legitimate trade goes to the people who need life-extension the most—in other words, to people who make their living by traveling long distances in space. The result is that an ampul of any anti-agathic, even the least efficient ones, that a spaceman thinks he can spare can be sold for the price the seller asks. Not a one of the anti-agathics has ever been synthesized, so if we could harvest here——"

"That is enough; it is not necessary that I understand more," Miramon said. He squatted reflectively, evidently having abandoned the chair as an impediment to thought. "All this makes me wonder if you are not from the Great Age after all. Well—this is difficult to think about reasonably. Why would your culture object to your being rich?"

"It wouldn't, as long as we came by it honestly. We'll have to show that we worked for our riches—otherwise we'll be suspected of having peddled cut drugs on the black market, at the expense of the rank-and-file people on board our own city. We'll need a written agreement with you. A permission."

"That is clear," Miramon said. "You will get it, I am sure. I cannot grant it myself. But I can predict what the priests will ask you to do to earn it."

"What, then? This is just what I want to know. Let's have it."

"First of all, you will be asked for the secret of this ... this cure for death. They will want to use it on themselves, and hide it from the rest of us. Wisdom, perhaps; it would make for more desertions otherwise—but I am sure they will want it."

"They can have it, but I think we'll see to it that the secret leaks out. The City Fathers know the therapy, and you have so rich a supply of the drugs here that there's no reason why you shouldn't all get it." Privately, Amain had an additional reason: If He reached the other side of the Rift eventually with enough anti-agathics to extend coverage much among the galaxy's general population, there would be all kinds of economic hell to pay.

"What next?"

"You will be asked to wipe out the jungle."

Amalfi sat back, stunned, and mopped his bald head. Wipe out the jungle! Oh, it would be easy enough to lay waste to almost all of it—even to give the Hevians energy weapons to keep those wastes clear—but sooner or later the jungle would come back.

The weapons would short out in the eternal moisture; the Hevians. would not take proper care of them, would not be able to repair them— how would the brightest Greek have repaired a shattered X-ray tube, even if he had known what steps to take? The technology didn't exist.

No, the jungle would come back. And the cops, in pursuit of the bindlestiff on the city's own Dirac alarm, would eventually come to He to see whether or not the Okies had fulfilled their contract—and would find the planet as raw as ever. Good-by to riches. This was jungle climate. There would be jungles here until the next Dray-sonian catastrophe, and that was that.

"Excuse me," he said, and reached for the control helmet. "Get me the City Fathers," he said into the mouthpiece.

"SPEAK," the spokesman vodeur said after a while.

"How would you go about wiping out a jungle?"

There was a moment's silence. "SODIUM FLUOSILI-

GATE DUSTING WOULD SERVE. IN A WET CLIMATE IT WOULD CREATE FATAL

LEAF BLISTER. HARDIER WEEDS COULD BE SPRAYED WITH 2, 4-D. OF COURSE

THE JUNGLE WOULD RETURN."

"That's what I meant. Any way to make the job stick?"

"NO, UNLESS THE PLANET EXHIBITS DRAY-SONIANISM."

"What?"

"NO, UNLESS THE PLANET EXHIBITS DRAY-SONIANISM. IN THAT CASE ITS AXIS

MIGHT BE REGULARIZED. IT HAS NEVER BEEN TRIED, BUT THEORETICALLY IT

IS QUITE SIMPLE; A BILL TO REGULARIZE EARTH'S AXIS WAS DEFEATED BY

THREE VOTES IN THE'EIGHTY-SECOND COUNCIL, OWING TO THE OPPOSITION

OF THE CONSERVATION LOBBY."

"Could the city handle it?"

"NO. THE COST WOULD BE PROHIBITIVE. MAYOR AMALFI, ARE YOU

CONTEMPLATING TIPPING THIS PLANET? WE FORBID IT! EVERY INDICATION

SHOWS———"

Amalfi tore the helmet from his head and flung it across the room. Miramon sprang up in alarm.

"Hazleton!"

The city manager shot through the door as if he had been kicked through it on roller skates. "Here, boss— what's the———"

"Get down below and turn off the City Fathers— fast, before they catch on and do something! Quick, man——"

Hazleton was already gone. On the other side of the room, the phones of the helmet squawked dead data in anxious, even syllables.

Then suddenly they went silent.

The City Fathers had been turned off, and Amalfi was ready to move a world.

The fact that the City Fathers could not be consulted— for the first time since the Epoch affair five centuries ago, when the whole city had been without power for a while— made the job more difficult than it needed to be, barring their conservatism. Tipping the planet, the crux of the job, was simple enough in essence; the city's spindizzies could handle it.

But the side effects of the medicine might easily prove to be worse than the disease.

The problem was seismological. Rapidly whirling objects have a way of being stubborn about changing their positions in space. If that energy were overcome, it would have to appear somewhere else—the most likely place being multiple earth§uflkes.

Too, very little cbuld be anticipated about the gravities of the task. The planet's revolution produced, as usual, a sizable magnetic field. Amalfi did not know how well that field would take to being tipped in the space-lattice which it distorted, nor just what would happen to He when the city's spindizzies polarized the whole gravity field. During

"moving day" the planet would be, in effect, without magnetic moment of its own, and since computation was a function of the City Fathers, there was no way of finding out where the energy would reappear, in what form, or at what intensity.

He broached the latter question to Hazleton. "If we were dealing with an ordinary problem, I'd say the energy would show up as velocity," he pointed out. "In which case we'd be in for an involuntary junket. But this is no ordinary case. The mass involved is ...

well, it's planetary, that's all. What do you think, Mark?"

"I don't know what to think," Hazleton admitted. "The equations only give us general solutions, and only quanti-cised solutions at that—and this whole problem is a classical field problem. When we move the city, we change the magnetic moment of its component electrons; but the city itself is a low-mass body with no spin of its own, and doesn't have a gross magnetic moment."

"That's what stuck me. I can't cross over from probability into tensors any more than poor old Einstein could. As far as I know, nobody's ever really faced up to the discontinuity between what the spindizzy does to the electron and what happens to a body of classical mass in a spindizzy field."

"Still—we could control velocity, or even ignore it out here. Suppose the energy reappears as heat, instead? There'd be nothing left of He but a cloud of gas."

Amalfi shook his head. "I think that's a bogey. The gyroscopic resistance may show up as heat, sure, but not the magnetogravitic. I think we'd be safest to assume that it'll appear as velocity, just as in ordinary flight. Use the standard transformation and see what you get."

Hazleton bent over his slide rule, the sweat standing out

along his forehead and above his mustache in great heavy droplets. Amalfi could understand the eagerness of the Hevians to get rid of the jungle and its eternal humidity.



His own clothing, sparse though it was, had been sopping ever since the city had landed here.

"Well," the city manager said finally, "unless I've made a mistake somewhere, the whole kit and kaboodle, the planet itself, will go shooting away from here at about twice the speed of light. That's not too bad—just about coasting speed for us. We could always loop around and bring the planet back to its orbit."

"Ah, but could we? Remember, we don't control it! The vector appears automatically when we turn on the spindizzies. We don't even know in which direction that arrow is going to point. The planet could throw itself into the sun within the first second as far as we know. We can't predict the direction."

"Yes, we can," Hazleton objected. "Along the axis of spin, of course."

"Cant? And torque?"

"No problem^—no, yes, there is. I keep forgetting that we're dealing with a planet instead of electrons." He applied the slipstick again. "No soap. Too many substitutions. Can't be answered in time without the City Fathers— and torque might hype the end-velocity substantially. But if we can figure a way to control the flight, it won't matter in the end. Of course there'll be perturbations of the other planets when this one goes massless, whether it -actually moves or not—but nobody lives on them anyhow."

"All right, Mark, go figure a control system. I'll see what can be done on the geology end——"

The door slid back suddenly, and Amalfi looked back over his shoulder. It was Sergeant Anderson. The perimeter sergeant was usually blase in the face of all possible wonders, unless they threatened the city. "What's the matter?" Amalfi said, alarmed.

"Mr. Mayor, we've gotten an ultracast from some outfit claiming to be refugees from another Okie city—they claim they hit a bindlestiff and got broken up. They've crash-landed on this planet up north, and they're being mobbed by one of the local bandit towns. They were holding 'em off and yelling for help, and then they stopped transmitting. I thought you ought to know."

Amalfl heaved himself to his feet almost instantly. "Did you get a bearing on that call?" he demanded.

"Yes sir."

"Give me the figures. Come on, Mark. That's our life craft from the city with the no-fuel drive. We need those boys." | ;•'

Amalfi and Hazleton grabbed a cab to the edge of the city, and went the rest of the way to the Hevian town on foot, across the supersonics-cleared strip of bare turf which surrounded the walls. The turf felt rubbery. Amalfi suspected that some rudimentary form of friction-field was keeping the mud in a state of stiff gel. He had visions of foot soldiers sinking suddenly into slowly-folding ooze as the fields were turned off, and quickened his pace.

Inside the gates, the Hevian guards summoned a queer, malodorous vehicle which seemed to be powered by the combustion of hydrocarbons, and the Okies were roared through the streets toward Miramon. Throughout the journey, Amalfi clung to a cloth strap in an access of nervousness. Traveling right on a surface at any good speed was a rare experience for him, and the way things zipped past the windows made him jumpy.



"Is this bird out to smash us up?" Hazleton demanded petulantly. "He must be doing all of four hundred kilos an hour."

"I'm glad you feel the same way," Amalfi said, relaxing a little. "Actually, I'll bet he's doing less than two hundred. It's just the way the——"

The driver, who had been holding his car down to a conservative fifty out of deference to the strangers from the Great Age, wrenched the machine around a corner and halted it neatly before Miramon's door. Amalfi got out, his knees wobbly. Hazleton's face was a delicate puce.

"I'm going to figure out a way to make our cabs operate outside the city," he muttered.

"Every time we make a new planetfall, we have to ride on ox carts, the backs of bull kangaroos, in hot air balloons, steam-driven air-screws, things that drag you feet first and face down through tunnels, or whatever else the natives think is classy transportation. My stomach won't stand much more."

Amalfi grinned and raised his hand to Miramon, whoSe

expression suggested laughter smothered with great difficulty.

'"What brings you here?" the Hevian said. "Come in. I have no chairs, but———"

"No time," Amalfi said. "Listen closely, Miramon, because this is going to be complex to explain, and I'm going to have to give it to you fast. You already know that our city isn't the only one of its type. Well, the fact is that we aren't even the first Okie city to enter the Rift; there were two others ahead of us. One of them, a criminal city that we call a bindlestiff, attacked and destroyed the other; we were too far away to prevent it. Do you follow me?"

"I think so," Miramon said. "This bindlestiff is like our bandit cities——"

"Yes,- precisely. And as far as we know, it's still in the Rift, somewhere. Now the city that the 'stiff destroyed had something that we want very badly, and that we must have before the 'stiffs get it. We know that the dead city put off some life craft, and that one of those craft has just landed on your world—astd has fallen afoul of one of your own bandit cities.

We've got to rescue them. They're the sole survivors of the dead city as far as we know, and it's vital for us to question them. We need to know what they know about the thing we want—the no-fuel drive—and what they know about where the bindlestiff is now."

"I see," Miramon said thoughtfully. "Will this—this bindlestiff follow them to He?"

"We think it will. And it's powerful—it packs all the stuff we have and more besides. We have to pick up these survivors first, and work out some way to defend ourselves and you people against the 'stiff when it gets here. And above all, we must prevent the 'stiff from getting the secret of that fuelless drive!"

"What would you like me to do?" Miramon said gravely.

"Can you locate the Hevian town that's holding these people prisoner? We have a fix on it, but only a blurred one. If you can, we'll be able to get them out of there ourselves."

Miramon went back into his house—actually, like all the other living quarters in the town, it was a dormitory housing twenty-five men of the same trade or profession— and returned with a map. The map-making conventions of He were anything but self-explanatory, but after a while

Hazleton was able to figure out the symbolism involved. "There's your city, and here's ours," he said to Miramon, pointing. "Right? And this peeled-orange thing is a butterfly grid. I've always claimed that it was a lot more faithful to spherical territory than our Geographic projection, boss." l i'

"Easier still to express what you want to remember as a topological relationship," Amain said impatiently. "Nobody ever confuses a table of symbols with the territory. Show Miramon where the signals came from."

"Up here, on this wing of the butterfly."

Miramon frowned. "There is only one city there—Fabr-Suithe. A very bad place to approach, even in the military sense. But if you insist on trying, we will help you. Do you know what the end result will be?"

"We'll rescue our friends, I hope. What else?"

"The bandit cities will come out in force to hinder the Great Work. They oppose it; the jungle is their life."

"Then why haven't they impeded us before now?" Hazleton said. "Are they scared?"

"No. They fear nothing—we think they take drugs—but they have seen no way to attack you without huge losses, and their reasons for attacking you have not been sufficiently compelling to make them take the risk up to now. But if you attack one of them, that will give them reason enough. They learn hatred very quickly."

"I think we can handle them," Hazleton said coldly.

"I am sure you can," Miramon said. "But you should be warned that Fabr-Suithe is the leader of all the bandit cities. If Fabr-Suithe attacks you, so will they all."

Amain shrugged. "We'll chance it. We'll have to: we must have those men. Maybe we can make it quick enough to crush resistance before it starts. We can pick our own town up and go calling on Fabr-Suithe; if they don't want to deliver up these Okies——"

"Boss———"

"Eh?"

"How are you going to get us off the ground?"

Amalfi could feel his ears turning red, and swore. "I forgot that Twenty-third Street machine. Miramon, we'll have to have a task force of your own rockets. Hazleton, how are we going to work this? We can't fit anything really powerful into a Hevian rocket plane—a pile would go into one easily enough, but a frictionator or a naval-size mesotron rifle wouldn't, and there'd be no point in taking popguns. Do you suppose we could gas Fabr-Suithe?"

"You couldn't carry enough gas in a Hevian rocket either. Or carry enough men to make a raid in force."

"Excuse me," Miramon said, "but it is not even certain that the priests will authorize the use of our planes against Fabr-Suithe. We had best drive directly over to the temple and ask them for permission."

"Belsen and bebopl" Amalfi said. It was the oldest oath in his repertoire.

Talk, even with electronic aids, was impossible inside the little rocket. The whole machine roared like a gigantic tam-tam to the vibration of the Venturis. Morosely Amalfi watched Hazleton connecting the mechanism in the nose of the plane with the power-leads from the pile—no mean balancing feat, considering the way the craft pitched in its passage through the tortured Hevian crosswinds. The pile itself, of course, was .simple enough to handle; it consisted only of a tank about the size of a glass brick, filled with a fine white froth: heavy water containing uranium235 hexafluoride in solution, damped by bubbles of cadmium vapor. Most of its weight was shielding and the peripheral capillary network of the heat-exchanger.

There had been no difficulty with the priests about the little rocket task force itself; the priests had been delighted at the proposal that the emissaries from the Great Age should teach an apostate Hevian city the error of its ways. Amalfi suspected that the straight-faced Miramon had invented the need for priestly permission just to get the two Okies back into the smelly ground car again and watch their faces during the drive to the temple. Still the discomforts of that ride had been small compared to this one.

The pilot shifted his feet on the treadles, and the deck pitched. A metal trap rushed back under Amalfi's nose, and he found himself looking through misty air at a crazily canted jungle. Something long, thin, and angry flashed over it and was gone. At the same time there was a piercing, inhuman shriek, sharp enough to dwarf for a long instant the song of the rocket.

Then there were more of the same: ptsouiiirrrl ptsoidiirrr! ptsouiiirrrl The machine jerked to nearly every

one and then shook itself violently, twisting and careening across the jungle top^ Amalfl had never felt so helpless before in his life. He* did not even know what the noise was; he could only be sure that it was ill-tempered. The coarse blaam of high explosive, when it began, was recognizable—the city had ibf ten had occasion to blast on jobs— but nothing in his experience went kerchowkerchowker-chowkerchow, like a demented vibratory drill, and the invisible thing that screamed its own pep yell as it flew—

eeeeeeeeyokKRCHackackarackarackaracka— seemed wholly impossible.

He was astonished to discover that the hull around him was stippled with small holes, real holes with the slipstream fluting over them. It took him what seemed to be three weeks to realize that the whooping and cheer-leading which meant nothing to him was riddling the ship and threatening to kill him at any second.

Someone was shaking him. He lurched to his knees, trying to unfreeze his eyeballs.

"Amalfl! Amalfi!" The voice, although it was breathing on his ear, was parsecs away.

"Pick your spot, quick! They'll have us shot down in a——"

Something burst outside and threw Amalfi back to the deck. Doggedly he crawled to the trap and peered down through the now-shattered glass. The bandit Hevian city swooped past, upside down. The mayor felt a sudden wave of motion sickness, and the city was lost in a web of tears. The second time it came by, he managed to see which building in it had the heaviest guard, and pointed, choking.

The rocket threw its tailfeathers over the nearest cloud and bored beak-first for the ground. Amalfi hung on to the edge of the suddenly blank trap, his own blood spraying back in a fine mist into his face from his cut fingers.

"Now!"

Nobody heard, but Hazleton saw his nod. A blast of pure light blew through the upended cabin, despite the shielding between it and the pile. Even through the top of his head, the violet-white light of that soundless blast nearly blinded Amalfi, and he could feel the irradiation of his shoulders and chest. He would develop no allergies on this planet, anyhow—every molecule of histamine in his blood must have been detoxified in that instant.

The rocket yawed wildly, and then came under control

again. The ordnance noises Had already quit, cut off at the moment of the flash.

The bandit Hevian city was blind.

The sound of the jets cut off, and Amalfi understood for the first time what an "aching void" might be. The machine fell into a steep glide, the air howling dismally outside it.

Another rocket, under the guidance of Carrel, dived down before it, scything a narrow runway in the jungle with portable mesotron rifles—for the bandit towns kept no supersonic no-plant's-land between themselves and the rank vegetation.

The moment the rocket stopped moving, Amalfi and a hand-picked squad of Okies and Hevians were out of it and slogging through the muck. From inside Fabr-Suithe drifted a myriad of screams—human screams now, screams of rage and grief, from men who thought themselves blinded for life. Amalfi did not doubt that many of them were.

Certainly anyone who had had the misfortune to be looking at the sky during that instant when the entire output of the pile had been converted to visible light would never see again?

But the laws of chance would have protected most of the renegades, so speed was vital.

The mud built up heavy pads under his shoes, and the jungle did not thin out until they hit the town's wall itself.

The gates had been rusted open years ago, and were choked with greenery. The Hevians hacked their way through it with practiced knives and cunning.

Inside, the going was still almost as thick. Fabr-Suithe proper presented a depressing face of proliferating despair. Most of the buildings were completely enshrouded in vines, and many were halfway toward ruins. Iron-hard tendrils had thrust their way between stones, into windows, under cornices, up drains and chimney funnels. Poison-green succulent leaves plastered themselves greedily upon every surface, and in shadowed places there were huge blood-colored fungi which smelled like a man six days dead; the sweetish taint hung heavily hi the air. Even the paving blocks had sprouted—inevitably, since, whether by ignorance or laziness, most of the recent ones had been cut from green wood.

The screaming began to die into whimpers. Amalfi did his best to keep himself from inspecting the stricken inhabitants. A man who believes he has just been blinded permanently is not a pretty sight, even when he is wrong. Yet it was impossible-' not to notice the curious mixture of soiled finery with gleamingly clean nakedness. It was as if two different periods had mixed in the city, as if a gathering of Hruntan nobjes' had been sprinkled with Noble Savages. Possibly the 'men who had given in completely to the jungle had also slid back enough to discover the pleasures of bathing. If so, they would shortly discover the pleasures of the mud-wallow, too, and would not look so noble after that.

"Amalfi, here they are——"

The mayor's suppressed sympathy for the blinded men evaporated when he got a look at the imprisoned Okies. They had been systematically mauled to begin with, and after that sundry little attentions had been paid to them which combined the best features of savagery and decadence. One of them, mercifully, had been strangled by his comrades early in the "questioning." Another, a basket case, should have been rescued, for he could still talk rationally, but he pleaded so persistently for death that Amalfl had him shot in a sudden fit of sentimentality. Of the other three men, all could walk and talk, but two were mad. The catatonic was carried out on a stretcher, and the manic was bound, gagged, and led gingerly away.

"How did you do it?" asked the rational man in Russian, the dead universal language of , Earth. He was a human skeleton, but he radiated an amazing personal force. He had lost his tongue early in the "questioning," but had already taught himself to talk by the artificial method—the result was weird, but it was intelligible. "The savages were coming down to kill us as soon as they heard your rockets. Then there was a sort of flash, and they all started screaming—a pretty sound, let me tell you."

"I'll bet," Amalfi said. "Do you speak Interlingua? Good, my Russian is rudimentary these days. That 'sort of a flash' was a photon explosion. It was the only way we could figure on being sure of getting you out alive. We thought of trying gas, but if they had had gas masks, they would have been able to kill you anyhow."

"I haven't actually seen any masks, but I'm sure they have them. There are traveling volcanic gas clouds in this part of the planet, they say; they must have evolved some absorption device—charcoal is well known here. Lucky we

were so far underground, or-we'd be blind, too, then. You people must be engineers."

"More or less," Amalfi agreed. "Strictly, we're miners and petroleum geologists, but we've developed a lot of side lines since we went aloft—like any Okie. On Earth we were a port city and did just about everything, but aloft you have to specialize. Here's our rocket—crawl in. It's rough, but it's transportation. How about you?"

"Agronomists. Our mayor thought there was a good field for it out here along the periphery—teaching the abandoned colonies and the offshoots how to work poisoned soil and manage low-yield crops without heavy machinery. Our side line was waxmans."

"What are those?" Amalfi said, adjusting the harness around the wasted body.

"Soil-source antibiotics. It was those the bindlestiff wanted—and got. The filthy swine.

They can't bother to keep a reasonably sanitary city; they'd rather pirate some honest outfit for drugs when they have an epidemic. Oh, and they wanted germanium, too, of course. They blew us up when they found^we didn't have any—we'd converted to a barter economy as soon as we got out of the last commerce lanes."

"What about your passenger?" Amalfi said with studied nonchalance.

"Doctor Beetle? Not that that was his name—I couldn't pronounce that even when I had my tongue. I don't imagine he survived. We had to keep him in a tank even in the city, and I can't quite see him living through a lifeship journey. He was a Myrdian—smart cookies all of them, too. That no-fuel drive of his——"

Outside, a shot cracked, and Amalfi winced. "We'd best take off—they're getting their eyesight back. Talk to you later. Hazleton, any incidents?"

"Nothing to speak of, boss. Everybody stowed?"

"Yep. Kick off."

There was a volley of shots, and then the rocket coughed, roared, and stood on its tail.

Amalfi pulled a deep sigh loose from the acceleration and turned his head toward the rational man.

He was still securely strapped in, and looked quite relaxed. A brass-nosed slug had come through the side of the ship next to him and had neatly removed the top of his skull.

Working information out of the madmen was a painfully long, anxious process. Even after the manic case had been returned to a semblance of rationality, he could contribute very little.

The lifeship had not come to He because of Hazleton's Dirac warning, he saM.'The lifeship and the burned Okie had not had any Dirac equipment to the best of his knowledge. The lifeship had come to He, as Amalfl had predicted, because it was the only possible planetfall in the desert of the Rift. Even so, the refugees had had to use deep-sleep and strict starvation rationing to make it.

"Did you see the 'stiff again?"

"No, sir. If they heard your Dirac warning, they probably figured the police had spotted them and scrammed— or maybe they thought there was a military base or an advanced culture here on the planet."

"You're guessing," Amalfi said gruffly. "What happened to Doctor Beetle?"

The man looked startled. "The Myrdian in the tank? He got blown up with the city, I suppose."

"He wasn't put off in another lifeship?"

"Doesn't seem very likely. But I was only a pilot. Could be that they took him out in the mayor's gig for some reason."

"You don't know anything about his no-fuel drive?"

"First I heard of it."

Amalfi was far from satisfied; he suspected that there was still a short circuit somewhere in the man's memory. But that was all that could be gotten from him, and Amalfi had to accept the fact. All that remained to be done was to get some assessment of the weapons available to the bindlestiff; on this subject the ex-manic was ignorant, but the city's neurophysiologist said cautiously that something might be extracted from the catatonic within a month or two; thus far, he hadn't even succeeded in capturing the man's attention.

Amalfi accepted the estimate also, since it was the best he could get. With Moving Day for He coming near, he couldn't afford to worry overtime about another problem. He had already decided that the simplest answer to vul-canism, which otherwise would be inevitable when the planet's geophysical balance was changed, would be to reinforce the crust. At two hundred points on the surface of He, drilling teams were now sinking long, thin, slanting

shafts, reaching toward the-stress-fluid of the world's core. The shafts interlocked intricately, and thus far only one volcano had been created by the drilling. In general, the lava pockets which had been tapped had already been anticipated, and the flow had been bled off into many intersecting channels without ever reaching the surface. After the molten rock had hardened, the clogged channels were re-drilled, with mesotron rifles set to the smallest possible dispersion.

None of the shafts had yet tapped the stress-fluid; the plan was to complete them all simultaneously. At that point, specific volcanic areas, riddled with channel intersections, would give way, and immense plugs would be forced up toward the crust, plugs of iron, connected by ferrous cantilevers through the channels between. The planet of He would wear a cruel corset, permitting only the slightest flexure—it would be stitched with threads of steel, steel that had held even granite in solution for geological ages.

The heat problem was tougher, and Amalfi was not sure whether or not he had hit upon the solution. The very fact of structural resistSjnce would create high temperatures, and any general formation of shearplanes would cut the imbedded girders at once. The method being prepared to cope with that was rather drastic, and its after-effects largely unknown.

On the whole, however, the plans were simple, and putting them into effect had seemed heavy but relatively uncomplicated labor. Some opposition, of course, had been expected from the local bandit towns.

But Amalfi had not expected to lose nearly 20 per cent of his crews during the first month after the raid on Fabr-Suithe.

It was Miramon who brought the news of the latest work camp found slaughtered. Amalfi was sitting under a tree fern on high ground overlooking the city, watching a flight of giant dragonflies and thinking about heat transfer in rock.

"You are sure they were adequately protected?" Miramon asked cautiously. "Some of our insects——"

Amalfi thought the insects, and the jungle, almost disturbingly beautiful. The thought of destroying it all occasionally upset him. "Yes, they were," he said shortly. "We sprayed out the camp areas with dicoumarins and fluorine-substituted residuals. Besides—do any of your insects ust explosives?"

"Explosives! There" was dynamite used? I saw no evidence——"

"No. That's what bothers me. I don't like all those felled trees you descitbe; that sounds more like TDX than dynamite or high explosive. We use TDX ourselves to get a cutting blast—it has the property of exploding in a flat plane."

Miramon goggled. "Impossible. An explosion had to expand evenly in all directions that are open to it."

"Not if the explosive is a piperazohexynitrate built from polarized carbon atoms. Such atoms can't move in any direction but at right angles to the gravity radius. That's what I mean. You people are up to dynamite, but not to TDX."

He paused, frowning. "Of course some of our losses have just been to bandit raids, with missile weapons and ordinary bombs—your friends from Fabr-Suithe and their allies.

But these camps where there was an explosion and no crater to show for it———"

He fell silent. There was no point in mentioning the gassed corpses. It was hard even to think about them. Somebody on this planet had a gas which was a regurgi-tant, a sternutatory, and a vesicant all in one. The men had been forced out of their masks—which had been designed solely to protect them from volcanic gases—to vomit, had taken the stuff into their lungs by convulsive sneezing, and had blistered into great sacs of serum inside and out. That, obviously, had been the multiple-benzene-ring gas Hawkesite; it had been very popular during the days of the warring stellar "empires,"

when it had been called "polybathroomfloorine" for no discoverable reason. But what was it doing on He?



There was only one possible answer, and for a reason which he did not try to understand, it made Amalfi breathe a little easier. All around him the jungle sighed and swayed, and humming clouds of gnats made rainbows over the dew-laden pinnae of the ferns. The jungle, almost always murmurously quiet, had never seemed like the real enemy—and now Amalfi knew that his intuition had been right. The real enemy had at last declared itself, stealthily, but with a stealth which was naivete itself in comparison with the ancient guile of the jungle.

"Miramon," Amalfi said" tranquilly, "we're in a spot. That criminal city I told you about—the bindlestiff—is already here. It must have landed even before my city arrived, long enough ago to hide itself very thoroughly. Probably it came down at night in some taboo area. The tramps in it have leagued themselves with Fabr-Suithe anyhow, that much is obvious."

A moth with a two-meter wingspread blundered across the clearing, piloted by a gray-brown nematode which had sunk its sucker above the ganglion between the glittering creature's pinions. Amalfi was in a mood to read parables into things, and the parasitism reminded him of how greatly he had underestimated the enemy. The bindlestiff evidently knew, and was skillful with, the secret of manipulating a new culture.

A-shrewd Okie never attempts to overwhelm a civilization by direct assault, but instead pilots it, as indetectably as possible, doing no apparent harm, adding no apparent burden, but turning history deftly and tyrannically aside at the crucial instant...

Amalfi snapped the belt switch of his ultraphone. "Hazleton?" "I

"Here, boss." Behind the city manager's voice was the indistinct rumble of heavy mining.

"What's up?"

"Nothing yet. Are you having any bandit trouble out there?"

"No. We're not expecting any, either, with all this artillery."

"Famous last words," Amalfi said. "The 'stiffs here, Mark—and it's no stranger, either."

There was a short silence. In the background, Amalfi could hear the shouts of Hazleton's crew. When the city manager's voice came in again, it was moving from word to word very carefully, as if it expected each one to break under its weight. "You imply that the

'stiff was already on He when our Dirac broadcast went out. Right? I'm not sure these losses of ours can't be explained some simpler way, boss; the theory ... uh ... lacks elegance."

Amalfi grinned tightly. "A heuristic criticism," he said. "Go to the foot of the class, Mark, and think it over. Thus far they've out-thought us six ways for Sunday. We may be able to put your old scheme about the women into effect still, but if it's to work, we'll have to smoke the 'stiff out into the open."

"How?"

"Everybody here knows that there's going to be a drastic change in the planet when we finish what we're doing, but we're the only ones who know exactly what we're going to do. The 'stiffs will have to stop us, whether they've got Doctor Beetle or not. So I'm forcing their hand. Moving Day is |iereby advanced by one thousand hours." •

"What! I'm sorry, boss, but that's flatly impossible."

Amalfi felt a rare spasm of anger. "That's as may be," he growled. "Nevertheless, spread it around; let the Hevi-ans hear it. And just to prove that I'm not kidding, Mark, I'm turning the City Fathers back on at M plus 1100. If you're not ready to spin before then, you may well swing instead."

The click of the belt switch to the off position was unsatisfying. Amalfi would much have preferred to have concluded the interview with something really final—a clash of cymbals, for instance. He swung suddenly on Miramon.

"What are you goggling at?"

The Hevian shut his mouth, flushing. "Your pardon," he said. "I was hoping to understand your instructions to your assistant, in the hope of being of some use. But you spoke in such incomprehensible terms that it sounded like a theological dispute. As for me, I never argue about politics or religion." He turned on his heel and stamped off through the trees.

Amalfi watched him go, cooling off gradually. This would never do. He must be getting to be an old man. All during the conversation with Hazleton he had felt his temper getting the better of his judgment, yet he had felt sudden and inert, unwilling to make the effort of opposing the momentum of his anger. At this rate, the City Fathers would soon depose him and appoint some stable character to the mayoralty—not Hazleton, certainly, but some un-poetic youngster who would play everything by empirics. Amalfi was in no position to be threatening anyone else with liquidation, even as a joke.

He walked toward the grounded city, heavy with sunlight, sunk in reflection. He was now about nine hundred years old, give or take fifty; strong as an ox, mentally alert and active, in good hormone balance, all twenty-eight . senses sharp, his own special psi faculty— orientation—still as infallible as ever, and all in all as sane as a compulsively peripatetic starman could be. The anti-agathics would keep him in this shape indefinitely, as far as anyone knew—but the problem of patience had never been solved.

The older a man became, the more quickly he saw answers to tough questions because the more experience he had to bring to bear on them; and the less likely he was to tolerate slow thinking among his associates. If he were sane, his answers were generally right answers—if he were unsane, they were not; but what mattered was the speed of the thinking itself. In the end, both the sane and the unsane became equally dictatorial, less and less ready to explain why they picked one answer over another.

It was funny: before death had been indefinitely postponed, it had been thought that memory would turn longevity into a Greek gift, because not even the human brain could remember a practical infinity of accumulated facts. Nowadays, however, nobody bothered to remember many facts. That was what the City Fathers and like machines were for:.|hey stored data. Living men memorized nothing but processes, throwing out obsolete ones for new ones as invention made it necessary. When they needed facts, they asked the machines.

In some cases, even processes were wiped from human memory to make more room if there were simple, indestructible machines to replace them—the slide rule, for instance.

Amalfi wondered suddenly if there was a single man in the city who could multiply, divide, take square root, or figure pH in his head or on paper. The thought was so novel as to be alarming—as novel as if an ancient astrophysicist had seriously wondered how many of his colleagues could run an abacus.



No, memory was no problem. But it was hard to be patient after a thousand years.

The bottom of an airlock drifted into his field of view, plastered with brown tendrils of mud. He looked up. The lock, drilled directly into the great granite disc which was the foundation of the city, was a severed end of what had been a subway line running out of Manhattan centuries ago; this one evidently had been the Astoria line of the BMT, a lock seldom used, since it was too far from both the Empire State and City Hall, the city's two present centers of control. It was certainly a long way around the perimeter from where Amalfl had expected to go back on board. Feeling like a stranger, he went in.

Inside, the corridof rang with bloodcurdling shrieks which echoed endlessly. It was as if somebody were flaying a live dinosaur, or, better, a pack of them. Underneath the noise there was <JL ,!sound like water being expelled under high pressure, arid someone was laughing hysterically. Alarmed, Amalfi ran up the nearest steps; the noise got louder. He hunched his bull shoulders and burst through the door behind which the butchery seemed to be going on.

Surely there had never been such a place in the city. It was a huge, steamy chamber, walled with some ceramic substance placed in regular tiles. The tiles were slimy and stained, hence, old—very old. On the floor, smaller hexagonal white tiles made an endlessly repeating mosaic, reminding Amalfl at once of the structural formula of Hawkesite.

Hordes of nude women ran aimlessly back and forth in the chamber, screaming, battering at the wall, dodging wildly, or rolling on the mosaic floor. Every so often a thick stream of water caught one of them, bowling her howling away. Overhead, long banks of nozzles sprayed needles of mist into the air; Amalfl was soaking wet almost at once. The laughter got louder. ;

The mayor bent quickly, tteew off his muddy shoes, and stalked the laughter, his toes gripping the slippery tiles. The heavy column of water swerved toward him, then was warped away again.

"John! Do you need a bath so badly? Come join the party!"

It was Dee Hazleton. She was as nude as any of her victims, and was gleefully plying an enormous hose. She looked lovely; Amalfl turned his mind determinedly away from that thought.

"Isn't this fun? We just got a new batch of these creatures. I got Mark to have the old fire hose connected, and I've been giving them their first wash."

It did not sound much like the old Dee. Amalfl expressed his opinion of women who lost their inhibitions with such drastic thoroughness. He went on at some length, and Dee made as if to turn the hose on him again.

"No, you don't," he growled, wresting it from her. It proved extremely hard to manage. "What is this place, anyhow? I don't recall any such torture chamber in the plans."

"It was a public bath, Mark says. There's another one downtown, in the Baruch Houses district, and another one on Forty-first Street beside the Port Authority Terminal, and quite a few others. Mark says they must have been closed up when the city first went aloft. I've been using this one to sluice off these women before they're sent to Medical."



"With city water?" Even the thought of such waste made his hackles rise.

"Oh no, John, I know better than that. The water's pumped in from the river t<3 the west."

"Water for bathing!" Amalfl said. "No wonder the ancients sometimes didn't have enough to drink. Still, I'd thought the static jet was older than that."

He surveyed the Hevian women, who, now that the water was turned off, were huddled in the warmest part of the echoing chamb«$r. None of them shared Dee's gently curved ripeness, but, as usual, some of them showed promise. Hazelton was prescient, it had to be granted. Of course it had been expectable that the Hevians would turn out to be human. Only eleven non-human civilizations had ever been discovered, and of these, only the Lyrans and the Myrdians had any brains to speak of (unless one counted the Vegans; Earthmen did not think of them as human, but all the non-human cultures did; anyhow, they were extinct as a civilization).

But to have the Hevians turn over complete custody of their women to the Okies, without so much as a preliminary conference, at the first contact, had been a colossal break.

Hazleton had advanced his proposal to use any possible women as bindlestiff-bait years before any Okie could have known that there were people on He at all.

Well, that was Hazleton's own psi gift: not true clairvoyance, but an ability to pluck workable plans out of logically insufficient data. Time after time only the seemingly miraculous working-out of some obvious flight of fancy had prevented Hazleton's being jettisoned by the blindly logical City Fathers.

"Dee, come to Astronomy with me," Amalfi said. "I've got something to show you. And for my sake, put on

something, or the men will think I'm out to found a dynasty."

"All right," Dee saifl reluctantly. She was not yet used to the odd Okie standards of exposure, and sometimes appeared nude when it twasn't customary—a compensation, Amalfl supposed^ foV her Utopian upbringing, which had taught her that nudity had a deleterious effect upon the purity of one's politics. The Hevian women moaned and hid their heads while she put on her shorts. Most of them had been stoned for inadvertently covering themselves at one time or another, for in Hevian society %omen were not people but reminders of damnation, doubly evil for the slightest taint of secretiveness.

History, Amalfl thought, would be more instructive a teacher if it were not so stupefyingly repetitious. He led the way up the corridor, searching for a lift shaft, disturbingly conscious of Dee's wet soles padding cheerfully behind him.

In Astronomy, Jake was, as usual, peering wistfully at a galaxy somewhere out on the marches of nowhen, trying to turn spiral arms into elliptical orbits without recourse to the calculations section. He looked up as Amalfi and the girl entered.

"Hello," he said dismally. "Amalfl, I really need some help here. How can a man work without machines? If only you'd turn the City Fathers back on——"

"Shortly. How long has it been since you looked back the way we came, Jake?"

"Not since we started across the Rift. Why, should I have? The Rift is just a scratch in a saucer; you need real distance to work on basic problems."

"I know that. But let's take a look. I have an idea that we're not as alone in the Rift as we thought."

Resignedly, Jake went to his control desk and thumbed the buttons that moved his telescope. "What do you expect to find?" he demanded. "A haze of iron filings, or a stray meson? Or a fleet of police cruisers?"

"Well," Amalfi said, pointing to the screen, "those aren't wine bottles."

The police cruisers, so close that the light of He's star had begun to twinkle on their sides, shot across the screen in a brilliant stream, contrails of false photons striping the Rift behind them.

"So they aren't," Jake said, not much interested. "Now may I have my scope back, Amalfi?"

Amalfi only grinned. Cops or no cops, he felt young again.

Hazleton was mud up to the thighs. Long ribands of it trailed behind him as he hurtled up the lift shaft to the control room. Amalfi watched him coming, noting the set whiteness of the city manager's face as he looked up at Amalfi's bent head.

"What's this about cops?" Hazleton demanded while still in flight. "The message didn't get to me straight. We were raided, and all hell's broken loose everywhere. I nearly didn't get here straight myself." He sprang into the room, his boots shedding gummy clods.

"I saw some of the fighting," Amalfi said. "Looks like the Moving Day rumor reached the

'stiffs, all right."

"Sure. What's this about cops?"

"The cops are here. They're coming in from the northwest quadrant, already off overdrive, and .should be ready to land day after tomorrow."

"Surely they're not still after us," Hazleton said. "And I can't see why they should come all this distance after the 'stiff. They must have had to use deep-sleep to make it. And we didn't say anything about the no-fuel drive in our alarm 'cast——"

"We didn't have to. They're after the 'stiff, all right. Someday I must tell you the parable of the diseased bee, but there isn't time now. Things are breaking too fast. We have to keep an eye on everything, and be ready to jump in any direction no matter which item on the agenda comes up first. How bad is the fighting?"

"Very bad. At least five of the local bandit towns are in on it, including Fabr-Suithe, of course. Two of them mount heavy stuff, about contemporary with the Hruntan Empire's in its heyday ... ah, I see you know that already. Well, this is supposed to be a holy war on us. We're meddling with the jungle and interfering with their chances for salvation-through-suffering, or something—I didn't stop to dispute the point."

"That's bad. It will convince some of the civilized towns, too. I doubt that Fabr-Suithe really believes this is a jihad—they've thrown their religion overboard—but it makes wonderful propaganda,"

"You're right there. Only a few of the civilized towns, the ones that have been helping us from the beginning, are putting up a stiff fight. Almost everyone else, on both sides, is sitting it out wilting for us to cut each other's throats. Our own handicap is that we lack mobility. If we could persuade all the civilized towns to come in on our side, we wouldn't need it, but so many of them are scared."

"The enemy lacks mobility, too, until the bindlestiff town is ready to take a direct hand,"

Amalfi said thoughtfully. "Have you seen any signs that the tramps are in on the fighting?"

"Not yet. But they won't wait much longer. And we don't even know where they afe!"



"They'll be forced to locate themselves for us today or tomorrow, of that I'm certain. Right now it's time to muster all the rehabilitated women you have and get ready to plant them; as far as I can see, that whole scheme is going to pay off. As soon as I get a fix on the bindlestiff, I'll report the location of the nearest bandit town, and you can follow through from there."

Hazleton's eyes, very weary until now, began to glitter with gratification. "And how about Moving Day?" he said. "I suppose you know that not one of your stress-fluid plugs is going to hold with the work thus incomplete."

"I know it," Amalfi said. "I'm counting on it. We'll spin on the hour. If the plugs spring high, wide, and tall, I won't weep; as a matter of fact, I don't know how else we could hope to get rid of all that heat."

The radar watch blipped sharply, and both men turned to look at the screen. There was a fountain of green dots on it. Hazleton took three quick steps and turned the switch which projected the new butterfly grid onto the screen.

"Well, where are they?" Amalfi demanded. "That's got to be them."

"Right smack hi the middle of the southwestern continent, in that vine jungle where the little chigger snakes nest—the ones that burrow under your fingernails. There's supposed to be a lake of boiling mud on that spot."

"There probably is. They could be under it, surrounded by a medium-light screen."

"All right, then we've got them placed. But what's this fountain effect the radar's giving us? What are the 'stiffs shooting up?"

"Mines, I suspect," Amalfi said. "On proximity fuses. Orbital."

"Mines? Isn't that dandy," Hazleton said. "They'll leave an escape lane for themselves, of course, but we'll never be able to find it. They've got us under a plutonium umbrella, Amalfi."

"We'll get out. And in the meantime, the cops can't land, either. Go plant your women, Mark. And—put some clothes on 'em first. They'll cause more of a stir that way."

"You bet they will," the city manager said feelingly. He stepped into the lift shaft and fell out of sight.

Amalfi went out onto the observation platform of the control tower. From there he could see all the rest of the city, including most of the perimeter, for the tower—it was still called, now and then, the Empire State Building— was the tallest structure in the city.

There was plenty of battle noise rattling the garish tropical sunset along most of the northwest qukdrant, and even an occasional tiny toppling figure. The city had adopted the local dodge of clearing and gelling the mud at its rim, and had returned the gel to the morass state at the .first sign of attack, but the jungle men had broad skis, of some metal no Hevian could have machined so precisely, on which they slid over the muck. Discs of red fire marked bursting TDX shells, scything the air like death's own winnows. No gas was in evidence, but Amalfi knew that there would be gas before long with the bindlestiff directing the fighting.

The city's retaliatory fire was largely invisible, since it emerged below the top of the perimeter. There was 'a Bethe fender out, which would keep the run from being scaled until one of the projectors was knocked out, and plenty of heavy rifles were being kept hot. But the city had never been designed for warfare, and many of its most efficient destroyers had their noses buried in the mud, since their intended function was only to clear a landing area. Using an out-and-out Bethe blaster was impossible where there was an adjacent planetary mass—fortunately, since the bindlestiff had such a blaster and Amalfi's city did not.

Amalfi sniffed the scarlet edges of the struggle apprais-ingly. The screen set up beside him did not show an

intelligible battle pattern yet, but it seemed to be almost on the verge of making sense.

Under Amalfi's fingers on the platform railing were three buttons which he had had placed there four hundred years ago, duplicating a set on the balcony of iCity Hall. They had set in motion different actions at different times. But each time they had represented choices of actions which he would have to make when the pinch came. He had never found any reason to have a fourth button installed on either railing.

Rockets shrilled overhead. Bombs fell from them, crepitating bursts of noise and smoke and flying metal. Amalfi did not look up. The very mild spindizzy screen would fend off anything moving that rapidly. Only slow-moving objects, like men, could sidle through a polarized gravitic field. He looked out toward the horizon, touching the three buttons very delicately.

Suddenly the sunset snuffed itself out. Amalfi, who had never seen a tropical sunset before coming to He, felt a vague alarm, but as far as he could tell, the abrupt darkness was natural, though startling. The fighting went on, the flying discs of TDX explosions much more lurid now against the blackness.

After a while there was a dogfight far aloft, identifiable mostly by the exhaust traceries of rockets and missiles. Evidently Miramon's air force was tangling with Fabr-Suithe's. The jungle jammered derision and fury at Amalfi's city without any letup.

Amalfi stood, watching the screen so intently as to cut the rest of the world almost completely out of his consciousness. Understanding the emerging pattern was hard work, for he had never tried to grasp a situation at such close quarters before, and the blue-coded trajectory of every shell, sketched across the screen in glowing segments of ellipses, tried to capture his exclusive attention, as if they were all planets.

About an hour past midnight, at the height of the heaviest air raid yet, he felt a touch at his elbow.

"Boss——"

Amalfi heard the word as though it had been uttered at the bottom of the Rift. The still-ascending fountain of space mines the bindlestiff was throwing up had just come into the margin of the screen—meaning that O'Brian, the proxy chief, had just located the

'stiff with one of his flying robot bystanders—and Amalfi was trying to extrap-olate the shape of the top of the fountain. Somewhere up there in the aeropause, the fountain flattened into a shell of orbits encompassing the whole of He, and it was important to know how high up that shell began.

But the utter exhaustion of the voice touched something deeper. He said, "Yes, Mark."

"It's done. We lost almost everybody in the party. But we planted the women in a clearing right where a 'stiff outpost could see them.... What a riot that caused." A ghost of animation stirred in the voice for a moment. "You should have been there."

"I'm almost there now. Just getting the picture from a proxy. Good work, Mark.... Better ...



get some rest." "Now? But boss———"-

Something very heavy described a searing parabola across the screen, and then the whole city turned to a scramble of magnesium-white and ink. As the light of the star-shell faded, the screen showed a formless dim-yellow spreading and crawling, as if someone had spilled paint in the innards of the machine. Amalfi had been waiting for it. '

"Gas alarm, Mark," he heard himself saying. "Sure to be Hawkesite. Barium suits for everybody—that stuff's pure death-by-torture."

"Yes, right. Boss, have you been up here all this time? You'll kill yourself running things this way. You need rest more than I do."

Amalfi found that he did not have time to answer. O'Brian's proxy had come upon the town where Hazleton had dropped the women. There was certainly a riot there. Amalfi snapped a switch, backing the point of view off to another proxy which was hovering a mile up, scanning the whole battle area. From here he could see the black tendrils of movement which were files of soldiers moving through the jungle. Some which had been approaching Amalfi's city were now turning back. Furthermore, new tendrils were being put out from Hevian towns which up to now had taken no part in the fighting—the on-the-fence towns. Evidently they were no longer on the fence, but which side they had jumped to still remained to be seen.

He snapped the switch again, bringing back a close look at the lake of boiling mud which lay at the base of the mine fountain. Something new was going on there, too: the hot mud was flowing slowly, thickly, away from the

center of the lake. Then there was a clear area in the center, as if the lake had suddenly developed a vortex. The clear area widened.

The bindlestiff city was rising to the surface. It came cautiously; half an |hpur went by before its periphery touched the lake shore. Then black tendrils stretched out into the tangled desolation of the jungle; the bindlestiff was at last risking its own men in the struggle. What they were after was plain enough, for the flies were all moving in the direction of the town where Hazleton had dropped the women.

The bindlestiff city itself sat and waited. Even against the mass-pressure of the planet of He, Amalfi's sense of spatial orientation could pick up the unmistakable, slightly nauseating sensation of spindizzy field under medium drive, doming the seething mud.

Dawn was coming now. The riot around the town where the women had been dropped dwindled a little. Then one of the task forces from the bindlestiff reached it, and it flared all over again, worse than ever. The 'stiffs were fighting their own allies.

Abruptly there was no Hevian town in the center of the riot at all. There was only a mushrooming pillar of radioactive gas which made the screen race with interference patterns. The 'stiffs h::<i bombed the town. What was left of the riot retreated b'owly toward the lake of boiling mud; the 'stiffs had their women and were fighting a rear-guard action. The news, Amalfl knew, would travel fast.

Amalfi's own city was shrouded in sick orange mist, lit with flashes of no-color. The blistering gas could not pass the spindizzy screen in a body, but it diffused through, molecule by heavy molecule. The mayor realized suddenly that he had not heeded his own gas warning, and that there was probably some harm coming to him. He started and moved slightly, and discovered that he was completely encased. What...



Barium paste. Evidently Hazleton had known that Amalfi could not leave the platform, and instead had plastered him with the paste in default of trying to get a suit on him. Even his eyes were covered with a transparent visor, and a feeling of distension in his nostrils bespoke a Kolman barium filter.

So much for the gas. The heavy tensions in and around

the bindlestiff city continued to gather; they would soon be unbearable. Above, just outside the shell of circling mines, the first few police cruisers were sidling down with great caution. The war in the jungle had already fallen apart into meaninglessness. The abduction of the women by the tramps had collapsed all Hevian rivalries. Bandits and civilized towns alike were bent now upon nothing but the destruction of Fabr-Suithe and its allies. Fabr-Suithe could hold them off for a long time, but it was clearly time for the bindlestiff to leave—time for it to make off with its pleased and wondering Hevian women, its anti-agathics, its germanium, and whatever else it had managed to garner—tune for it to lose itself again hi the Rift before the Earth police could invest the planet of He.

The gravitic field "around the bindlestiff city knotted suddenly, painfully, in Amalfi's brain, and began to rise away from the lake of boiling mud. The 'stiff was taking off. In a moment it would be gone through the rent in the mine umbrella which only the tramps could see.

Amalfi pressed thetiutton—the only one, this time, that had been connected to anything.

Moving Day began.

Moving Day began with six pillars of glaring white, forty miles in diameter, which burst through the soft soil at each compass point of He. Fabr-Suithe had sat directly over the site of one of them. The bandit town was nothing but a flake of ash in a split second, a curled black flake borne aloft on the top of a white-hot piston.

The pillars lunged, roaring, into the heavens, fifty, a hundred, two hundred miles, and burst at their tops like popcorn. The Hevian sky burned thermite-blue with steel meteors.

Outside, the space mines, cut off from the world of which they had been satellites by the greatest spindizzy field in history, fled away into the Rift.

And when the meteors had burned away, the sun was growing.

The world of He was on spindizzy drive, its magnetic moment transformed into momentum. It was the biggest Okie "city" that had ever flown. There was no time to feel alarm. The sun flashed by and was dwindling to a point before the fact could be grasped.

Then it was gone. The far wall of the Rift began to swell and separate into individual points of light.

The planet of He was crossing the Rift.

Appalled, AmalfT fought to understand the scale of speed. He failed. The planet of He was moving, that was all he could comprehend. It was moving at a proper cruising speed for al"eity" of its size—a speed that gulped down light years as if they were gnats. Even to think of controlling such a flight was ridiculous.

Stars began to wink past He like fireflies. They had reached the other side of the Rift. The planet began to curve gradually away from the main cloud. Then the stars were all behind.

The surface of the saucer that was the galaxy began to come into view.



"Boss! We're going out of the galaxy! Look——"

"I know it. Get me a fix on He's old sun as soon as we're high enough above the Rift to see it again. After that it'll be too late."

Hazleton worked feverishly. It took him only half an hour, but during that time, the massed stars receded far enough to make plain the gray scar of the Rift as a long shadow on a spangled ground. At the end the Hevian sun was only a tenth-magnitude point in it.

"Got it, I think. But we can't swing the planet back. It'll take us thousands of years to cross to the next galaxy. We'll have to abandon He, boss, or we're sunk."

"All right. Get us aloft. Full drive."

"Our contract———"

"Fulfilled—take my word for it now. Spin!"

The city sprang aloft. The planet of He did not dwindle in the city's sky. It simply vanished, snuffed out in the intergalactic gap. Miramon, if he lived, would be the first of a totally new race of pioneers.

Amalfi moved then, back towards the controls, the barium casing cracking and falling off him as he came back to life. The air of the city still stank of Hawkesite, but the concentration of the gas already had been taken down below the harmful level by the city's purifiers. The mayor began to edge the city away from the vector of He's flight and the city's own, back toward the home lens.

Hazleton stirred restlessly.

"Your conscience bothering you, Mark?"

"Maybe," Hazleton said. "Is there some escape clause in our contract with Miramon that lets us desert him like

this? If there is, I missed it, and I read the fine print pretty closely."

"No, there's no escape clause," Amalfi said abstractedly, shifting the space stick by a millimeter or two. "The Hevians won't be hurt. The spindizzy screen will protect them from loss of heat and atmosphere—their volcanoes will keep them warmer than they'll probably like, and their technology is up to producing all the light they'll need. But they won't be able to keep the planet well enough lit to satisfy the jungle. That will die. By the time Miramon and his friends reach the star that suits them in the Andromed-an galaxy, they'll understand the spindizzy well enough to put their planet back into, the proper orbit. Or maybe they'll like roaming better by that time, and will decide to be an Okie planet. Either way, we licked the jungle for them, just as we promised to do, fair and square."

"We didn't get paid," the city manager pointed out. "And it'll take a lot of fuel to get back to any part of our own galaxy. The bindlestiff got off ahead of us, and got carried way out of raSge of the cops in the process, right on our backs—with plenty of germanium, drugs, women, the no-fuel drive, everything."

"No, they didn't," Amalfi said. "They blew up the moment we moved He."

"All right," Hazleton said resignedly. "You could detect that where I couldn't, so I'll take your word for it. But you'd better be able to explain it!"

"It's not hard to explain. The 'stiffs had captured Doctor Beetle. I was pretty sure they had; after all, they came to He for no other reason. They needed the no-fuel drive, and they knew Doctor Beetle had it because they heard the agronomists' SOS, just as we did. So they snatched Doctor Beetle when he was landed—do you remember what a big fuss their bandit-city allies made about the other agronomist lifeship, to divert us? It worked, too—and in the meantime they cooked the secret out of him. Probably in his own tank."

"So?"

"So," Amalfi said, "the tramps forgot that any Okie city always has passengers like Doctor Beetle—people with big ideas only partially worked out, ideas that need the finishing touches that can only be provided by some other culture. After all, a man doesn't take passage on an Okie city unless he's a third-rater, hoping to make his everlasting fortune on some planet where the inhabitants know much less than he dribs."

Hazleton scratched his head ruefully. "That's right. We had the same experience with the Lyran invisibility machine. It never wotked until we took Doc Schloss on board."

"Exactly. The 'stiffs were in too much of a hurry. They didn't carry their stolen no-fuel drive with them until they found some culture which could perfect it. They tried to use it right away. They were lazy. And they tried to use it inside the biggest spindizzy field ever generated. What happened? It blew up. I felt it happen—and the top of my head nearly came off then and there. If we hadn't left the 'stiffs parsecs behind in the first split second.

Doctor Beetle's drive would have blown up He at the same time. It doesn't pay to be lazy, Mark."

"Who ever said it did?" Hazleton said. After a moment's more thought, he began to plot the point at which the city would probably re-enter its own galaxy. That point turned out to be a long way away from the Rift, in an area that, after a mental wrench to visualize it backwards from the usual orientation, promised a fair population.

"Look," he said, "we'll hit about where the last few waves of the Acolytes settled—remember the Night of Hadjjii?"

Amalfi didn't, since he hadn't been born then, but he remembered the history, which was what the city manager had meant. He said, "Good. I want to take us to garage and get that Twenty-third Street machine settled for good and all. I'm tired of its blowing out in the pinches, and it's going sour for fair now. Hear it?"

Hazleton, cocked his head intently. In the lull, Amalfi saw suddenly that Dee was standing in the doorway, still completely enswathed in her anti-gas suit except for the faceplate.

"Is it over?" she said.

"Well, our stay on He is over. We're still on the run, if that's what you mean. The cops never give up, Dee; you'll learn that sooner or later."

"Where are we going?"

She asked the question in the same tone in which she had once said, "What is a volt, John?" For an astonishing moment Amalfi was almost overwhelmed with an urge to send Hazleton from the room on some excuse, to return almost bodily to those days of her innocence, to relive all the previous questions that she had asked—the moments when he had known the answers better.

There was, of course, no real answer to this one. Where would an Okie go? They were going, that was all. If there was a destination, no one could know what it was.

He endured the surge of emotion stoically. In the end, he only shrugged.

"By the way," he said, "what's the operational day?" Hazleton looked at the clock. "M plus eleven twenty-five."

With a sidelong glance, Apialfi leaned forward, resumed the helmet he had cast aside on He, and turned on the City Fathers.

The helmet phones shrilled with alarm. "All right, all right," he growled. "What is it?"

"MAYOR AMALFI, HAVE YOU TIPPED THIS PLANET?"

"No," Amalfi said. ®We sent it on its way as it was." There was,a short silence, humming with computation. It was probably just as well, Amalfi thought, that the machines had been turned off for a while; they had not had a rest in many centuries. They would probably emerge into consciousness a little saner for it.

"VERY WELL. WE MUST NOW SELECT THE POINT AT WHICH WE LEAVE THE

RIFT. STAND BY FOR DETERMINATION."

Hazleton and Amalfi grinned at each other. Amalfi said, "We're coming in on the last Acolyte stars, and we'll need to decelerate far beyond spindizzy safety limits. We urgently need an overhaul on the Twenty-third Street driver. Give us a determination for the present social setup there, please——"

"YOU ARE MISTAKEN. THAT CLUSTER IS NOWHERE NEAR THE RIFT.

FURTHERMORE, THE POPULACE THERE HAS A LONG RECORD OF MASS

XENOPHOBIA AND HAD BEST BE AVOIDED. WE WILL GIVE YOU A

DETERMINATION FOR THE FAR RIFT WALL. STAND BY." Amalfi removed the headset gently. "The Rift wall," he said, moving the microphone away from his mouth.

"That was long ago—and far away."

1

CHAPTER FIVS: Murphy

A SPINDIZZY going sour makes the galaxy's most unnerving noise. The top range of the sound is inaudible, but it feels like a multiple toothache. Just below that, there is a screech like metal tearing, which blends smoothly into a composite cataract of plate glass, slate, and boulders; this is the middle register. After that, there is a painful gap in the sound's spectrum, and the rest of the noise comes into one's ears again with a hollow round dinosaurian sob and plummets on down into the subsonics, ending in frequencies which induce diarrhea and an almost unconquerable urge to bite one's thumbs.

The noise was coming, of course, from the Twenty-third Street spindizzy, but it permeated the whole city. It was tolerable only so long as the hold which contained the moribund driver was kept sealed. Amalfl knew better than to open that hold. He surveyed the souring machine via instruments, and kept the audio tap prudently closed. The sound fraction which was thrumming through the city's walls was bad enough, even as far up as the control chamber.

Hazleton's hand came over his left shoulder, stabbing a long finger at the recording thermocouple.

"She's beginning to smoke now. Damned if I know how she's lasted this long. The model was two hundred years old when we took it aboard—and the repair job I did on He was only an emergency rig."



"What can we do?" Amalfi said. He did not bother to look around; the city manager's moods were his own second nature. They had lived together a long time—long enough to learn what learning is, long enough to know that, just as habit is second nature, so nature—the seven steps from chance to meaning—is first habit. The hand which rested upon Amalfi's right shoulder told him all he needed to know about Hazleton at this moment. "We can't shut her down."

"If we don't, she'll blow for good and all. That hold's hot already."

"Hot and howling. .. . Let me think a minute."

Hazleton waited. After another moment, Amalfi said, "We'll keep her shoving. If the City Fathers can push this much juice through her, maybe they can push just a little more.

Maybe enough to get us down to a reasonable cruising speed. Besides—we couldn't jury-rig that spindizzy again. It's radiating all up and down the line. The City Fathers could shut her down if we ordered it, but it'd take human beings to repair her and re-tune the setup stages. And it's too late for that."

"It'll be a year before anything alive can go into that hold," Hazleton agreed gloomily. "All right. How's our velocity now?"

"Negligible, with reference to the galaxy as a whole. But as far as the Acolyte stars proper are concerned— we'd shoot through the whole cluster at about eight times the city's top speed if we stopped decelerating now. It's going to be damned tight, that's for sure, Mark."

"Excuse me," Dee's voice said behind them. She was hesitating just beyond the threshold of the lift shaft. "Is there something wrong? If you're busy——"

"No busier than usual," Hazleton said. "Just wondering about our usual baby."

"The Twenty-third Street machine. I could tell by the curvature of your spines. Why don't you have it replaced and get it over with?"

Amalfi and the city manager grinned at each other, but the mayor's grin was short-lived.

"Well, why not?" he said suddenly.

"My gods, boss, the cost," Hazleton said with incredulity. "The City Fathers would impeach you for suggesting it." He donned the helmet. "Treasury check," he told the microphone.

"They've never had to run her all by themselves under max overdrive before now. I predict that they'll emerge from the experience clamoring to have her replaced, even if we don't eat for a year to pay for it. Besides, we should have the money, for once. We dug a lot of germanium while we were setting up He to be de-wobbled. Maybe the time really has come when we can afford a replacement."

Dee came forward swiftly, motes of light on the move

in her eyes. "John, can that be true?" she said. "I thought we'd lost a lot on the Hevian contract."

"Well, we're not rich. We would have been, I'm still convinced, if we'd been able to harvest the anti-agathics on a decent scale." | ,-'

"But we didn't," D£e said. "We had to run away."

"We ran away. But in terms of germanium alone, we can call ourselves well off. Well enough off to buy a new spindizzy. Right, Mark?"

Hazleton listened to the City Fathers a moment more, and then took off the bone-mikes.



"It looks that way," he said. "Anyhow, we can easily cover the price of an overhaul, or maybe even of a reconditioned second-hand machine of a later model. Depends on whether or not the Acolyte stars have a service planet, and what the garage fees are there."

"The fees should be low enough to keep us solvent," Amalfi said, thrusting his lower lip out thoughtfully. "The Acolyte area is a backwater, but it was settled originally by refugees from an anti-Earth pogrom in the Malar system—an aftermath of the collapse of Vega, as I recall. There's a record of the pogrom in the libraries of most planets—you reminded me of it, Mark: the Night of Hadjjii—which means that the Acolytes aren't far enough away from normal trading areas to be proper frontier stars."

He paused, and his frown deepened. "Now that I come to think of it, the Acolytes were an important minor source of power metals for part of this limb of the galaxy at one time.

They'll have at least one garage planet, Mark, depend on it. They may even have work for the city to do."

"Sounds good," Hazleton said. "Too good, maybe. Actually, we've got to sit down in the Acolytes, boss, because that Twenty-third Street machine won't carry us beyond them at anything above a snail's pace. I asked the City Fathers that while I was checking the treasury. This is the end of the line for that gadget."

He sounded tired. Amalfi looked at him.

"That's not what's worrying you, Mark," he said. "We've always had that problem waiting for us somewhere in the future, and it isn't one that's difficult of solution. What's the real trouble? Cops, maybe?"

"All right, it's cops," Hazleton said, a little sullenly. "I know we're a long way away from any cops that know us by name. But have you any idea of the total amount of unpaid fines we're carrying? And I don't see how we can assume that any amount of distance is 'too great' for the cops to follow us if they really want us—and it seems that they do."

"Why, Mark?" Dee said. "After all, we've done nothing serious."

"It piles up," Hazleton said. "We haven't been called on our Violations docket in a long time. When we're finally caught, we'll have to pay in full, and if that were to happen now, we'd be bankrupt."

"Pooh," Dee said. Like anyone more or less recently naturalized, her belief in the capacities of her adopted city-state was as finite as it was unbounded. "We could find work and build up a new treasury. It might be hard going for a while, but we'd survive it.

People have been broke before, and come through it whole."

"People, yes; cities, no," Amalfi said. "Mark is right on that point, Dee. According to the law, a bankrupt city must be dispersed. It's essentially a humane law, in that it prevents desperate mayors and city managers from taking bankrupt cities out again on long job-hunting trips, during which half of the Okies on board will die just because of the stubbornness of the people in charge."

"Exactly," Hazleton said.

"Even so, I think it's a bogey," Amalfi said gently. "I'll grant you your facts, Mark, but not your extrapolation. The cops can't possibly follow us from He's old star to here. We didn't know ourselves that we'd wind up among the Acolytes. I doubt that the cops were even able to plot He's course, let alone our subsequent one. Isn't that so?"

"Of course. But——"

"And if the Earth cops alerted every local police force in the galaxy to every petty offender," Amalfi continued with quiet implacability, "no local police force would ever be able to do any policing. They'd be too busy, recording and filing and checking new alerts coming in constantly from a million inhabited planets. Their own local criminals would mostly go free, to become a burden upon the filing systems of every other inhabited area.

"So, believe me, Mark, the cops around here have never even heard of us. We're approaching a normal situation, that's all. The Acolyte cops haven't the slightest reason to

treat us as anything,,but just another wandering, law abiding Okie city—and after all, that's really all we are."

"Good," Hazleton said, his chest collapsing to expel a heavy sigh. , ••

Amalft heard neitnW the word nor the sigh.

At the same instant, the big master screen, which had been showing the swelling, granulating mass of the Acolyte star cluster, flashed blinding scarlet over its whole surface, and the scrannel shriek of a police whistle made the air in the control room seethe.

The cops swaggered and stomped on board the Okie city, and into Amalfi's main office in City Hall, as if the nothingness of the marches of the galaxy were their personal property.

Their uniforms were not the customary dress coveralls—actually, space-suit liners—of the Earth police, however. Instead, they were flashy black affairs, trimmed with silver braid, Sam Browne belt, and shiny boots. The blue-jowled thugs who had been jammed into these tight-fitting creations reminded Amalfi of a period which considerably antedated the Night of Jadjjii—or any other event in the history of space flight.

And the thugs carried meson pistols. These heavy, cumbersome weapons could be held in one hand, but two hands were needed to fire them. They were very modern side arms to find in a border star cluster. They were only about a century out of date. This made them thoroughly up-to-date as far as the city's own armament was concerned.

The pistols told Amalfi several other things that he needed to know. Their existence here could mean only one thing: that the Acolytes had had a recent contact with one of those pollinating bees of the galaxy, an Okie city. Furthermore, the probability was not high that it had been the sole Okie contact the Acolytes had had for a long time, as Amalfi might otherwise have assumed.

It took years to build up the technology to mass produce meson pistols so that ordinary cops could pack them. It took more years still, years spent in fairly frequent contact with other technologies, to make adoption of the pistol possible at all. The pistol, then, confirmed unusually frequent contact with other Okies, which, in turn, meant that there was a garage planet here, as Amalfi had hoped.

The pistol also told Amalfi something else, which he did

not much like. The meson pistol was not a good antipersonnel weapon.

It was much more suitable for demolition work.

The cops could still swagger in Amalfi's office, but they could not stomp effectively. The floor was too thickly carpeted. Amalfi never used the ancient, plushy office, with its big black mahogany desk and other antiques, except for official occasions. The control tower was his normal on-duty habitat, but that was closed to non-citizens.

"What's your business?" the police lieutenant barked at Hazleton. Hazleton, standing beside the desk, said nothing, but merely jerked his head toward where Amalfi was seated, and resumed looking at the big screen back of the desk.

"Are you the mayor of this burg?" the lieutenant demanded.

"I am," Amalfi said, removing a cigar from his mouth and looking the lieutenant over with lidless eyes. He decided that he did notejike the lieutenant. His rump was too big. If a man is going to be barrel-shaped, he ought to do a good job of it, as Amalfi had. Amalfi had no use for top-shaped men.

"All right, answer the question, Fatty. What's your business?"

"Petroleum geology."

"You're lying. You're not dealing with some isolated, type Four-Q podunk now, Okie.

These are the Acolyte stars."

Hazleton looked with pointedly vague puzzlement at the lieutenant, and then back to the screen, which showed no stars at all within any reasonable distance.

The by-play was lost on the cop. "Petroleum geology isn't a business with Okies," he said. "You'd all starve if you didn't know how to mine and crack oil for food. Now give me a straight answer before I decide you're a vagrant and get tough."

Amalfi said evenly, "Our business is petroleum geology. Naturally we've developed some side lines since we've been aloft, but they're mostly natural outgrowths of petroleum geology—on which subject we happen to be experts. We trace and develop petroleum sources for planets which need the material." He eyed the cigar judiciously and thrust it back between his teeth. "Incidentally, Lieutenant, ITj

you're wasting your breath threatening us with a vagrancy charge. You know as well as we do that vagrancy laws are specifically forbidden by article one of the Constitution."

"Consitution?" the cop laughed. "If you mean the Earth Constitution, we do^'ti'Tiave much contact with Earth out here. These are thef Acolyte stars, see? Next question: have you any money?"

"Enough."

"How much is enough?"

"If you want to know whether or not we have operating capital, our City Fathers will give you the statutory yes or no answer if you can give them the data on your system that they'll need to make the calculation. The answer will almost assuredly be yes. We're not required to report our profit pool to you, of course."

"Now look," the lieutenant said. "You don't need to play the space lawyer with me. All I want to do is get off this town. If you've got dough, I can clear you—that is, if you got it through legal channels."

"We got it on a planet called He, some distance from here. We were hired by the Hevians to rub out a jungle which was bothering them. We did it by regularizing their axis."

"Yeah?" the cop said. "Regularized their axis, eh? I guess that must have been some job."



"It was," Amalfi said gravely. "We had to setacetus on He's left-hand frannistan."

"Gee. Will your City Fathers show me the contract? Okay, then. Where are you going?"

"To garage; we've a bum spindizzy. After that, out again. You people look like you're well past the stage where you've much use for oil."

"Yeah, we're pretty modernized here, not like some of these border areas you hear about. These are the Acolyte stars." Suddenly it seemed to occur to him that he had somehow lost ground; his voice turned brusque again. "So maybe you're all right, Okie.

I'll give you a pass through. Just be sure you go where you say you're going, and don't make stopovers, understand? If you watch your step, maybe I can lend you a hand here and there."

Amalfi said, "That's very good of you, Lieutenant. We'll try not to have to bother you, but just in case we do have to call on you, who shall we ask for?"

"Lieutenant Lerner, Forty-fifth Border Security Group."

"Good. Oh, before you go, I collect medal ribbons— every man to his hobby, you know.

And that royal violet one of yours is quite unusual—I speak as a connoisseur. Would you consent to sell it? It wouldn't be like giving up the medal itself—I'm sure your corps would issue you another ribbon."

"I don't know," Lieutenant Lerner said doubtfully. "It's against regs——"

"I realize that, and naturally I'd expect to cover any possible fine you might incur. (Mark, would you call down for a check for five hundred Oc dollars?) No sum I could offer you would really b&"'sufficient to pay for a medal for which you risked your life, but five hundred Oc is all our City Fathers will allow me for hobbies this month. Could you do me the favor of accepting it?"

"Yeah, I guess so," the lieutenant said. He detached the bar of faded, dismal purple from over his pocket with clumsy eagerness afcd put it on the desk. A second later, Hazleton silently handed him the check, which he pocketed without seeming to notice it at all.

"Well, be sure you keep a straight course, Okie. C'mon, you guys, let's get back to the.

boat."

The three thugs eased themselves tentatively into the lift shaft and slithered down out of sight through the friction-field wearing expressions of sternly repressed alarm. Amalfi grinned. Quite obviously the principle of molar valence, and frictionators and other gadgets using the principle, were still generally unknown.

Hazleton walked over to the shaft and peered down. Then he said, "Boss, that damn thing is a good-conduct ribbon. The Earth cops issued them by the tens of thousands about three centuries ago to any rookie who could get up out of bed when the whistle blew three days running. Since when is it worth five hundred Oc?"

"Never, until now," Amalfi said tranquilly. "But the lieutenant wanted to be bribed, and it's always wise to appear to be buying something when you're bribing someone. I put the price so high because he'll have to split it with his men. If I hadn't offered the bribe, I'm sure he'd have wanted to look at our Violations docket."

"I figured that; and ours is none too clean, as I've been pointing out. But I think you wasted the money, Amalfi.

The Violations docket should have been the first thing he asked to see, not the^last.

Since he didn't ask for it at the beginning, he wasn't interested in it."



"That's probably exactly so," Amalfi admitted. He put the cigar back and pulled on it thoughtfully. "All right, Mark, what's the pitch? Suppose you tell me."

"I don't know yet. I can't square the maintenance of an alert guard, so many parsecs out from the actual Acolyte area, with that slob's obvious indifference to whether or not we might be on the shady side of the law—or even be bindlestiff. Hell, he didn't even ask who we were."

"That rules out the possibility that the Acolytes have been alerted against some one bindlestiff city."

"It does," Hazleton agreed. "Lerner was far too easily bribed, for that matter. Patrols that are really looking for something specific don't bribe, even in a fairly corrupt culture. It doesn't figure."

"And somehow," Amalfi said, pushing a toggle to off, "I don't think the City Fathers are going to be a bit of help. I had the whole conversation up to now piped down to them, but all I'm going to get out of them is a bawling out for spending money, and a catechism about my supposed hobby. They never have been able to make anything out of voice tone. Damn! We're missing something important, Mark, something that would be obvious once it hit us. Something absolutely crucial. And here we are plunging on toward the Acolytes without the faintest idea of what it is!"

"Boss," Hazleton said.

The cold flatness of his voice brought Amalfi swiveling around in his chair in a hurry. The city manager was looking up again at the big screen, on which the Acolyte stars had now clearly separated into individual points. "What is it, Mark?"

"Look there—in the mostly dark area on the far side of the cluster. Do you see it?"

"I see quite a lot of star-free space there, yes." Amalfi looked closer. "There's also a spectroscopic double, with a red dwarf standing out some distance from the other components——"

"You're warm. Now look at the red dwarf." There was also, Amalfi began to see, a faint smudge of green there, about as big as the far end of a pencil. The screen was keyed to show Okie cities in green, but no city

could possibly be that big. The green smudge covered an area that would blank out an average Sol-type solar system.

Amalfi felt his big square front teeth beginning to bite his cigar in two. He took the dead object out of his mouth.

"Cities," he muttered. He spat, but the bitterness in his mouth did not seem to be tobacco juice after all. "Not one city. Hundreds."

"Yes," Hazleton said. "There's your answer, boss, or part of it. It's a jungle."

"An Okie jungle."

Amalfi gave the jungle, a wide berth, but he had O'Brian send proxies as soon as the city was safely down below top speed. Had he released the missiles earlier, they would have been left behind and lost, for they were only slightly faster than the city itself. Now they showed a fantastic and gloomy picture.

The empty area^ where the hobo cities had settled was well out at the edge of the Acolyte cluster, on the side toward the rest of the galaxy. The nearest star to the area, as Hazleton had pointed out, was a triple. It consisted of two type Go stars and a red dwarf, almost a double for the Soy-Alpha Centauri system. But there was one difference: the two Go stars were quite close to each other, constituting a spectroscopic doublet, separable visually only by the Dinwiddie circuits even at this relatively short distance; while the red dwarf had swung out into the empty area, and was now more than four light years away from its companions.

Around this tiny and virtually heatless fire, more than three hundred Okie cities huddled.

On the screen they passed in an endless, boundaryless flood of green specks, like a river of fantastic asteroids, bobbing in space and passing and repassing each other in their orbits around the dwarf star. The concentration was heaviest near the central sun, which was so penurious of its slight radiation that it had been masked almost completely by the Dinwiddie code lights when Hazleton first spotted the jungle. But there were late comers in orbits as far out as three billion miles—spindizzy screens do not take kindly to being thrust into close contact with each other.

"It's frightening," Dee said, studying the screen intently.

"I knew there were other Okie cities, especially after we hit the bindlestiff. But"so many! I could hardly have imagined three hundred in the whole galaxy."

"A gross underestimate," Hazleton said indulgently. "There were about 4ignteen thousand cities at the last census, weren't there, boss?"

"Yes," Amalfl said. He was as unable to look away from the screen as Dee. "But I know what Dee means. It scares the hell out of me, Mark. Something must have caused an almost complete collapse of the economy around this part of the galaxy. No other force could create a jungle of that kind. These bastardly Acolytes evidently have been exploiting it to draw Okies here, in order to hire the few they need on a competitive basis."

"At the lowest possible wages, in other words," Hazleton said. "But what for?"

"There you have me. Possibly they're trying to industrialize the whole cluster, to make themselves self-sufficient before the depression or whatever it is hits them. About all we can be sure of at this juncture is that we'd better get out of here the moment the new spindizzy gets put in. There'll be no decent work here."

"I'm not sure I agree," Hazleton said, redeploying his lanky, apparently universal-jointed limbs over his chair. "If they're industrializing here, it could mean that the depression is here, not anywhere else. Possibly they've overproduced themselves into a money shortage, especially if their distribution setup is as creaking, elaborate, and unjust as it usually is in these backwaters. If they're using a badly deflated dollar, we'll be sitting pretty."

Amalfi considered it. It seemed to hold up.

"We'll have to wait and see," he said. "You could well be right. But one cluster, even at its most booming stage, could never have hoped to support three hundred cities. The waste of technology involved would be terrific—and you don't attract Okies to a money-short area, you draw them from one."

"Not necessarily. Suppose there's an oversupply outside? Remember back in the Nationalist Era on Earth, artists and such low-income people used to leave the big Hamil-tonian state, I've forgotten its name, to live in much smaller states where the currency was softer?"



"That was different. They had mixed coinage then——"

"Boys, may I break in on this bull session?" Dee said hesitantly, but with a trace of mockery in her voice. "It's getting a little over my head.

Suppose this whole end of this star-limb has had its economy wrecked. How, I'll leave to you two; on Utopia, our economy was frozen at a fixed rate of turnover, and had been for as long as any of us could remember; so maybe I can be forgiven for not understanding what you're talking about. But in any case, inflation or deflation, we can always leave when we have our new spindizzy."

Amalfi shook his head heavily. "That," he said, "is what scares me, Dee. There are a hell of a lot of Okies in that jungle, and they can't all be suffering from defects in their driving equipment. If there were someplace they could go where times are better, why haven't they gone there? Why do they congregate in a jungle in this Godforsaken star cluster, for all the universe as if there were no place else where they could find work? Okies aren't sedentary, or sociable, either."

Hazleton began drumming his fingers lightly on the arm Of his chair, and hi$ eyes closed slightly. "Money is energy," he said. "Still, I can't say that I like that any better. The more I look at it, the more I think this is one fix we won't get out of by any amount of cute tricks.

Maybe we should have stuck with He."

"Maybe."

Amalfi turned his attention back to the controls. Hazleton was subtle; but one consequence of his subtlety was that he intended to expend unnecessary amounts of time speculating about situations the facts of which would soon become evident in any case.

The city was now approaching the local garage world, which bore the unlikely name of Murphy, and maneuvering among the close-packed stars of the cluster was a job delicate enough to demand the mayor's own hand upon the space stick. The City Fathers, of course, could have' teetered the city through the conflicting gravitic fields to a safe landing on Murphy, but they would have taken a month at the job. Hazleton would have gone faster, but the City Fathers would have monitored his route all the way, and snatched control from him at the slightest transgression of the margins of error they had calculated. They were not equipped to respect short cuts.

Of course, they were also unequipped to appreciate the direct intuition of spatial distances and mass pressures

which made Amalfi a master pilot. But over Amalfi they had no authority, except the ultimate authority of the revocation of his office.

As Murphy grew on fhe screen, technicians began to file into the control rooib,

^activating with personal keys desks which had been disconnected for more than three centuries—ever since the last new spindizzy had been brought on board. Readying the city's drive machinery for new equipment was a major project. Every other spindizzy on board would have to be retuned to the new machine. In the present case, the job would be further complicated by the radioactivity of the defective unit. While the garage-men should have special equipment to cope with that problem—de-gaussing, for instance, was the usual first step—no garage would know the machinery involved as well as the Okies who used it. Every city is unique.



Murphy, as Amalfi saw it on his own screen, was a commonplace enough world. It was just slightly above the size of Mars, but pleasanter to live on, since it was closer to its primary by a good distance.

But it looked deserted. As the city came closer, Amalfi could see the twenty-mile pockmarks which were the graving docks typical of a garage; but every one of those perfectly regular, machinery-ringed craters in the planet's visible hemisphere turned out to be empty.

"That's bad," he heard Hazleton murmur. It was certainly unpromising. The planet turned slowly under his eyes.

Then a city slid up over the horizon. Hazleton's breath sucked sharply through his teeth.

Amalfi could also hear a soft stirring sound, and then footsteps—several of the technicians had come up behind him to peer over his shoulder.

"Posts!" he growled. The technicians scattered like leaves.

On the idle service world, the grounded city was star-tlingly huge. It thrust up from the ground like an invader— but a naked giant, fallen and defenseless, without its spindizzy screens. There was, of course, every good reason why the screens should not be up, but still, a city without them was a rare and disconcerting sight, like a flayed corpse in a tank.

There seemed to be some activity at its perimeter. Amalfi could not resist thinking of that activity as bacterial.

"Doesn't that answer the question Dee's way?" Hazleton suggested at last. "There's an outfit that has dough for repairs, so money from outside the Acolyte area must still be good. It's having the repairs made, so it can't be quite hopeless—it thinks it has someplace to go from here. And it's a cinch to be a smart outfit, well worth consulting. It's prevented the Acolytes from fleecing it—and some form of Acolyte swindle is the only remaining explanation for the existence of the jungle. We'd best get in touch with it before we land, boss, and find out what to expect."

"No," Amalfi said. "Stick to your post, Mark."

"Why? Surely it can't do any harm."

Amalfi didn't answer„, His own psi sense had already told him something that knocked Hazleton's argument into a cocked helmet, but that something showed on Hazleton's own instruments, if Hazleton cared to look. The city manager had allowed an extrapolation to carry him off. into Cloud-Cuckoo-Land.

Abruptly the board began to wink with directional signals. Automatic~%uides from the control tower on Murphy were waving the city to a readied dock. Amalfi shifted the space stick obediently, awaiting the orange blinker that would announce some living intelligence ready with an opinion as to the desirability of Okies on Murphy.

But neither opinion nor blinker had yet asked for his attention even when Amalfi had begun to float the city for its planting in the unpromising soil below. Evidently business was so poor on Murphy that the garage had lost most of its staff to more "going" projects.

In that case, no entities but the automatics in the tower would be on hand to supervise an unexpected landing.

With a shrug, Amalfi cut the City Fathers back in. There was no need for a human being to land a city as long as the landing presented no problem in policy. There were more than enough human uses for human beings; routine operations were the proper province of the City Fathers.

"First planetfall since He," Hazleton said. He seemed to be brightening a little. "It'll feel good to stretch our legs."

"No leg-stretching or any other kind of calisthenics," Amalfi said. "Not until we get more information. I haven't gotten a yeep out of this planet yet. For all we know, we may be restricted to our own premises by the local customs." .

il

"Wouldn't the towen-have said so?"

"No tower would be empowered to deliver a message like that to all comers. It might scare off an occasional legitimate customer. But' it could still be so, Mark; you should know that. Leti do some snooping first."

Amalfl picked up his mike. "Get me the perimeter sergeant ... Anderson? This is the mayor. Arm ten good men from the boarding squad, and meet the city manager and me at the Cathedral Parkway lookout. Station your men at the adjacent sally ports, well out of sight of the localities, if there are any such around. ... Yes, that'd be just as well,-too. ...

Right."

Hazleton said, "We're going out."

"Yes. And, Mark— this star cluster may well be the last stop that we'll ever make. Will you remember that?"

"I'll have no difficulty remembering it," Hazleton said, looking directly at Amalfi with eyes as gray as ice, "seeing that it's exactly what I told you four days ago. I have my own notions of the proper way to cope with the possibility, and they probably won't jibe with yours. Four days ago you were explaining to me that I was being excessively defeatist.

Now you've expropriated my conclusion because something has forced it on you—and I know you better than to expect you to tell me what that something is—and so now you're telling me to 'Remember Thor Five' again. You can't have it both ways, Amalfi."

For a second, the two men's glances remained locked, pupil with pupil.

"You two," Dee's voice said, "might just as well be married."

From the skywalk of the graving dock in which the city rested at last, a walk level with the main deck of the city, the world of Murphy presented to Amalfi the face of a desolate mechanical wilderness.

It was an elephant's graveyard of cranes, hoists, dollies, spur lines, donkey engines, cables, scaffolding, pallets, halftracks, camel-backs, chutes, conveyors, bins, tanks, hoppers, pipelines, waldoes, spindizzies, trompers, breeders, proxies, ehrenhafts, and half a hundred other devices of as many ages which might at some time be needed in servicing some city.

Much of the machinery was rusty, or fallen in upon itself, or whole on the surface but forever dead inside,

with a spurious wholeness that so simple an instrument as the dosimeter every man wore on his left wrist could reveal as submicroscopic scandal. Much of it, too, was still quite usable. But all of it had the look of machinery which no one really expected to use.

On the near horizon, the other city, the one Amalfi had seen from aloft, stood tall and straight. Tiny mechanisms puttered about it.

And far below the skywalk, on the cluttered surface of Murphy, in the shadow of the bulge of Amalfi's city, a tiny and merely human figure danced and gesticulated.

Amalfi led the way down the tight spiral of the metal staircase, Hazleton and JSergeant Anderson behind him. Their steps were muffled-in the thin air. He watched his own carefully; on a low-gravity world it was just as well to temper the use of one's muscles.

The fact that one fell slower on such worlds did not much lessen the thump at the end of the fall, and Amalfi had found long ago that, away from the unvarying one-G field of the city, his bull strength often betifeyed him even when he was being normally careful.

The dancing doll proved to be a short, curly-haired technie in a clean but mussed uniform. Possibly he had slept in it; at least it seemed clear that he had never done any work in it. He had a smooth, chubby face, dark of complexion, greasy and stippled with clogged pores. He glared at Amalfi truculently with eyes like beer-bottle ends.

"What the hell?" he said. "How'd you get here?"

"We swam, how else? When do we get some service?"

"I'll ask the questions, bum. And tell your sergeant to keep his hand off his gun. He makes me nervous, and when I'm nervous, there's no telling what I'll do. You're after repairs?"

"What else?"

"We're busy," the garageman said. "No charity here. Go back to your jungle."

"You're about as busy as a molecule at zero," Amalfi roared, thrusting his head forward.

The garageman's shiny, bulbous nose retreated, but not by much. "We need repairs, and we mean to have 'em. We've got money to pay, and Lieutenant Lerner of your own local cops sent us here to get 'em. If those two reasons won't suit you, I'll have my sergeant put his gun hand to some use—he could

probably draw and fire before you tripped over something in this junk yard." a

"Who the hell are you threatening? Don't you know you're in the Acolyte stars now?

We've broken up better— no, now wait a minufe,' sergeant, let's not be hasty. I've been dealing with bums until they're coming out of my ears. Maybe you're all right after all. You did say something about money—I heard you distinctly."

"You did," Amalfi said, remaining impassive with difficulty.

"Your City Fathers will vouch for it?"

"Sure. Hazleton—oh, hell, Anderson, what happened to the city manager?" *

"He took a branching catwalk farther up," the perimeter sergeant said. "Didn't say where he was going."

It didn't, after all, pay to be too cautious, Amalfi thought wryly. If his brains hadn't been concentrating so exclusively on his feet, he would have detected the fact that only one other pair of feet was with him as soon as Hazleton had begun to catfoot it away.

"He'll be back—I hope," Amalfi said. "Look, friend, what we need is repair work. We've got a bad spindizzy in a hot hold. Can you haul it out and give us a replacement, preferably the newest model you've got?"

The garageman considered it. The problem seemed to appeal to him; his whole expression changed, so thoroughly that he looked almost friendly in his intimate ugliness.

"I've got a Six-R-Six in storage that might do, if you've got the refluxlaminated pediments to mount it on," he said slowly. "If you haven't, I've also a reconditioned B-C-Seven-Seven-Y that hums as sweetly as new. But I've never done any hot hauling before—didn't know spindiz-zies ever hotted up enough to notice. Anybody on board your burg that can give me a hand on decontamination?"

"Yes, it's all set up and ready to ride. Check the color of our money, and let's get on it."

"It'll take a little time to get a crew together," the garageman said. "By the way, don't let your men wander around. The cops don't like it.",

"I'll do my best."

The garageman scampered away, dodging in and out among the idle, rust-tinted machines. Amalfi watched him go, marveling anew at how quickly the born technician can be gulled into forgetting who he's working for, let alone how his work is going to be used. First you mention money—since technics are usually underpaid; you then cap that with a tough and inherently interesting problem— and you have your man. Amalfi was always happy when he met a pragmatist in the enemy's camp.

"Boss——"

Amalfi spun. "Where the hell have you been? Didnt you hear me say that this planet is probably taboo to tourists? If you'd been on hand when you were needed, you'd have heard the 'probably' knocked out of that statement—to say nothing of speeding matters considerably!"

"I'm aware of that," Hazleton said evenly. "I took a calculated risk—something you seem to have forgotten how to do, Amalfi. And it paid off. I've been over to that other city, and found out something that we needed to know. Incidentally, the graving docks around here are a mess. This one, and the one the other city is in, must be the only ones in operation for hundreds of miles. All the rest are nearly full or sand and rust and flaked concrete."

"And the other city?" Amalfi said very quietly.

"It's been garnisheed; there's no doubt about it. It's shabby and deserted. Half of it is being held up by buttressing, and it's got huts pitched in the streets. It's nearly a hulk.

There's a crew over there putting it in some sort of operating order, but they're in no hurry, and they aren't doing a damn thing to make the city habitable—all they want it to do is run. It's not the city's own complement, obviously. Where they are, I'm afraid to think."

"There's considerable thinking you haven't done," Amalfi said. "The original crew is obviously in debtor's prison. The garage is putting the city in order for some kind of dirty job that they don't expect it to outlast—and that no city still free could be hired to do at any price."

"And what would that be?"

"Setting up a planethead on a gas giant," said Amalfi. "They want to work some low-density, ammonia-methane world with an ice core, a Jupiter-type planet, that they can't conquer any other way. It's my guess that they hope to use such a planethead as an inexhaustible source of poison gas."

"That's not your only guess," Hazleton said, his lips thinned. "I expect to be disciplined for wandering off,

Amalfi, but I'm a big boy, and won't have rationalizations palmed off on me just^o keep the myth of your omniscience going."



"I'm not omniscient," Amalfi said mildly. "I looked at the other city on the w|y,iin. And I looked at the instruments. You didn't. The instruments alone told me that almost nothing was going on in that city that was normal to Okie operation. They also told me that its spindizzies were being turned to produce a field which would burn them-out within a year, and they told me what that field was supposed to do—what kind of conditions it was supposed to resist.

"Spindizzy fields will bounce any fast-moving large aggregate of molecules. They won't much impede the passage of gases by osmosis. If you so drive a field as to exclude the smallest possible molecular exchange, even under a pressure of more than a million atmospheres, you destroy the machine. That set of conditions occurs only in one kind of situation, a situation no Okie would ever commit himself to for an instant: setting down on a gas giant. Obviously then, since the city was being readied for that kind of job, it had been garnisheed—it was now state property, and nobody cares about wasting state property."

"Once again," Hazleton said, "you might have told me that in time to prevent my taking my side jaunt. However, this time it's just as well you didn't, because I still haven't come to the main thing I discovered. Do you know the identity of that city?"

"No."

"Good for you for admitting it. I do. It's the city we heard about when it was in the building three centuries ago; the so-called all-purpose city. Even under all the junk and decay, the lines are there. These Acolytes are letting it rot where it makes a real difference, just to hot-rod it for one job only. We could take it away from them if we tried. I studied the plans when they were first published, and——"

He stopped. Amalfi turned toward where Hazleton was .looking. The garageman was coming back at a dead run. He had a meson pistol in one hand.

"I'm convinced," Amalfi said swiftly. "Can you get over there again without being observed? This looks to me like trouble."

"Yes, I can. There's a——"

"'Yes' is enough for now. Tune our City Fathers to theirs, and set up Standard Situation N

in both. Cue it to our 'spin' key—straight yes-no signal."

"Situation JV? Boss, that's a-——"

"I know what it is. I think we need it now. Our bum spindizzy prevents us from making any possible getaway without the combined knowledge of the two sets of City Fathers; we just aren't fast enough. Git, before it's too late."

The garageman was almost upon them, emitting screams of fury each time he hit the ground at the end of a leap, as if the sounds were jolted out of him by the impact. In the thin atmosphere of Murphy, the yells sounded like toots on a toy whistle.

Hazleton hesitated a moment more, then sprinted up the stairway. The garageman ducked around a trunnion and fired. The meson pistol howled at the sky and flew backwards out of his hand. Evidently he had never fired one before.

"Mayor Amalfi, shaS I———"

"Not yet, sergeant. Cover him, that's all. Hey, you! Walk over here. Nice and slow, with your hands locked behind your head. That's it. ... Now then: what were you firing at my city manager for?"



The dark-complected face was livid now. "You can't get away," he said thickly. "There's a dozen police squads on the way. They'll break you up for fair. It'll be fun to watch."

"Why?" Amalfi asked, in a reasonable one. "You shot at us first. We've done nothing wrong."

"Nothing but pass a bum check! Around here that's a crime worse than murder, brother.

I checked you with Lerner, and he's frothing at the mouth. You'd damn well better pray that some other squad gets to you before his does!"

"A bum check?" Amalfi said. "You're blowing. Our money's better than anything you're using around here, by the looks of you. It's germanium—solid germanium."

"Germanium?" the dockman repeated incredulously.

"That's what I said. It'd pay you to clean your ears more often."

The garageman's eyebrows continued to go higher and higher, and the corners of his mouth began to quiver. Two fat, oily tears ran down his cheeks. Since he still had his hands locked behind his head, he looked remarkably like a man about to throw a'fit.

Then his whole face split open.

"Germanium!" He howled. "Ho, haw, haw, haw! Germanium! What hole tin-*the plenum have you been living in, Okie? Germanium—haw, haw!" He emitted a weak gasp and took his hands down to wipe his eyes. "Haven't you any silver, or gold, or platinum, or tin, or iron? ®r something else that's worth something? Clear out, bum. You're broke. Take it from me as a friend, clear out; I'm giving you good advice."

•He seemed to have calmed down a little, Amalfi said. "What's wrong with germanium?"





"Nothing," the dockman said, looking at Amalfi over his incredible nose with a mixture of compassion and vindictiveness, "It's a good, useful metal. But it just isn't money any more, Okie. I don't see how you could have missed finding that out. Germanium is trash now—well, no, it's still worth something, but only what it's actually worth, if you get me.

You have to buy it; you can't buy other things with it.

"It's no good here as money. It's no good anywhere else, either. Anywhere else. The whole galaxy is broke. Dead broke.

"And so are you."

He wiped his eyes again. Overhead a siren groaned, softly but urgently.

Hazleton was ready, and had sighted the incoming cops.

Amalfi found it impossible to understand what happened when he closed the "spin" key.

He did not hope to understand it at any time in the future, either; and it would do no good to ask the City Fathers, who would simply refuse to tell him—for the very good reason that they did not know. Whatever they had had in reserve for Standard Situation N— that ultimate situation which every Okie city must expect to face eventually, the situation wherein what is necessary to prevent total destruction is only and simply to get away fast— it was drastic and unprecedented. Or it had become so when the City Fathers had been given the chance to pool their knowledge with that of the City Fathers of the all-purpose city.

The city snapped from its graving dock on Murphy to a featureless coordinate-set space.

The movement took no

time and involved no detectable display of energy. One moment the city was on Murphy; Amalfi closed the key, and Murphy had vanished, and Jake was demanding to know where in space the city was. He was told to find out.

The cops had come up on Murphy in fair order, but they had not been given the chance to fire a single shot. When Jake had managed to find Murphy again, O'Brian sent a proxy out to watch the cops, who by that time were shooting back and forth across the planet's sky like belated actors looking for a crucial collar button.

An hour later, without the slightest preliminary activity, the all-purpose city snapped out of existence on Murphy. By the time the garagemen had recovered enough to sound another alarm, the cops were scattered in all directions, still hunting something that they had had no prior idea could turn up missing: Amalfi's own town. By the time they managed to reform their ranks sufficiently to trace the all-purpose city, it had stopped operating, and thus had become undetectable?.

It was floating now in an orbit half a million miles away from Amalfi's city. Its screens were down again. If there had been any garagemen on it when it took off, they were dead now; the city was airless.

And the City Fathers honestly did not know how all this had been accomplished; or, rather, they no longer knew. Standard Situation N was keyed in by a sealed and self-blowing circuit. It had been set up that way long ago, to prevent incompetent or lazy city administrators from calling upon it at every minor crisis. It could never be used again.

And Amalfi knew that he had called it into use, not only for his.own city, but for the other one as well, in a situation which had not really been the ultimate extreme, had not really been Situation N. He had squandered the final recourse of both cities.

He was still equally certain that neither city would ever need that circuit again.

The two cities, linked only by an invisible ultraphone tight-beam, were now floating free in the starless area three light years away from the jungle, and eight parsecs away from Murphy. The dim towers of the dead city were not visible to Amalfi, who stood alone on the belfry of City

Hall; but they floated in his brain, waiting for him to tell them to come to life.

Whether or not his act of extreme desperation in the face of a not ultimately desperate situation had in actuality murdered that city was a question he could not decide. In the face of the galactic disaster, the question seemed very small.

He shelved it to consider what he had learned about his own bad check. Germanium never had had the enormous worth in real terms that it had had as a treasure metal. It did have properties which made it valuable in many techniques: the germanium lattice would part with an electron at the urging of a comparatively low amount of energy; the p-n boundary functioned as a crystal detector; and so on. The metal found its way into uncountable thousands of electronic devices—and, it was rare.

But not that rare. Like silver, platinum, and iridium before it, germanium's treasure value had been strictly artificial—an economic convention, springing from myths, jewelers'

preferences, and the jealousy of statal monopolies. Sooner or later, some planet or cluster with a high technology—and a consequently high exchange rate— would capture enough of the metal to drive its competitors, or, more likely, its own treasury, off the germanium standard; or someone would learn to synthesize or transmute the element cheaply. It hardly mattered which had happened now.

What mattered was the result. The actual metallic germanium on board the city now had only an eighth of its former value at current rates of sale. Much worse, however, was the fact that most of the city's funds were not metal, but paper: Oc dollars, issued against government-held metal back on Earth and a few other administrative centers. This money, since it did not represent any metallic germanium that belonged to the city, was now unredeemable—valueless.

The new standard was a drug standard. Had the city come away from He with the expected heavy surplus of anti-agathics, it would now have been a multibillionaire.

Instead, it was close to being a pauper.

Amalfi wondered how the drug standard had come about. To Okies, cut off for the most part from the main stream of history, such developments frequently seemed like the brainstorms of some unknown single genius; it was

hard to think of them as evolving from a set of situations when none of the situations could now be intimately known. Still, however it had arisen, the notion had its point.

Drugs can be graded exactly as to value by then: therapeutic effect and their availability.

Drugs that could be made synthetically in quantity at low cost would be the pennies and nickels of the new coinage—and those that could not, and were rare and always in heavier demand than the supply could meet, would be the hundred-dollar units.

Further, even expensive drugs could be diluted, which would make debt payment flexible; drugs could be as amenable to laboratory test for counterfeit as metal had been; and finally, drugs became outmoded rapidly enough to make for a high-velocity currency which could not be hoarded or cornered, even by the most predatory measures.

It was a good standard. Since it would be impossible to carry on real transactions in terms of fractions of a cubic centimeter of some Tbhemical, just as it had been impractical to carry a ton and a half of germanium about in order to pay one's debts, there would still be a paper currency.

But on the drug standard, the city was poor. It had none of the new paper money at all, though it would, of course, sell all its metallic germanium at once to get a supply.

Possibly its germanium-based paper money might also be sold, against Earth redemption, at about a fifth of the' current market value of the metallic equivalent if the Acolytes cared to bother with redeeming it.

The actual drugs on board the city could not be traded against. They were necessary to maintain the life of the city. Amalfi winced to think of the size of the bite medical care was going to take out of every individual's budget under the new economy. The anti-agathics, in particular, would pose a terrifying dilemma: shall I use my anti-agathic credits now, as money, to relieve my current money miseries, or shall I continue to live in poverty in order to prolong my life? ...

Remorselessly, Amalfi drove one consequence after an- • other through the stony corridors of his skull, like a priest wielding the whip behind lowing sacrifices. The city was poor. It could find no work among the Acolyte stars at a rate which would make the work justifiable. It could look for work nowhere else without a new spindizzy.

That left only the jungle. There was no place else to go.

Amalfi had never set down in a jungle before, and the thought made him wipe the palms of his hands unconsciously upon his thighs. The word in his mind—it had always been there, h^ knew, lying next to the word "fun-gle"—was never. The city must always pay its own way, it must always come whole out of any crisis, it must always pull its own weight...

Those emblems of conduct were now cliches, which never had turned out to be a time, like any other time— one that had implicit in it the inevitable timeword: Now.

Amalfi picked up the phone which hung from the belfry railing.

"Hazleton?"

"Here, boss. What's the verdict?"

"None yet,' Amalfi said. "Supposedly we snitched the city next door for some purpose; now we need to know what the chances are of abandoning ship at this point and getting out of here with it. Get some men in suits over there and check on it."

Hazleton did not answer for a moment. In that moment, Amalfi knew that the question was peripheral, and that the verdict was already in. A line by the Earth poet Theodore Roethke crept across the floor of his brain like a salamander: The edge cannot eat the center.

"Right," Hazleton's voice said.

Half an eternal hour later, it added: "Boss, that city is worse off than we are, I'm afraid. It's got good drivers still, but of course they're all tuned wrong. Besides, the whole place seems to be structurally unsound on a close look; the garagemen really did a thorough job of burrowing around in it. Among other things, the keel's cracked—the Acolytes must have landed it, not the original crew."

It would, of course, be impossible to claim foreknowledge of any of this, with Hazleton's present state of mind teetering upon the edge of some rebellion Amalfi hoped he did not yet understand. It was possible that Hazleton, despite all the mayor's precautions, had divined the load of emotional guilt which had been accumulating steadily upon Amalfi—or perhaps that suspicion was only the guilt itself speaking. In any event, Amalfi had allowed himself to be stampeded into stealing the other city by Hazleton, even in the face of the foreknowledge, to keep peace in

the family. He said instead, "What's your recommendation, Mark?"

"I'd cast loose from it, boss. I'm only sorry I advocated snitching it in the first place. We have the only thing it had to give us that we could make our own: our City Fathers now know everything their City Fathers knew. We couldn't take anything else but a new spindizzy, and that's a job for a graving dock."

"All right. Give it a point thirty-four per cent screen to clinch its present orbit, and come on back. Make sure you don't give it more than that, or those overtimed spindizzies will advertise its position to anyone coming within two parsecs of it, and interfere with our own operation to boot."

"Right."

And now there were the local cops to be considered. They had chalked up against Amalfi's city, not only the issuing of a bad check, but the theft of state property, and the deaths of Acolyte technicians on board the other city.

Only the jungle wis safe, and even the jungle was safe only temporarily. In the jungle, at least for the time being, one city could lose itself among three hundred others— many of which would be better armed than Amalfi's city had ever been.

There might even be a chance, in such a salmon-pack of cities, that Amalfi would see at last with his own eyes the mythical Vegan orbital fort—the sole non-human construction ever to go Okie, and now the center of an enormous saga of exploits woven about it by the starmen. Amalfi was as fascinated by the legend as any other Okie, though he knew the meager facts well: the fort had circled Vega until the smashing of the Confederacy's home planet, and then—unexpectedly, since the Vegans had never been given to flying anything bigger than a battleship—had taken off for parts unknown, smashing its way through the englobement of police cruisers almost instantly. Nothing had ever been heard of it since, although the legend grew and grew.

The Vegans themselves had been anything but an attractive people, and it was difficult to say why the story of the orbital fort was so beloved with the Okies. Of course, Okies generally disliked the cops and said that they had no love for Earth, but this hardly explained why the legend of the fort was so popular among them. The fort was now said to be invulnerable and unlimited; it had done miracles in every limb of the galaxy; it was everywhere and nowhere; it was the Okies' Beowulf, their Cid, their Sigurd, Gawaine, Roland, Cuchulainn, Prometheus,,. Lem-minkainen ... t '

Amalfl felt a sudden chill. The thought that had just come to him was so outrageous that he had almost stopped thinking it in the middle, out of sheer instinct. The fort—probably it had been destroyed centuries ago. But if it did still exist, certain conclusions emerged implacably, and certain actions could be taken on them. . . .

Yes, it was possible. It was possible. And definitely worth trying....

But if it actually worked ...

Having made the decision, Amalfi put the idea resolutely aside. In the meantime, one thing was sure: as long as the Acolytes continued to use the jungle as a labor pool, their cops would not risk smashing things up indiscriminately only in order to search out one single "criminal" city. To the Acolyte's way of thinking, all Okies were lawbreakers, by definition.

Which, Amalfi thought, was quite correct as far as his own city was concerned. The city was not only a bum now, but a bindlestiff to boot—by definition.

The end of the line.

"Boss? I'm coining in. What's the dodge? We'll need to pull it soon, or——"

Amalfi looked up steadily at the red dwarf star above the balcony.

"There is no dodge," he said. "We're licked, Mark. We're going to the jungle."

CHAPTER SIX: The Jungle

THE cities drifted along their sterile orbits around the little red sun. Here and there, a few showed up on the screen by their riding lights, but most of them could not spare even enough power to keep riding lights going. The

lights were vital in such close-packed quarters, but power to maintain spindizzy screens was more important still.

Only one city glowed—not with its riding lights, which were all out, but by street lighting.

That city had power to waste, and it wanted the fact known. And it wanted it known, too, that it preferred to waste the power in sheer bragging to the maintenance of such elementary legalities as riding lights.

Amalfi looked soberly at the image of the bright city. It was not a very clear image, since the bright city was in a preferred position close to the red dwarf, where that sun's natural and unboundable gravitational field strained the structure of space markedly. The saturation of the intervening area with the smaller screens of the other Okies made the seeing still worse, since Amalfi's own city had been unable to press through the pack beyond eighteen AU's from the sun, a distance about equivalent to that from Sol to Uranus. For Amalfi, consequently, the red dwarf was visually only a star of the tenth magnitude— the G0 star four liglit years away seemed much closer.

But obviously, three hundred-odd Okie cities could not all huddle close enough to a red dwarf to derive any warmth from it. Somebody had to be on the outside. It was equally obvious, and expectable, that the city with the most power available to it should be the one drawn up the most cosily to the dull stellar fire, while those who most needed to conserve every erg shivered in the outer blackness.

What was surprising was that the bright city should be advertising its defiance of local law and common sense alike—while police-escorted Acolyte ships were shoving their way into the heart of the jungle.

Amalfi looked up at the screen banks. For the second time within the year, he was in a chamber of City Hall which was almost never used. This one was the ancient reception hall, which had been fitted with a screen system of considerable complexity about five hundred and eighty years ago, just after the city had first taken to space. It was called into service only when the city was approaching a heavily developed, highly civilized star system, in order to carry on the multiple negotiations with various diplomatic, legal, and economic officials which had to be gone through before an Okie could hope to deal with such a system. Certainly Amalfl had never expected to have any use for the reception hall in a jungle.

There was a lot, he thought grimly, that he didn't know about living in an Okie jungle. *•

One of the screens'"came alight. It showed the full-length figure of a woman in sober clothing of an old style, utilitarian in cut, but obviously made of perishable materials. The woman inside the clothes was hard-eyed, but not hard of muscle; an Acolyte trader, evidently.

"The assignment," the trader said in a cold voice, "is a temporary development project on Hern Six, as announced previously. We can take six cities there, to be paid upon a per-job basis."

"Attention, Okies."

A third screen faded in. Even before the image had stabilized in the locally distorted space-lattice, Amalfi recognized its outlines. The general topology of a cop can seldom be blurred by distortion of any kind. He was only mildly surprised to find, when the face came through, that the police spokesman was Lieutenant Lerner, the man whose bribe had turned to worthless germanium in his hands.

"If there's any disorder, nobody gets hired," Lerner said. "Nobody. Understand? You'll present your offers to the lady in proper fashion, and she'll take or leave your bids as she sees fit. Those of you who are wanted outside the jungle will be held accountable if you leave the jungle— we're offering no immunities this trip. And if there's any damn insolence——"

Lieutenant Lerner's image drew its forefinger across its throat in a gesture that somehow had never lost its specificity. Amalfi growled and switched off the audio; Lerner was still talking, as was the trader, but now another screen was coming on, and Amalfi had to know what words were to come from it. The speeches of the trader and the cop could be predicted almost positively in advance—as a matter of fact, the City Fathers had already handed Amalfi the predictions, and he had listened to the actual speeches only long enough to check them for barely possible unknowns.

But what the bright city near the red dwarf—the jungle's boss, the king of the hobos—would say ...

Not even Amalfi, let alone the City Fathers, could know that in advance. Lieutenant Lerner and the trader worked

their mouths soundlessly while the wavering shadow on the fourth screen jelled. A slow, heavy, brutally confident voice was already in complete possession of the reception hall.

"Nobody takes any offer less than sixty," it said. "The class A cities will ask one hundred and twenty-four for the Hern Six job, and grade B cities don't get to underbid them until the goddam trader has all the A's she'll take. If she picks all six from the A\ that's tough.

No C's are to bid at all on the Hern Six deal. We'll take care of anybody that breaks ranks, either right away . .."

The image came through. Amalfi goggled at it.

". . . or after the cops leave. That's all for now."

The image faded. The twisted, hairless man in the ancient metal-mesh cape stood in Amalfi's memory for quite a while afterwards.

The Okie King was a man made of lava. Perhaps he had been born at one time, but now he looked like a geological accident, a column of black stone sprung from a fissure and contorted roughly into the shape of a man.

And his face was shockingly disfigured and scarred by the one disease that still remained unconquered, unsolved, though it no longer killed.

Cancer.

A voice murmured inside Amalfi's head, coming from the tiny vibrator imbedded in the mastoid bone behind the mayor's right ear. "That's just what the City Fathers said he would say," Hazleton commented softly from his post uptown in the control tower. "But he can't be as nai've as all that. He's an old-timer; been aloft since back before they knew how to polarize spindizzy screens against cosmic radiation. Must be eight hundred years old at a minimum."

"You can lay up a lot of cunning in that length of time," Amalfi agreed in a similarly low voice. He was wearing throat mikes under a high military collar. As far as the screens were concerned, he was standing motionless, silent, and alone; though he was an expert at talking without moving his lips, he did not try to do so now, for the fuzziness of local transmission conditions made it unlikely that his murmuring would be detected. "It doesn't seem likely that he means what he says. But we'd best sit tight for the moment."

He glanced into the auxiliary battle tank, a three-dimensional chart in which color-coded points of lights moved, showing each city, the nearby sun, and the Acolyte vessels, not to scale, but in their relative positions. The tank was camouflaged as a desk and could be seen into only from behind;" hence it was out of sight of any eye but Amalfi's. In it the Acolyte force showed itself to consist of one trader's ship and four police craft; one of the latter was a command cruiser, very probably Ler-ner's, and the others were light cruisers.

It was not much of a force, but then, there was no real need for a full squadron here. With a minimum of organization, the Okies could run Lerner and his ward out of the jungle, even at some cost to their own numbers—but where would the Okies run to after Lerner had yelled for navy support? The question answered itself.

A string of twenty-three small "personal" screens came on now, high up along the curve of the far wall. Twenty-three faces looked down at Amalfi—the mayors of all but one of the class A cities in the jungle; Amalfi's own city was the twenty-fourth. Amalfi valved the main audio gain back up again.

"Are we ready to begin?" the Acolyte woman said. "I've got codes here for twenty-four cities, and I see you're all here. Small courage among Okies these days— twenty-four out of three hundred of you for a simple job like this! That's the attitude that made Okies of you in the first place. You're afraid of honest work."

"We'll work," the King's voice said. His screen, however, remained gray-green. "Look over the codes and take your pick."

The trader looked for the voice. "No insolence," she said sharply. "Or I'll ask for volunteers from the grade B's. It would save me money, anyhow."

There was no reply. The trader frowned and looked at the code list in her hand. After a moment, she called off three numbers, and then, with greater hesitation, a fourth. Four of the screens above Amalfi went blank, and in the tank, four green flecks began to move outward from the red dwarf star.

"That's all we need for Hern Six except for a pressure job," the woman said slowly.

"There are eight cities listed here as pressure specialists. You there—who are you, anyhow?"

"Bradley-Vermont," one of the faces above Amalfi said.

"What would you 'ask for a pressure job?"

"One hundred and twenty-four," Bradley-Vermont's mayor said sullenly.

"O-ho! You've a high opinion of yourself, haven't you? You may as well float here and rot for a while longer, until you learn something more about the law of supply and demand.

You—you're Dresden-Saxony, it says here. What's your price? Remember, I only need one."

Dresden-Saxony's mayor was a slight man with high cheekbones and glittering black eyes. He seemed to be enjoying himself, despite his obvious state of malnutrition; at least, he was smiling a little, and his eyes glittered over the dark shadows which made them look large.

"We ask one hundred 'and twenty-four," he said with malicious indifference.

The woman's lids slitted. "You do, eh? That's a coincidence, isn't it? And you?"

"The same," the third mayor said, though with obvious reluctance.

The trader swung around and pointed directly at Amalfi. In the very old cities, such as the one the King operated, it would be impossible to tell who she was pointing at, but probably most of the cities in the jungle had compensating tri-di. "What's your town?"

"We're not answering that question," Amalfi said. "And we're not pressure specialists anyhow."

"I know that, I can read a code. But you're the biggest Okie I've ever seen, and I'm not talking about your belly either; and you're modern enough for the purpose. The job is yours for one hundred—no more."

"Not interested."

"You're a fool as well as a fat man. You just came into this hell-hole and there are charges against——"

"Ah, you know who we are. Why did you ask?"

"Never mind that. You don't know what a jungle is like until you've lived in it. You'd be smart to take the job and get out now while you can. You'd be worth one hundred and twelve to me if you could finish the job under the estimated time."

"You've denied us immunity," Amalfi said, "and you needn't bother offering it, either.

We're not interested in pressure work for any price."

The woman laughed. "You're a liar, too. You know as well as I do that nobody arrests Okies on jobs. And you

take on the volunteer before interviewing the others might be—resented.

"Keep out of this," the voice of the King said, so much more slowly and heavily than before that its weight was almost tangible upon the air. "Let the lady do her own picking.

She's got no use for a class C outfit."

'We'll take the job. We're a mining town from way back, and we can refine the stuff, too, by gaseous diffusion, mass spectrography, mass chromatography, whatev-er's asked.

We can handle it. And we've got to have it."

"So do the rest," the King said, coldly unimpressed. 'Take your turn."

"We're dying out here! Hunger, cold, thirst, disease!"

"Others are in the samevstate. Do you think any of us like it here? Wait your turn!"

"All right," the woman said suddenly. "I'm sick of being told who I do and who I don't want.

Anything to get this over with. File your coordinates, whoever that is out there, and———"

"File your coordinates and we'll have a Dirac torpedo there before you've stopped talking!" the King roared. "Acolyte, what are you paying for this rock-heaving? Nobody here works for less than sixty—that's flat."

"We'll go for fifty-five."

The woman smiled an unpleasant smile. "Apparently somebody in this pest area is glad of a chance to do some honest work for a change.Who's next?"

"Hell, you don't need to take a class C city," one of the rejected class A's blurted. "We'll go for fifty-five. What can we lose?"

"Then we'll take fifty," the outsider whispered immediately.

"You'll take a bolt in the teeth! As for you—you're Coquilhatville-Congo, eh?—you're going to be sorry you ever had a tongue to flap."

There was already a stir among the green dots in the tank. Some of the larger cities were leaving their orbits. The woman began to look vaguely alarmed.

"Hazleton!" Amalfi murmured quickly. "This is going to get worse before it gets better. Set us up, as fast as you canuto move into one of the vacated orbits close to the red ttar the moment I give the word."

"We won't be able to put on any speed——"

"I wouldn't want us to if we could. It'll have to be done wouldn't find it difficult to leave the job once it's finished. Here now—I'll give you one hundred and twenty. That's my top offer, and it's only four less than the pressure experts are asking. Fair enough?"

"It may be fair enough," Amalfi said. "But we don't do pressure work; and we've already gotten in reports from the proxies we sent to Hern Six as soon as Lieutenant Lerner said that was where the job was. We don't like the look of it. We don't want it. We won't take it at one hundred and twenty, we won't take it at one hundred and twenty-four—and we won't take it at all. Understand?"

"Very well," the woman said with concentrated vicious-ness. "You'll hear from me again, Okie."

The King was looking at Amalfi with an unreadable, but certainly unfriendly, expression.

If Amalfi's guess was right, the King thought Amalfi was somewhat overdoing Okie solidarity. It might also be occurring to him that the expression of so much independence mipht be a bid for power within the jungle itself. Yes, Amalfi was sure that that, at least, had occurred to the King.

The hiring of the class B cities was now all that remained, but nevertheless it took quite a while to get started. The woman, it emerged, was more than a trader; she was an entrepreneur of some importance. She wanted the cities, twenty of them, each for the same identical piece of dirty work: working low-grade carnotite lies on a small planet too near a hot star. Twenty mining cities working upon such a planet would reduce it to as small and sculptured a lump of trash as a meteorite before very many months. The method, obviously, was to get the work done fast without paying more than a pittance for it.

Then, startlingly, while the woman was still making up her mind, the voice came through.

It was weak and indistinct, and without any face to go with it.

"We'll take the job. Take us."

There was a murmuring from the screens, and across some of the faces there the same shadow seemed to run. Amalfi checked the tank, but it told him little. The signal had been too weak. All that could be made certain was that the voice belonged to some city far out on the periphery of the jungle—a city desperate for energy.

The Acolyte woman seemed momentarily nonplussed. Even in a jungle, Amalfi thought grimly, some crude rules had to be observed; evidently the woman realized that to slowly enough so that it won't be apparent in any tank that we're moving counter to the general tendency. Also, get me a fix on that outfit on the outside that broke ranks if you possibly can. If , you can't do it without attracting attention, drop the project at once."

"Right."

"By Hadjjii's nightshirt you've got a lesson coming!" the woman was exclaiming. "The whole deal is off for today. No jobs, not for anybody. I'll come back in a week. Maybe by then you'll have some common sense back. Lieutenant, let's get the hell out of here."

That, however, proved to be a difficult assignment. There was a sort of wave front of heavy-duty cities between the Acolyte ships and open space, expanding outward into the darkness where the weaklings shivered. In that second frigid shell most of the class C cities were panicking; and, still farther out, the brilliant green sparks of the cities whose promised jobs had just been written off were plunging angrily back toward the main cloud.

The reception hall was a bedlam of voices, mostly those of mayors trying to establish that they had not been responsible for the break in the wage line. Somewhere several cities were still attempting to shout new bids to the Acolyte woman under cover of the confusion. Through it all the voice of the King whirled like a bull-roarer.

"Clear the sky!" Lerner shouted. "Clear it up out there, by——"

As if in response, the tank suddenly crackled with hair-thin sapphire tracers. The static of the scattered mesotron rifle fire rattled audio speakers, cross-hatched the desperate, shouting faces on the screens. Terror, the terror of a man who finds suddenly that the situation he is in has always been deadly, turned Lieutenant Lerner's features rigid.

Amalfi saw him reach for something.

"All right, Hazleton, spin!"

The defective spindizzy sobbed, and the city moved painfully. Lerner's elbow jerked back toward his midriff, and from his ship came the pale guide light of a Bethe blaster.

Seconds later, something went up in the white agony of a fusion explosion—something so far off from the center of the riot that Amalfi first thought, with a shock of fury, that Lerner had undertaken to destroy Okie cities unselec-tively, simply to terrorize. Then the look on Lerner's face

told him that the "shot had been fired at random. Lerner was as taken aback as Amalfi, and seemingly for much the same reasons, at the death of the unknown bystander.

The depth of the response surprised Amalfi anew. Perhaps there was hope for Lerner yet.

Some incredible fool of an Okie was firing on the cop now, but the shots fell short; mesotron rifles were not primarily military instruments, and the Acolytes had almost worked free of the jungle. For a moment Amalfi was afraid that Lerner would fling a few vindictive Beth6 blasts back into the pack, but evidently the cop was recovering the residue of his good sense; at least, no more shots came from the command cruiser. It was possible that he had realized that any further exchange of fire would turn the incident from a minor brawl to a mob uprising which would make it necessary to call in the Acolyte navy.

Not even the Acolytes could want that, for it would end in cutting off their supply of skilled labor.

The city's spindizzies cut out. Lurid, smoky scarlet light leaked down the stone stairwell which led out of the reception hall to the belfry;

"We're parked near the stinking little star, boss. We're less than a million miles out from the orbit of the King's own city."

"Good work, Mark. Break out a gig. We're going calling."

"All right. Anything special in the way of equipment?"

"Equipment?" Amalfi said, slowly. "Well—no. But you'd best bring Sergeant Anderson along. And Mark——"

"Yes?"

"Bring Dee, too."

The center of government of the King's city was enormously impressive: ancient, stately, marmoreal. It was surrounded on a lower level by a number of lesser structures of equally heavy-handed beauty. One of these was a heavy, archaic cantilever bridge for which Amalfi could postulate no use at all; it spanned an enormously broad avenue which divided the city in two, an avenue which was virtually untraveled; the bridge, too, carried only foot traffic now, and not much of that.

He decided finally that the bridge had been retained only out of respect to history. These seemed to be no other

sentiment which fitted it, since the normal mode of transportation in the King's city, as in every other Okie city, was by aircab. Like the City Hall, the bridge was beautiful; possibly that had spoken for its retention, too.

The cab rocked sli|hlly and grounded. "Here we are, gentlemen," the Ti'n Cabby said.

"Welcome to Buda-Pesht."

Amalfi followed Dee and Hazleton out onto the plaza. Other cabs, many of them, dotted the red sky, homing on the palace and settling near by.

"Looks like a conclave," Hazleton said. "Guests from outside, not just managerial people inside this one city; otherwise, why the welcome from the cabby?"

"That's my guess, too, and I think we're none too early for it, either. It's my theory that the King is in for a rough time from his subjects. This shoot-up with Lerner, and the loss of jobs for everybody, must have lowered his stock considerably. If so, it'll give us an opening."

"Speaking of which," Hazleton said, "where's the entrance to this tomb, anyhow?

Ah—that must be it."

They hurried through the shadows of the pillared portico. Inside, in the foyer, hunched or striding figures moved past them toward the broad, ancient staircase, or gathered in small groups, murmuring urgently in the opulent dimness. This entrance hall was marvelous with chandeliers; they did not cast much light, but they shed glamour like a molting peacock.

Someone plucked Amalfi by the sleeve. He looked down. A slight man with a worn Slavic face and black eyes which looked alive with suppressed mischief stood at his side.

"This place makes me homesick," the slight man said, "although we don't go in for quite so much sheer mass on my town. I believe you're the mayor who refused all offers, on behalf of a city with no name. I'm correct, am I not?"

"You are," Amalfi said, studying the figure with difficulty in the ceremonial dimness. "And you're the mayor of Dresden-Saxony: Franz Specht. What can we do for you?"

"Nothing, thank you. I simply wanted to make myself known. It may be that you will need to know someone, inside." He nodded in the direction of the staircase. "I admired your stand today, but there may be some who resent it. Why is your city nameless, by the way?"

"It isn't," Amalfi" said. "But we sometimes need to use our name as a weapon, or at least as a lever. We hold it in reserve as such."

"A weapon! Now that is something to ponder. I will see you later, I hope." Specht slipped away abruptly, a shadow among shadows. Hazleton looked at Amalfi with evident puzzlement.

"What's his angle, boss? Backing a longshot, maybe?"

"That would be my guess. Anyhow, as he says, we can probably use a friend in this mob.



Let's go on up."

In the great hall, which had been the throne room of an empire older than any Okie, older even than space flight, there was already a meeting in progress. The King himself was standing on the dais, enormously tall, bald, scarred, terrific, as shining black as anthracite. Ancient as he was, his antiquity was that of some, featureless, eventless, an antiquity without history against the rich backdrop of his city. He was anything but an expectable mayor of Buda-Pesht; Amalfi strongly suspected that there were recent bloodstains on the city's log.

Nevertheless, the King held the rebellious Okies under control without apparent effort.

His enormous gravelly voice roared down about their heads like a rockslide, overwhelming them all with its raw momentum alone. The occasional bleats of protest from the floor sounded futile and damned against it, like the voices of lambs objecting to the inevitable avalanche.

"So you're mad!" he was thundering. "You got roughed up a little and now you're looking for somebody to blame it on! Well, I'll tell you who to blame it on! I'll tell you what to do about it, too. And by God, when I'm through telling you, you'll do it, the whole pack of you!"

Amalfi pushed through the restive, close-packed mayors and city managers, putting his bull shoulders to good use. Hazleton and Dee, hand in hand, tailed him closely. The Okies on the floor grumbled as Amalfi shoved his way forward; but they were so bound up in the King's diatribe, and in their own fierce, unformulated resistance to the King's battering-ram leadership tactics, that they could spare nothing more than a moment's irritation for Amalfi's passage among them.

"Why are we hanging around here now, getting pushed around by these Acolyte hicks?"

the King roared. "You're fed with it. All right, I'm fed with it, too. I wouldn't take it from the beginning! When I came here, you guys were bidding each other5 down to peanuts. When the bidding was over, the city that got the job lost money on it every time.

It was me that showed you how to organize. It was me that showed yc|u,'how to stand up for your rights. It was me that showed you how to form a wage line, and how to hold one.

And it's going to be me that'll show you what to do when a wage line breaks up."

Amalfi reached behind him, caught Dee's hand, and drew her forward to stand beside him. They were now in the front row of the crowd, almost up against the dais. The King saw the movement; he paused and looked down. Amalfi felt Dee's hand tighten spasmodically upon his. He returned the pressure.

"All right," Amalfi said. When he was willing to let his voice out, he could fill a considerable space with it. He let it out. "Show, or shut up."

The King, who had been looking directly down at them, made a spasmodic movement—almost as if he had been about to take one step backwards. "Who the hell are you?" he shouted.

'Tin the mayor of the only city that held the line today," Amalfi said. He did not seem to be shouting, but somehow his voice was no smaller in the hall than the King's. A quick murmur went through the mob, and Amalfi could see necks craning in his direction.

"We're the newest—and the biggest—city here, and this is the first sample we've seen of the way you run this wage bidding. We think it stinks. We'll see the Acolytes in hell before we take their jobs at any of the prices they offer, let alone the low pay levels you set."

Someone near by turned and looked at Amalfi slantwise. "Evidently you folks can eat space," the Okie said dryly.

"We eat food. We won't eat slops," Amalfi growled. "You up there on the platform—let's hear this great plan for getting us out of this mess. It couldn't be any worse than the wage-line system—that's a cinch."

The King began to pace. He whirled as Amalfi finished speaking, arms akimbo, feet apart, his shiny bald cranium thrust forward, gleaming blankly against the faded tapestries.

"I'll let you hear it," he roared. "You bet I'll let you hear it. Let's see what your big talk comes to after you

know what it is. -You can stay behind and try to work boom-time wages out of the Acolytes if you want; but if you've guts, you'll go with us." "Where to?" Amalfi said calmly.

"We're going to march on Earth." There was a brief, stunned silence. Then a composite roar began to grow in the hall.

Amalfi grinned. The sound of the response was not exactly friendly.

"Wait!" the King bellowed. "Wait, dammit! I ask you— what's the sense in our fighting the Acolytes? They're just local trash. They know just as well as we do that they couldn't get away with their slave-market tactics and their private militia and their-shoot-ups if Earth had an eye on 'em."

"Then why don't we holler for the Earth cops?" someone demanded.

"Because they wouldn't come here. They can't. There must be Okies all over the galaxy that are taking stuff from local systems and clusters, stuff like what we're taking. This depression is everywhere, and there just aren't enough Earth cops to be all over the place at once.

"But we don't have to take it. We can go to Earth and demand our rights. We're citizens, every one of us—unless there are any Vegans here. You a Vegan, buddy?"

The scarred face stared down at Amalfi, smiling grue-somely. A nervous titter went through the hall.

"The rest of us can go to Earth and demand that the government bail us out. What else is government for, anyhow? Who produces the money that kept the politicians fat all through the good centuries? What would the government have to govern and tax and penalize if it weren't for the Okies? Answer me that, you with the orbital fort under your belt!"

The laughter was louder and sounded more assured now. Amalfi, however, was quite used to gibes at his pod; such thrusts were for him a sure sign that his current opponent had run out of pertinent things to say. He returned coldly: "More than half of us had charges against us when we came here—not local charges, but violations of Earth orders of one kind or another. Some of us have been dodging being brought back on our Violations dockets for decades. Are you going to offer yourselves to the Earth cops on a platter?"

The King did not appear to be listening with more than half an ear. He had Brought up a broad grin at the second wave of laughter, and had been looking back down at Dee for admiration.



"We'll send out s&c&ll on the Dirac," he said. "To all Okies, everywhere. 'We're all going back to Earth,' we'll say. 'We're going home to get an accounting. We've done Earth's heavy labor all over the galaxy, and Earth's paid us by turning our money into waste paper. We're going home to see that Earth does something about it'—we'll set a date—'and any Okie with starman's guts will follow us.' How does that sound, eh?"

Dee's grip on Amalfi's hand was now tighter than any pressure he would have believed she could exert. Amalfi did not speak to the King; he simply looked back at him, his eyes metallic.

From somewhere fairly far back in the throne room, a newly familiar voice called, "The mayor of the nameless city has asked a pertinent luestion. From the point of view of Earth, we're a dangerous collection of potential criminals at worst. At best we're discontented jobless people, and "undesirable in large numbers anywhere near the home planet."

Hazleton pushed up to the front row, on the other side of Dee, and glared belligerently up at the King. The King, however, had looked away again, over Hazleton's head.

"Anybody got a better idea?" the immense black man said dryly. "Here's good old Vega down here; he's full of ideas. Let's hear his idea. I'll bet it's colossal. I'll just bet he's a genius, this Vegan."

"Get up there, boss," Hazleton hissed. "You've got "em!"

Amalfi released Dee's hand—he had some difficulty in being gentle about it—bounded clumsily but without real effort onto the dais, and turned to face the crowd.

"Hey there, mister," someone shouted. "You're no Vegan!"

The crowd laughed uneasily.

"Never said I was," Amalfi retorted. Hazleton's face promptly fell. "Are you all a pack of children? No mythical fort is going to bail you out of this. Neither is any fool mass flight on Earth. There isn't any easy way out. There is one tough way out, if you've got the guts for it."

"Let's hear it."

"Speak up!"

"Let's get it over with."

"All right," Amalfi said. He walked back to the immense throne of the Hapsburgs and sat down in it, catching the King flatfooted. Standing, Amalfi, despite his bulk, was a smaller man than the King, but on the throne he made the King look not only smaller but also quite irrelevant. From the back of the dais, his voice boomed out as powerfully as before.

"Gentlemen," he said, "our germanium is worthless now. So is our paper money. Even the work we do doesn't seem to be worth while now, on any standard. That's our trouble, and there isn't much that Earth can do about it—they're caught in the cqllapse, too."

"A professor," the King said, his seamed lips twisting.

"Shaddap. You asked me up here. I'm staying up here until I've had my say. The commodity we all have to sell is labor. Hand labor, heavy work, isn't worth anything.

Machines can do that. But brainwork can't be done with anything but brains; art and pure science are beyond the compass of any machine.

"Now, we can't sell art. We can't produce it; we aren't artists and aren't set up as such; there's an entirely different segment of galactic society that supplies that need. But brainwork in pure science is something we can sell, just as we've always sold brainwork in applied sciences. If we play our cards right, we can sell it anywhere, for any price we ask, regardless of the money system involved. It's the ultimate commodity, and in the long run it's a commodity which no one but the Okies could merchandise successfully.

"Selling that commodity, we could take over the Acolytes or any other star system. We could do it better in a general depression than we could ever have done it before, because we can now set any price on it that we choose." "Prove it," somebody called.

"That's easy. We have here around three hundred cities. Let's integrate and use their accumulated knowledge. This is the first time in history that so many City Fathers have been gathered together in one place, just as it's the first time that so many big organizations specializing in different sciences have ever been gathered together. If we were to consult with each other, pool our intellectual resources, we'd come out technologically at least a thousand years ahead of the rest of the galaxy. Individual experts can be bought for next to nothing now, but no individual expert— nor any individual city or planet— could match what we'd have.

"That's the pricelesp (Jfoin, gentlemen, the universal coin: human knowledge. Look now: there are eighty-five million undeveloped worlds in this galaxy ready to pay for knowledge of the current vintage, the kind we all share right now, the kind that runs about a century behind Earth on the average. But if we were to pool our knowledge, then even the most advanced planets, even Earth itself, would see their coinages crumble in the face of their eagerness to buy what we would have to offer."

"Question!"

"You're Dresden-Saxony back there, right?" Amalfi said. "Go ahead, Mayor Specht."

"Are you sure accumulated technology is the answer? You yourself said that straight techniques are the province of machines. The ancient Godel-Church theorems show that no machine or set of machines can score significant advances on human thought.

The designer has to precede the machine, and has to have achieved the desired function before the machine can even be built."

"What is this, a seminar?" the King demanded. "Let's

"Let's hear it," someone called.

"After that mess today——"

"Let 'em talk—they make sense!"

Amalfi waited a moment and then said, "Yes, Mayor Specht. Go ahead."

"I had about made my point. The machines can't do the job you offer as the solution to our troubles. This is why mayors have authority over City Fathers, rather than the other way around."

"That's quite true," Amalfi said. "And I don't pretend that a completely cross-connective hookup among all our City Fathers would automatically bail us out. For one thing we'd have to set the hookup pattern very carefully as a topological problem, to be sure we didn't get a degree of connectivity which would result in the disappearance of knowledge instead of its accumulation. There's an example of just the kind of thing you were talking about: machines can't handle topology because it isn't quantitative.

"I said that this was the hard way of solving the



problem, and I meant just that. After we'd pooled our machine-accumulated knowledge, furthermore, we'd have to interpret it before we could put it to some use.

"That would take time. Lots of time. Technicians will have to check the knowledge-pooling at every stage; they'll have to check the City Fathers to be sure they can take in what's being delivered to them—as far as we know, they have no storage limits, but that assumption hasn't ever been tested before on the practical level. They'll have to assess what it all adds up to in the end, run the assessments through the City Fathers for logical errors, assess the logic for supralogical bugs beyond the logics that the City Fathers use, check all the assessments for new implications needing complete rechecks—of which there will be thousands....

"It'll take more than two years, and probably closer to five years, to do even a scratch job.

The City Fathers will do their part of it in a few hours, and the rest of the time will be consumed by human brainwork. While that part of it's going on, we'll have it thin. But we've got it damn thin already, and when it's all over, we'll be able to write our own tickets, anywhere in the galaxy."

"A very good answer," Specht said. He spoke quietly, but each word whistled through the still, sweat-humid air like a thin missile. "Gentlemen, I believe the mayor of the nameless city is right."

"The hell he is!" the King howled, striding to the front of the dais and trying to wipe the air out of his way as he walked. "Who wants to sit for five years making like a pack of scientists while the Acolytes have us all digging ditches?"

"Who wants to be dispersed?" someone countered shrilly. "Who wants to pick a fight with Earth? Not me. I'll stay as far away from the Earth cops as I can. That's common sense for Okies."

"Cops!" the King shouted. "Cops look for single cities. What if a thousand cities marched on Earth? What cop would bother with one city on one disorderly conduct charge? If you were a cop and you saw a mob coming down at you, would you try to bust it up by pinching one man in it who'd run out on a Vacate order, or shaded a three per cent fruit-freezing contract? If that's common sense for Okies, I'll eat it.

"You guys are chicken, that's your trouble. You got

knocked around today and you hurt. You're tender. But you know damn weft that the law exists to protect you, not scum like the Acolytes. It's a cinch we can't call the Earth cops here to project us—the cops are too few for that, we're too fewji and besides, we would get nabbed individually for whatever we've got written against us. But in a march of thousands of Okies—a peaceful march, to ask Earth to give you what belongs to you—you couldn't be touched individually. But you're scared! You'd rather squat in a jungle and die by pieces!"

"Not us!"

"Us neither!"

"When do we start?"

"That's more like it," the King said.

Specht's voice said, "Buda-Pesht, you're trying to drum up a stampede. The question isn't closed yet."

"All right," the King agreed. "I'm willing to be reasonable. Let's take a vote."



"We aren't ready for a vote yet. The question is still open."

"Well?" said the King. "You there on the overstaffed potty—you got anything more to say? Are you as afraid of a vote as Specht is?"

Amalfi got up with deliberate slowness.

"I've made my points, and I'll abide by the voting," he said, "if it's physically possible for us to do so—our spindizzy equipment wouldn't tolerate an immediate flight to Earth if the voting goes that way. I've made my point. A mass flight to Earth would be suicide."

"One moment," Specht's voice cut in again. "Before we vote, I for one want to know who it is that has been advising us. Buda-Pesht we know. But— who are you?"

There was instant dead silence in the throne room.

The question was loaded, as everyone in the hall knew. Prestige among Okies depended, in the long run, upon only two things: time aloft and coups recorded by the interstellar grapevine." Amalfl's city stood high on both tallies; he had only to identify his city, and he would stand at least an even chance of carrying the voting. Even while nameless, for that matter, the city had earned considerable kudos in the jungle.

Evidently Hazleton thought so, too, for Amalfi could see the frantic covert hand signals he was making. Tell 'em, boss. It can't miss. Tell 'em!

After a long, suspended heartbeat, the mayor said, "My name is John Amalfi, Mayor Specht."

A single broad comber of contempt rolled through the hall.

"Asked and answered," the King said, showing his ragged teeth. "Glad to have you aboard, Mister Amalfi. Now if you'll get the hell off the platform, we'll get on with the voting. But don't be in any hurry to leave town, Mister Amalfi. I want to talk to you, man to man. Understand?"

"Yeah," Amalfi said. He swung his huge bulk lightly to the floor of the hall, and walked back to where Dee and Hazleton were standing, band in hand.

"Boss, why didn't you tell 'em?" Hazleton whispered, his face hard. "Or did you want to throw the whole show away? You had two beautiful chances, and you muffed 'em both!"

"Of course I muffed them. I came here to muff them. I came here to dynamite them, as a matter of fact. Now you and Dee had Btetter get out of here before I have to give Dee to the King in order to get back to our city at all."

"You staged that, too, John," Dee said. It was not an accusation; it was simply a statement of fact.

"I'm afraid I did," Amalfi said. "I'm sorry, Dee; it had to be done, or I wouldn't have done it.

I was also sure that I could fox the King on that point, if that's any consolation to you. Now move, or you will be sunk. Mark, make plenty of noise about getting away." "What about you?" Dee said. "I'll be along later. Git!"

Hazleton stared at Amalfi a moment longer. Then he turned and pushed back through the crowd, the frightened, reluctant girl at his heels. His method of being very noisy was characteristic of him: he was so completely silent that everyone within sight of him knew that he was making a getaway; even his footsteps made no sound at all. In the surging hall his noiselessness was as conspicuous as a siren in church.

Amalfi stood his ground long enough to let the King see that the principal hostage was still on hand, still obeying the letter of the King's order. Then, the moment the King's attention was distracted, he faded, moving with the local current in the crowd, bending his knees slightly to

reduce his height, tipping his head back to point his conspicuous baldness away from the dias, and making only the normal amount of soupd as he moved—becoming, in short, effectively invisible,

By this time the voeng was in full course, and it would be five minutes at the least before the King could afford to interrupt it long enough to order the doors closed against Amalfl.

After Hazleton's and Dee's ostentatiously alarmed exists, an emergency order in the middle of the voting would have made it painfully obvious what the King was after.

Of course, had the King had the foresight to equip himself with a personal transmitter before mounting the dais, the outcome might have been different. The King's failure to do so strengthened Amalfi's conviction that the King had not been mayor of Buda-Pesht long, and that he had not won the post by the usual processes.

But Dee and Hazleton would get out all right. So would Amalfl. On this limited subject, Amalfl had been six jumps ahead of the King all the way.

Amalfi drifted toward the part of the crowd from where, roughly, he estimated that the voice of the mayor of Dresden-Saxony had been coming. He found the worn, birdlike Slav without difficulty.

"You keep a tight holster-flap on your weapons," Specht said in a low voice.

"Sorry to disappoint you, Mayor Specht. You set it up beautifully. It might cheer you up a bit to know that the question was just the right one, all the same, and many thanks for it.

In return I owe you the answer; are you good at riddles?"

"Riddles?"

"Raetseln," Amalfi translated.

"Oh—conundrums. No, but I can try."

"What city has two names twice?"

Evidently Specht did not need to be good at riddles to come up with the answer to that one. His jaw dropped. "You're N——" he began.

Amalfi held up his hand in the conventional Okie FYI sign: "For your information only."

Specht gulped and nodded. With a grin, Amalfi drifted on out of the palace.

There was a lot of hard work still ahead, but from now on it should be all downhill. The

"march" on Earth would be carried in the voting.

Nothing essential remained to be done now in the jungle but to turn the march into a stampede.

By the time he reached his own city, Amalfi found he was suddenly intensely tired. He berthed the second gig Hazleton had had the perimeter sergeant send for him and went directly to his room, where he ordered his supper sent up.

This last move, he was forced to conclude, had been a mistake. The city's stores were heavily diminished, and the table that was set for him—set, as it would have been for anyone else in the city, by the City Fathers with complete knowledge of his preferences—was meager and uninteresting. It included fuming Rigellian wine, which he despised as a drink for Barbarians; such a choice could only mean that there was nothing else to drink in the city but water.

His weariness, the solitude, the direct transition from the audience hall of the Hapsburgs to his bare new room under the mast in the Empire State Building—it had been an elevator-winch hocusing until the city had converted to friction-fields—and the dullness of the meal combined to throw him into a rare and deep state of depression. What he thought he could see of the future of Okie cities did not exactly cheer him, either.

It was at this point that the door to his room irised open, and Hazleton stalked silently through it, hooking his chromoclav back into his belt.

They looked at each other stonily for a moment. Amalfi pointed to a chair.

"Sorry, boss," Hazleton said, without moving. "I've never used my key before except in an emergency, you know that. But I think maybe this is an emergency. We're in a bad way—and the way you're dealing with the problem strikes me as crazy. For the survival of the city, I want to be taken into your confidence."

"Sit down," Amalfi said. "Have some Rigel wine."

Hazleton made a wry face and sat down.

"You're in my confidence, as always, Mark. I don't leave you out of my plans except where I think you might shoot from the hip if I didn't. You'll agree that you've done that occasionally—and don't throw up the Thor Five situation again, because there I was on your side; it was the City Fathers that objected to that particular Hazleton gimmick."

"Granted." 3

"Good," Amalfl said. "Tell me what you want to know, then."

"Up to a point I understand what you're out to do," Hazleton said without preamble. "Your use of Dee as a safe-conduet in and out of the meeting was a shrewd trick. Considering the political threat we represented to the King, it was probably the only thing you could have done. Understand, I resent it personally and I may yet pay you off for it. But it was necessary, I agree."

"Good," the mayor said wearily. "But that's a minor point, Mark."

"Granted, except on the personal level. The main thing is that you threw away the whole chance you schemed so hard to get. The knowledge-pooling plan was a good one, and you had two major chances to put it across. First of all, the King set you up to claim we were Vegan—nobody has ever actually seen that fort, and physically you're enough unlike the normal run of humanity to pass for a Vegan without much trouble. Dee and I don't look Vegan, but we might be atypical, or maybe renegades.

"But you threw that one away. Then the mayor from Dresden-Saxony set you up to swing almost everybody our way by letting them know our name. If you'd followed through, you would have carried the voting. Hell, you'd probably have wound up king of the jungle to boot.

"And you threw that one away, too."

Hazleton took his slide rule out of his pocket and moodily pushed the slide back and forth in it. It was a gesture frequent enough with him, but ordinarily it preceded or followed some use of the rule. Tonight it was obviously just nervous play.

"But Mark, I didn't want to be king of the jungle," Amalfi said slowly. "I'd much rather let the present incumbent hold that responsibility. Every crime that's ever been committed, or will be committed in the near future, in this jungle, will be laid at his door eventually by the Earth cops. On top of that, the Okies here will hold him personally responsible for every misfortune that comes their way while they're in the jungle. I never did want that job; I only wanted the King to think that I wanted it.... Incidentally, did you try to raise that city out on the perimeter, the one that said it had mass chromatography?"

"Sure," Ha/leton said. "They don't answer."

"Okay. Now, about this knowledge-pooling plan: it wouldn't work, Mark. First of all, you couldn't keep a pack of Okies working at it long enough to get any good out of it. Okies aren't philosophers, and they aren't scientists except in a limited way. They're engineers and merchants; in some respects they're adventurers, too, but they don't think of themselves as adventurers. They're practical— that's the word they use. You've heard it."

"I've used it," Hazleton said edgily. "So have I. There's a great deal of meaning packed into it It means, among other things, that if you get Okies involved in a major analytical project, they'll get restive. They want sets of, applications of principles, not principles pure and useless; And it isn't in their natures to sit still in one place for long. If you convince them that they should, they'll try, and the whole thing will wind up in a terrific explosion.

"But that's only point one. Mark, have you any idea of the real scope of the knowledge-pooling project? I'm not trying to put you oil the spot, believe me. I don't think anybody in that hall realized it. If they had, they'd have laughed me off the platform.

There again, Okies aren't scientists, and their outlook is too impatient to let them carry a really long chain of reasoning to a.conclusion."

"You're an Okie," Hazleton pointed out. "You carried it to a conclusion. You told them how long it would take."

"I'm an Okie. I told them it would take from two to five years to do even a scratch job. As an Okie, I'm an expert at half-truths. It would take from two to five years even to get the project set up! And the rest of the job, Mark, would take centuries." "For a scratch job?"

"No such thing as a scratch job in this universe of discourse," Amalfi said, reaching for the fuming wine and reconsidering at the last minute. "Those cities out there represent the accumulated scientific knowledge of all the high-technical-level cultures they've ever encountered. Even allowing for the usual information gaps, that's about five thousand planets-full of data, at a minimum estimate. Sure, we could pool all that knowledge—just as I said at the meeting, the City Fathers could take it all in, and classify it, in only a little over an hour— after we'd spent two to five years setting them up to do it. And then we'd have to integrate it. And you've got to integrate it, Mark; you've got to know it thoroughly enough to be able to make it do something. You couldn't offer it for sale unless you-did that. Would you like the job?"

"No," Hazleton said''slowly, but at once. "But Amalfi, am I ever going to know what you're doing if you persist in proceeding like this? You didn't go to that meeting just to waste time; I can trust you that far. So I have to assume that the whole maneuver was a trick, designed to force the March on Earth, rather than to defeat it. You gave the cities a clearly defined, superficially sound, and less-attractive alternative. Once they had rejected the alternative, they had committed themselves to the King's tactics, without knowing it."

"That's quite right."

"If that's right," Hazleton said, looking up suddenly with a flat flash of almost-violet eyes,

"I think it's stupid. I think it's stupid even though it was marvelously devious. There's such a thing as outsmarting yourself."

Amalfi said, "That could be. In any event, if the choice had been limited to marching on Earth versus staying in the jungle, the cities would have stayed hi the jungle. Would it have been sensible to allow that?"

"We can't afford to stay in the jungle, anyhow."

"Of course we can't. And by the same token, we couldn't leave it by ourselves. The only way we could get free of this star cluster is in the middle of a mass movement. What else could I have been shooting for?"

"I don't know," Hazleton said. "But there's something else besides that in the back of your head."

"And your complaint is that you don't know about it in advance. I know why you don't know. You know, too."

"Dee?"

"Certainly," Amalfi said. "You weren't asking yourself the right question. You were emotionally driven to ask why I wanted Dee along. The question was pertinent enough, but it wasn't exactly central. If you had stood back a little further from the whole problem, you'd have seen why I wanted the March on Earth to go through, too."

"Ill keep trying," Hazleton said grimly. "Though I'd have preferred to be told. You and I are getting further apart every year, boss. It used to be that we thought very much alike; and it was then that you developed your habit

of not telling me the whole story. It was a training device, I think now. The more I was made to worry about the total plan, the more I was required to think the thing out for myself—which meant trying to figure you out—the more training I got in thinking like you.

And of course, to be a proper city manager, I had to think like you. You had to be sure that any decisions I made in your absence would be the decisions you would have made had you been around.

"All this hit me after our tangle with the Duchy of Gort. That incident was the first time that you and I had been out of touch with each other long enough for a situation of really major proportions to develop—a situation about which I knew Very little until I could get back to the city from Utopia and get briefed.

"When I got back, I found that I was damn lucky not to have thought like you. My first failure to comprehend your whole plan—and your training method of leaving me to puzzle things out alone—apparently had doomed me in your mind. You had* written me off, and you were training Carrel as my successor."

"All this is accurate reportage," Amalfi said. "If you mean to accuse me of keeping a bard school——" "——a fool will learn in no other?" "No. A fool won't learn at all. But I don't deny keeping a hard school. Go on."

"I haven't far to go, now. I learned in the Gort-Utopia system that thinking the way you think can sometimes be deadly for me. I got off Utopia by thinking my way, not yours.

The confirmation came when we hit He; had I been thinking entirely like you in that situation, we'd still be on the planet."

"Mark, you still haven't made your point. I can tell. It's perfectly true that we often relied on your plans, and precisely because they come from a mind most unlike my own. What of it?"



"This of it. You're now out to rub out whatever trace of originality I have. You used to value it, as you say. You used to use it for the city, and defend it against the City Fathers when they had an attack of conservatism. But now you've changed, and so have I.

"These days, I seem to be tending toward thinking more and more like a human being, with human concerns. I don't feel like Hazleton the master conniver any more, except in flashes. The opposite change is taking place in you. You're becoming more and more alienated from human concerns. When you look at people, you see—machines. After a little,,more of this, we won't be able to tell you from the Cit^Fathers."

Amalfi tried to think about it. He was very tired, and he felt old. It was not yet time for his anti-agathic shot, not by more than a decade, but knowing that he would probably not get it made the centuries he had already traversed weigh heavily upon his back.

"Or maybe I'm beginning to think that I'm a god," he said. "You. accused me of that on Murphy. Have you ever tried to imagine, Mark, how completely crippling it is to any man's humanity to be the mayor of an Okie city for hundreds of years? I suppose you have-—your own responsibilities aren't lighter than mine, only a little different. Let me ask you this, then: isn't it obvious- that this change in you dates from the day when Dee first came on board?"

"Of course it's obvious," Hazleton said, looking up sharply. "It dates from the Utopia-Gort affair. That's when Dee came on board; she was a Utopian. Are you about to tell me that she's to blame?"

"Shouldn't it also be obvious," Amalfi continued, with weary implacability, "that the converse change in me dates from the same event? Gods of all stars, Mark, don't you know that I love Dee, too?"

Hazleton froze and went white. He looked rigidly with suddenly blind eyes at the remains of Amalfi's miserable supper. After a long time, he laid his slide rule on the table as delicately as if it were made of spun sugar.

"I do know," he said, at long last. "I did know. But I didn't—want to know that I knew."

Amalfi spread his big hands in a gesture of helplessness he had not had to use for more than half a century. The city manager did not seem to notice.

"That being the case," Hazleton resumed, his voice suddenly much tighter, "that being so, Amalfi, I——"

He stopped.

"You needn't rush, Mark. Actually it doesn't change things much. Take your time."

"Amalfi—/ want off."

Each evenly spaced word struck Amalfi like the strokes of a mallet against a gong, the strokes which, timed exactly to the gong's vibration period, drive it toward shattering. Amalfi had expected anything but those three words. They told him that he had had no real idea of how helpless he had become.

/ want off was the traditional formula by which a starman renounced the stars. The Okie who spoke them cut himself off forever from the cities, and from the long swooping lines of the ingeodesics that the cities followed through space-time. The Okie who spoke them became planet-bound.

And—it was entirely final. The words were seared into Okie law. / want off could never be refused—nor retracted.



"You have it," Amalfi said. "Naturally. I won't tax you with being hasty, since it's-too late."

"Thanks."

"Well, where do you want it? On the nearest planet, or at the city's next port of call?"

These, too, were merely the traditional alternatives, but Hazleton didn't seem to relish either of them. His lips were white, and beseemed to be trembling slightly.

"That," he said, "depends on where you're planning to go next. You haven't yet told me."

Hazleton's disturbance disturbed Amalfi, too, more than he liked to recognize.

Mechanically, it would almost surely be possible for the ex-city manager to withdraw his decision; and mechanically, it would be possible to make the suggestion to Hazleton.

Those three words had been neither overheard nor recorded as far as Amalfi knew, except —a small chance—by the treacher, the section of the City Fathers which handled tablewaiting. Even there, however, the City Fathers wouldn't be likely to scan the treacher's memory bank more than once every five years. The treacher had nothing interesting to remember but the eating preference patterns of the Okies, and such patterns change slowly and, for the most part, insignificantly. No, the City Fathers need not know that Hazleton had resigned, not for a while yet.

But allowing the city manager to back down did not even occur to Amalfi; the mayor was too thoroughly an Okie for that. Had it been proposed to him, Almalfi would have objected that'the uttering of those three words had put Hazleton as totally under Amalfi's smallest command as was a private in the city's perimeter police; and he could have shown reasons why subservience of that kind

was now required of Hazleton. He could also have shown that those three words could never be actually revoked, however closely they were kept a secret between Hazleton and himself; if pressed, be could have shown that he could never forget them, aid''that Hazleton couldn't either. He might have explained that, every time Amalfl decided against a plan of Hazleton's, the city manager would put it down to secret rancor against that smothered resignation. Or, being Amalfl, he might merely have noted that the conflict between the two men had already been deep-running, and that after Hazleton had said, "I want off," it would become outright pathological.

Actually, however, no one of these things entered his mind. Hazleton had said, "I want off." Amalfi was an Okie, and for an Okie, "I want off" is final.

"No," the mayor said, at once. "You've asked for off, and that's the end of it. You're no longer entitled to any knowledge of city policy or plans, except for what reaches you in the form of directives. Now's the time when you can use your training in thinking like me, Mark— obviously you'll have no difficulty in thinking like the City Fathers—because it'll be your only source of information on policy from now on."

"I understand," Hazleton said formally. He stood silent a moment longer. Amalfi waited.

"At the next port of call, then," Hazleton said.

"All right. Until then, you're outgoing city manager. Put Carrel back into training as your successor, and begin feeding the City Fathers predisposing data toward him now. I don't want any more fuss from them when the election is held than we had when you were elected."

Hazleton's expression became slightly more set. "Right."

"Secondly, get the city moving toward the perimeter to intersect the town you couldn't raise. I'll want an orbit that gives us logarithmic acceleration, with all the real drive concentrated at the far end. On the way, ready two work teams: one for a fast spindizzy assessment, the other to run up whatever's necessary on the mass chromatogra-phy equipment, whatever that may be. Include medium-heavy dismounting tools, below the graving dock size, but heavy enough to handle any job less drastic."

"Right."

"Also, ready Sergeant Andersen's squad, in case that city isn't quite as dead as it sounds." "Right," Hazleton said again. "That's it," Amalfi said.

Hazleton nodded stiffly, and made as if to turn. Then, astonishingly, his stiff face exploded into a torrential passion of speech.

"Boss, tell me this before I go," he said, clenching his fists. "Was all this to push me into asking for off? Couldn't you think of any way of keeping your plans to yourself but kicking me out—or making me kick myself out? I don't believe this love story of yours, damned if I do. You know I'll take Dee with me when I disembark. And the Great Renunciation is just slop, just pure fiction, especially coming from you. You aren't any more in love with Dee than I am with you——"

And then Hazleton turned so white that Amalfi thought for a moment that the man was about to faint.

"Score one for you, Mark," Amalfi said. "Evidently I'm not the only one who*s staging a Great Renunciation." "Gods of all stars, Amalfi!"

"There are none," Amalfi said. "I can't do anything more, Mark. I've said good-by to you a hell of a lot of times, but this has to be the last time—not by my election, but by yours. Go and get the jobs done."

Hazleton said, "Right." He spun and strode out. The door reached full dilation barely in time.

Amalfi sighed as deeply as a sleeping child. Then he nipped the treacher switch from set to clear. The treacher said, "Will that be all, sir?"

"What do you want to do, poison me twice at the same meal?" Amalfi growled. "Get me an ultraphone line."

The treacher's voice changed at once. "Communications," it said briskly.

"This is the mayor. Raise Lieutenant Lerner, Forty-fifth Acolyte Border Security Group.

Don't give up too easily; that was his last address, but he's been upgraded since. When you get him, tell him you're speaking for me. Tell him also that the cities in the jungle are organizing for some sort of military action, and that if he can get a squadron in here fast enough, he can break it up. Got it?" "Yes, sir." The Communications man read it back. "If you say so, Mayor Amalfi."

"Who else would say so? Be sure Lerner doesn't get a fix on us. Send it pulse-modulated if you can."

"Can't, boss. Mr. Hazleton just put us under way. But there's a powerful Acplyte AM

ultraphone station somewhere near by. I cato'get our message into synch with it, and make the cop's detectors focus on the vector. Is that good enough?"

"Better, even," Amalfi said. "Hop to it."

"There's one other thing, boss. That big drone you ordered last year is finally finished, and the shop says that it has Dirac equipment mounted in it and ready to go. I've inspected.it and it looks fine, except that it's as big as a lifeship and just as detectable."

"All right, good; but that can wait. Get the message out."

"Yes, sir."

The voice cut out entirely. The incinerator chute gaped suddenly, and the dishes rose from the table and soared toward the opening in solemn procession. The goblet of wine left behind a miasmic trail, like a miniature comet.

At the last minute, Amalfi jerked out of his reverie and made a wild grab in mid-air; but he was too late. The chute gulped down that final item and shut again with a satisfied slam.

Hazleton had left his slide rule upon the table^

The space-suited party moved cautiously and with grim faces through the black, dead streets of the city on the periphery. At the lead, Sergeant Anderson's hand torch flashed into a doorway and flicked out again at once.

No other lights whatsoever could be seen in the dark city, nor had there been any response to calls. Except for a weak spindizzy field, no power flowed in the city at all, and even the screen was too feeble to maintain the city's air pressure above four pounds per square inch—hence the space suits.

Inside Amalfi's helmet O'Brian's voice was saying, "The second phase is about to start in the jungle, Mr. Mayor. Lerner moved in on them with what looks from here like all of the Acolyte navy he dared to pull out of the cluster itself. There's an admiral's flagship in the fleet, but all the big brass is doing is relaying Lerner's suggestions in the form of orders; he seems to have no ideas of his own."

"Sensible setup,"• Amalfi said, peering ahead unsuccessfully in the gloom.

"As far as it goes, sir. The thing is, the squadron itself is far too big for the job. It's unwieldly, and the jungle detected it well in advance; we stood ready to give the alarm to the King as you ordered, but it didn't prove necessary. The cities are drawing up in a rough battle formation now. It's quite a sight, even through the proxies. First time in history, isn't it?" "As far as I know. Does it look like it'll work?" "No, sir," the proxy pilot said promptly. "Whatever organization the King's worked out, it's functioning only partially, and damn sloppily. Cities are too clumsy for this kind of work even under the best hand, and his is a long way from the best, I'd judge. But we'll soon see for ourselves."

"Right. Give me another report in an hour." Anderson held up his hand and the party halted. Ahead was a huge pile of ultimately solid blackness, touched deceptively here anfl there with feeble stars where windows threw back reflections. Far aloft, however, one window glowed softly with its own light.

The boarding-squad men deployed quickly along opposite sides of the street while the technics took cover. Amalfi sidled along the near wall to where the sergeant was crouching.

"What do you think, Anderson?"

"I don't like it, Mr. Mayor. It stinks of mouse traps. Maybe everybody's dead and the last man didn't have the strength to turn out the light. On the other hand, just one light left burning for that reason, in the whole city?"

"I see what you mean. Dulany, take five men down that side street where the facsimile pillar is, follow it until you're tangent to the corner of this building up ahead, and stick out a probe. Don't use more than a couple of micro-volts, or you might get burned."

"Yessir." Dulany's squad—the man himself might best be described as a detector-detector—slipped away soundlessly, shadows among shadows.

"That isn't all I stopped us for, Mr. Mayor," Anderson said. "There's a grounded aircab just around the corner here. It's got a dead passenger in it. I wish you'd take a

look at him."

Amalfi took the proffered torch, covered its lens with

the mitten of his suit so that only a thin shred of light leaked through and played it for half a second through the cab's window. He felt his spine going rigid.

Wherever the light touched the flesh of the hunched corpse, it—glistened. I •'

"Communications 1'*

"Yes, sir!"

"Set up the return port for decontamination. Nobody gets back on board our town until he's been boiled alive— understand? I want the works."

There was a brief silence. Then: "Mr. Mayor, the city manager already has that in the works."

Amalfi grimaced wryly in the darkness. Anderson said, "Pardon me, sir, but—how did Mr.

Hazleton guess?"

"Why, that's not too hard to see, at least after the fact, sergeant. This city we're on was desperately poor. And being poor under the new money system means being low on drugs. The end result, as Mr. Hazleton saw, and I should have seen, is—plague."

"The sons of bitches," the sergeant said bitterly. The epithet seemed intended to apply to every non-Okie ifl the universe.

At the same moment, a lurid scarlet glare splashed over his face and the front of his suit, and red lanes of light checkered the street. There was an almost-simultaneous flat crash, without weight in the thin air, but ugly-sounding.

"TDX!" Anderson shouted, involuntarily.

"Dulany? Dulany! Damn it all, I told the man to take it easy with that probe. Whoever survived on that squad, report!"

Underneath the ringing in Amalfi's ears, someone began to laugh. It was as ugly a sound as the TDX explosion had been. There was no other answer.

"All right, Anderson, surround this place. Communications, get the rest of the boarding squad and half the security police over here on the double."

The nasty laughter got louder.

"Whoever you are that's putting out that silly giggle, you're going to learn how to make another kind of noise when I get my hands on you," Amalfi added viciously. "Nobody uses TDX on my men, I don't care whether he's an Okie or a cop. Get me? Nobody!"

The laughter stopped. Then a cracked voice said, "You lousy damned vultures."

"Vultures, is it?" Amalfi snapped. "If you'd answered our calls in the first place, there'd have been no trouble. Why don't you come to your senses? Do you want to die of the pestilence?"

"Vultures," the voice repeated. It carried an overtone of sinister idiocy. "Eaters of carrion.

The gods of all stars will boil your bones for soup." The cackling began again.



Amalfi felt a faint chill. He switched to tight-beam. "Anderson, keep your men at a respectable distance, and wait for the reinforcements. This place is obviously mined to the teeth, and I don't .know what other surprises our batty friend has for us."

"I could lob a gas grenade through that window——"

"Don't you suppose they're wearing suits, too? Just ring the place and sit tight."

"Check."

Amalfi squatted down upon his hams behind the aircab, sweating. There just'? might be enough power left in the accumulators here to put up a Bethe fender around the building, but that wasn't the main thing on his mind. This business of boarding another Okie city was easily the hardest operation he had ever had to direct. Every move went against the grain. The madman's accusation had hit him in his most vulnerable spot.

After what seemed like a whole week, his helmet ultra-phone said, "Proxy room. Mr.

Mayor, the jungle beat off Lerner's first wave. I didn't think they could do it. They got in one good heavy lick at the beginning—blew two heavy cruisers right out of the sky—and the Acolytes act scared green. The admiral's launch has run out completely, and left Lerner holding the bag."

"Losses?"

"Four cities definitely wiped out. We haven't enough proxies out to estimate cities damaged with any accuracy, but Lerner had a group of about thirty towns enfiladed when the first cruiser got it."

"You haven't got the big drone out there, have you?" the mayor said in sudden alarm.

"No, sir; Communications ordered that one left berthed. I'm waiting now to see when the next Acolyte wave gets rolling; I'll call you as———"

The proxy pilot's yoice snapped off, and the stars went out.

There was a shout of alarm from some technie in the party. Amalfl got up, cautiously and looked overhead. The single window in thelbig building which had shown a light was blacked out now, too.

"What the hell happened, Mr. Mayor?" Anderson's voice said quietly.

"A local spindizzy screen, at at least half-drive. Probably they've dropped their main screen entirely. Everybody keep to cover—there may be flares."

The laughter began again.

"Vultures," the voice said. "Little mangy vultures in a big tight cage."

Amalfl cut back in on the open radio band. "You're going to wreck your city," he said steadily. "And once you tear this section of it loose, your power will fail and your screen will go down again. You can't win, and you know it."

The street began to tremble. It was only a faint trembling now, but there was no telling how long the basic structure of the dead city could hold this one small area in place against the machine that was trying to fling it away into space. Hazleton, of course, would rush over a set of portable nutcrackers as soon as he had seen what had happened—but whether this part of the city would still be here when the nutcrackers arrived was an open question.

In the meantime, there was exactly nothing Amalfi could do about it. Even his contact with his own city was cut off.

"It isn't your city," the voice said, suddenly deceptively reasonable. "It's our city. You're hijacking us. But we won't let you."

"How were we supposed to know any of you were still alive?" Amalfi demanded angrily.

"You didn't answer our calls. Is it our fault if you didn't hear them? We thought this town was open for salvage——"

His voice was abruptly obliterated by a new one, enormous yet familiar! which came slamming into his helmet as if it intended to drive him out of his suit entirely.

"EARTH POLICE AA EMERGENCY ACOLYTE CLUSTER CONDENSATION XIII ARM BETA," it thundered. "SYSTEM

UNDER ATTACK BY MASS ARMY OF TRAMP CITIES. POLICE AID URGENTLY

NEEDED. LERNER LIEUTENANT FORTY-FIFTH

BORDER SECURITY GROUP ACTING COMMANDER CLUSTER DEFENSE FORCES. ACKNOWLEDGE."

Amalfl whistled soundlessly through his teeth. There was evidently a Dirac transceiver in operation somewhere inside the close-drawn spindizzy screen, or his helmet phones wouldn't have caught Lerner's yell for help; Diracs were too bulky for the usual proxy, let alone for a space suit. By the same token, everybody else in the galaxy possessing Dirac equipment had heard that yell—it had been the instantaneous propagation of Dirac pulses that had dealt the death blow to the West's hypercomplex relativity theories millennia ago.

And if a Dirac sender was open inside this bubble ...

"LERNER ACOLYTE DEFENSE FORCES YOUR MESSAGE IN. SQUADRON ASSIGNED YOUR

CONDENSATION ON WAY. HANG ON. BETA ARM COMMAND EARTH."

. . . then Amalfi could use it. He flipped the chest switch and shouted, "Hazleton, are your nutcrackers rolling?"

"Rolling, boss," Hazleton shot back instantly. "Another ninety seconds and-*——"

"Too late, this sector will tear loose before then. Tune up our own screen to twenty-four per cent and hold———"

He realized suddenly that he was shouting into a dead mike. The Okies here had caught on belatedly to what was happening, and had cut the power to their Dirac. Had that last, crucial, incomplete sentence gotten through, even a fragment of it? Or ...

Deep down under Amalfi's feet an alarming sound began to rise. It was part screech, part monstrous rockslide, part prolonged and hollow groan. Amalfi's teeth began to itch in their sockets, and his bowels stirred slightly. He grinned.

The message had gotten through—or enough of it to enable Hazleton to guess the rest.

The one spindizzy holding this field was going sour. Against the combined power of the nearby drivers of Amalfi's city, it could no longer maintain the clean space-lattice curvature it was set for.

"You're sunk," Amalfi told the invisible defenders quietly. "Give up now. and you'll not be hurt. I'll skip the TDX incident—Dulany was one of my best men, but -maybe there was some reason on your side, too. Come on over with us, and you'll have a city to call your own again. This one isn't any good to you any more, that's obvious."

There was no answer.

Patterns began to'race across the close-pressing black sky. The nutcrackers—portable generators designed to heterodyne a spindizzy,., field to the overload point—were being brought to |ear. The single tortured spindizzy howled with anguish.



"Speak up, up there," Amalfi said. "I'm trying to be fair, but if you force me to drive you out——"

"Vultures," the cracked voice sobbed.

The window aloft lit up with a searing glare and burst outward. A long tongue of red flame winnowed out over the street. The spindizzy screen went down at once, and with it the awful noise from the city's power deck; but it was several minutes before Amalfi's dazzled eyes could see the stars again.

He stared up at the exploded scar on the side of the building, outlined in orange heat swiftly dimming. He felt a little sick.

"TDX again," he said softly. "Consistent to the last, the poor sick idiots."

"Mr. Mayor?"

"Here."

"This is the proxy room. There's a regular stampede going on in the jungle. The cities are streaming away from the red star as fast as they can tune up. No discernible order—just a mob, and a panicky mob, too. No signs of anything being done for the wounded cities; and it looks to me like they're just being left for Lerner to break up as soon as he gets up enough courage."

Amalfi nodded to himself. "All right, O'Brian, launch the big drone now. I want that drone to go with those cities and stick with them all the way. Pilot it personally; it's highly detectable, and there'll probably be several attempts to destroy it, so be ready to dodge."

"I will, sir. Mr. Hazleton just launched her a moment ago; I'm giving her the gun right now."

For some reason this did not improve Amalfi's temper in the least.

The Okies set to work rapidly, dismounting the dead city's spindizzies from their bases and shipping them into storage on board their own city. The one which had been overdriven in that last futile defense had to be left behind, of course; like the Twenty-third Street machine, it was hot and could not be approached, except by a graving dock.

The rest went over as whole units. Hazleton looked more and more puzzled as the big machines came aboard, but he seemed resolved to ask no questions.

Carrel, however, suffered under no such self-imposed restraints. "What are we going to do with all these dismounted drivers?" he said. All three men stood in a sally port at the perimeter of their city, watching the ungainly bulks being floated across.

"We're going to fly another planet," Hazleton said flatly.

"You bet we are," Amalfi agreed. "And pray to your star gods that we're in time, Mark."

Hazleton didn't answer..,

Carrel said, "In time for what?"

"That I won't say until I have it right under my nose on a screen. It's a hunch, and I think it's a good one. In the meantime, take my word for it that we're in a hurry, like we've never been in a hurry before. What's the word on that mass chromatography apparatus, Hazleton?"

"It's a reverse-English on the zone-melting process for refining germanium, boss. You take a big column of metal—which metal doesn't matter, as long as it's pure— and contaminate one end of it with the stuff you want to separate out. Then you run a disc-shaped electric field up the column from the contaminated end, and the contaminants are carried along by resistance heating and separate out at various points along the bar. To get pure fractions, you cut the bar apart with a power saw."

"But does it work?"

"Nah," Hazleton said. "It's just what we've seen a thousand times before. Looks good in theory, but not even the guys who owned this city could make it go."

"Another Lyran invisibility machine—or no-fuel drive," the mayor said, nodding. "Too bad; a process like that would be useful. Is the equipment massive?"

"Enormous. The area it occupies is twelve city blocks on a side."

"Leave it there," Amalfi decided at once. "Obviously this outfit was bragging from desperation when it offered the technique for the Acolyte woman's job. If she'd taken them up on it, they wouldn't have been able to deliver— and I don't care to lead us into any such temptation."

"In this case the knowledge is as good as the equipment," Hazleton said. "Their City Fathers will have all the

information we coyld possibly worry out of the apparatus itself."

"Would somebody give me the pitch on this exodus of cities from the jungle,?" Carrel put in. "I wasn't along on your trip to the King's city, and I still think the whole idea of a March on Earth is crazy."

Amalfl remained silent. After a moment, Hazleton said, "It is and it isn't. The jungle doesn't dare stand up to a real Earth force and slug it out, and everybody knows now that there's an Earth force on its way here. The cities want to be somewhere else in a hurry.

But they still have some hope of getting Earth protection from the Acolyte cops and similar local organizations if they can put their case before the authorities outside of a trouble area."

"That," Carrel said, "is just what I don't see. What hope do they have of getting a fair shuffle? And why don't they just contact Earth on the Dirac, as Lerner did, instead of making this long trip? It's sixty-three hundred or so light years from here to Earth, and they aren't organized well enough to make such a long haul without a lot of hardship."

"And they'll do all their talking with Earth over the Dirac even after they get there," Amalfi added. "Partly, of course, this march is sheer theatricalism. The King hopes that such a big display of cities will make an impression on the people he'll be talking to. Don't forget that Earth is a quiet, rather idyllic world these days—a skyful of ragged cities will create a lot of alarm there.

"As for getting a square shuffle: the King is relying on a tradition of at least moderately fair dealing that goes back many centuries. Don't forget, Carrel, that for the last thousand years the Okie cities have been the major unifying force in our entire galactic culture."

"That's news to me," Carrel said, a little dubiously.

"But it's quite true. Do you know what a bee is? Well, it's a little Earth insect that sucks nectar from flowers. While it's about it, it picks up pollen and carries it about; it's a prime factor in cross-fertilization of plants. Most habitable planets have similar insects. The bee doesn't know that he's essential to the ecology of his world—all he's out to do is collect as much honey as he can—but that doesn't make him any less essential.

"The cities have been like the bee for a long time. The governments of the advanced planets, Earth in particular,

know it, even if the cities generally don't. The planets distrust the cities, but they also know that they're vital and must be protected. The planets are tough on bindlestiffs for the same reason. The bindlestiffs are diseased bees; the taint that they carry gets fastened upon innocent cities, cities that are needed to keep new techniques and other essential information on the move from planet to planet. Obviously, cities and planets alike have to protect themselves from criminal outfits, but there's the culture as a whole to be considered, as well as the safety of an individual unit; and to maintain that culture, the free passage of legitimate Okies throughout the galaxy has to be maintained."

"The King knows this?" Carrel said. "Of course he does. He's eight hundred years old; how could he help but know it? He wouldn't put it like this, but all the same, it's the essence of what he's depending upon to carry through his March on Earth."

"It still sounds risky to me," Carrel said dubiously. "We've all been cdnditioned almost from birth to distrust Earth, and Earth cops especially——"

"Only because the cops distrust us. That means that the cops are conditioned to be strict with cities about the smallest violations; so, since small violations of local laws are inevitable in a nomadic life, it's smart for an Okie to steer clear of cops. But for all the real hatred that exists between Okies and cops, we're both on the same side. We always have been."

On the underside of the city, just within the cone of vision of the three men, the big doors to the main hold swung slowly shut.

"That's the last one," Hazleton said. "Now I suppose we go back to where we left the all-purpose city we stole from Murphy, and relieve it of its drivers, too."

"Yes, we do," Amalfi said. "And after that, Mark, we go on to Hern Six. Carrel, ready a couple of small fission bombs for the Acolyte garrison there—it can't be large enough to make us much trouble, but we've no time left to play patty-cake."

"Is Hern Six the planet we're going to fly?" Carrel said.

"It has to be," Amalfi said, with a trace of impatience.

"It's the only one available. Furthermore, this time we're going to have to control the flight, not just let the planet scoot off anywhere its natural converted rotation wants it

to go. Being carried clean out of the galaxy once is once too often for me."

"Then I'd better put a crack team to work op the control problem with the City Fathers,"

Hazleton said. "Since we didn't havl them to consult with on He, we'll have to screen every scrap of pertinent information they have in stock. No wonder you've been so hot on this project for corralling knowledge from other cities. I only wish we could have gotten started on integrating it sooner."

"I haven't had this in mind quite that long," Amalfi said. "But,, believe me, I'm not sorry now that it turned out this way."

Carrel said, "Where are we going?"

Amalfi turned away toward the airlock. He had heard the question before, from Dee, but this was the first time that he had had an answer.

"Home," he said.

CHAPTER SEVEN: Hern VI



MOUNTING Hern VI—as desolate and damned a slab of rock as Amalfi had ever set down upon—for guided spindizzy flight was incredibly tedious work. Drivers had to be spotted accurately at every major compass point, and locked solidly to the center of gravity of the planetoid; and then each and every machine had to be tuned and put into balance with every other. And there were not enough spindizzies to set up a drive for the planet as a whole which would be fully dirigible when the day of flight came. The flight of Hern VI, when all the work was finally done, promised to be giddy and erratic.

But at least it would go approximately where the master space stick directed it to go. That much respon-siveness, Amalfi thought, was all that was really necessary— or all that he hoped would be necessary.

Periodically, O'Brian, the proxy pilot, reported on the progress of the March on Earth.

The mob had lost quite a few stragglers along the way as it passed attractive-looking systems where work* might be found, but the main body was still streaming doggedly toward the mother planet. Though the outsize drone was as obvious a body as a minor moon, so far not a single Okie had taken a pot shot at it. O'Brian had kept it darting through and about the marchers in a double-sine curve in three dimensions, at its top speed and with progressive modulations of the orbit. If the partial traces which it made on any individual city's radar screen were not mistaken for meteor tracks, predicting its course closely enough to lay a gun on it would keep any ordinary computer occupied full time.

It was a superb job of piloting. Amalfi made a mental note to see to it that the task of piloting the city itself was split off from the city -manager's job when Hazleton stepped down. Carrel was not a born pilot, and O'Brian was obviously the man Carrel would need.

At the beginning of the Hern VI conversion, the City Fathers had placed E-Day—the day of arrival of the marchers within optical telescope distance of Earth—at one hundred fifty-five years, four months, twenty days. Each report which came in from the big drone's pilot cut this co-ordinate-set back toward the flying present as the migrating jungle lost its laggards and became more and more compact, more and more able to put on speed as a unit. Amalfi consumed cigars faster and drove his men and machines harder every time the new computation was delivered to his desk.

But a full year had gone by since installation had started on Hern VI before O'Brian sent up the report he had been dreading and yet counting upon to arrive sooner or later.

"The march has lost two more cities to greener pastures, Mr. Amalfi," the proxy pilot said.

"But that's routine. We've gained a city, too."

"Gained one?" Amalfi said tensely. "Where'd it come from?"

"I don't know. The course I've got the drone on doesn't allow me to look in any one direction more than about twenty-five seconds at a time. I have to take a census every time I pass her through the pack. The last time I went around, there was this outfit on the screen, just as if it had been there all the time. But that isn't all. It's the damnedest looking city I've ever seen, and I can't find anything like it in the files, either."

"Describe it."

"For one thing, it's enormous. I'm not going to have to worry about anybody spotting my drone for a while. This outfit must have every detector in the jungle screaming blue bloody murder. Besides, it's closed up."

"What do you mean b£ that?"

"It's got a smooth hull all around, Mr. Mayor. It isn't the usual platform with buildings on it and a spindizzy screen around both. It's more like a proper spaceship, except for its size."

"Any communication between it and the pack?"

"About what you'd expect. Wants to join the march; the King gave it the okay. I think he was pleased; it's the very first answer he's had to his call for a general mobilization of Okies, and this one really looks like a top-notch city. It calls itself Lincoln-Nevada."

"It would," Amalfi said grimly. He mopped his face. "Give me a look at it, O'Brian."

The screen lit up. Amalfi mopped his face again.

"All right. Back your drone off a good distance from the march and keep that thing in sight from now on. Get 'Lincoln-Nevada' between you and the pack. It won't shoot at your drone; it doesn't know it doesn't belong there."

Without waiting for O'Brian's acknowledgment, Amalfi switched over to the City Fathers.

"How much longer is this job going to take?" he demanded.

"ANOTHER SIX YEARS, MR. MAYOR."

"Cut it to four at a minimum. And give me a course from here to the Lesser Magellanic Cloud, one that crosses Earth's orbit."

"MR. MAYOR, THE LESSER MAGELLANIC CLOUD IS TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY

THOUSAND LIGHT YEARS AWAY FROM THE ACOLYTE CLUSTER!"

"Thank you," Amalfi said sardonically. "I have no intention of going there, I assure you.

All I want is a course with those three points on it."

"VERY WELL. COMPUTED."

"When would we have to spin, to cross Earth's orbit on E-Day?"

"FROM FIVE SECONDS TO FIFTEEN DAYS FROM TODAY, FIGURING FROM THE

CENTER OF THE CLOUD TO EITHER EDGE."

"No good. We cant start within those limits. Give me a perfectly flat trajectory from here to there."

"THAT ARC INVOLVES NINE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-EIGHT DIRECT COLLISIONS

AND FOUR HUNDRED ELEVEN THOUSAND AND TWO GRAZES AND

NEAR-MISSES."

"Use it."

The City Fathers were silent. Amalfi wondered if it were possible for machinery to be stunned. He knew that the City Fathers would never use the crow-flight arc, since it conflicted with their most ineluctable basic directive: Preserve the city first. This was all right with the mayor, He had given that instruction with an eye to the tempo of building on Hern VI; he had a strong hunch that it would go considerably faster after that stunner.

And as a matter of fact, it was just fourteen months later when Amalfi's hand closed on the master space stick for Hern VI, and he said:

"Spin!"

iS

The career of Hern VI from its native Acolyte cluster across the center of the galaxy made history—particularly in the field of instrumentation. Hern VI was a tiny world, considerably smaller than Mercury, but nevertheless it was the most monstrous mass ever kicked past the speed of light within the limits of the inhabited galaxy. Except for the planet of He, which had left the galaxy from its periphery and was now well on its way toward Messier 31 in Andromeda, no such body had ever before been flown under spindizzy or any other drive. Its passage left permanent scars in the recording banks of every detecting instrument within range, and the memories of it graven into the brains of sentient observers were no less drastic.

Theoretically, Hern VI was following the long arc laid out for it by Amalfi's City Fathers, an arc leading from the fringe of the Acolyte cluster all the way across the face of the galaxy to the center of the Lesser Magallanic Cloud. (Its mass center, of course; both clouds had emerged too recently from the galaxy as a whole to have developed the definite orbital dead centers characteristic of "spiral" nebulae.) The mean motion of the flying planet followed that arc scrupulously.

But at the speed at which Hern VI was traveling—a velocity which could not be expressed comfortably even in

multiples of C, the old arbitrary velocity of light—the slightest variation from that orbit became a careening side jaunt of horrifying proportions before even the microsecond reactions of |he City Fathers could effect the proper corrections. | •'

Like other starmen, Amalfi was accustomed enough to traveling at transphotic speeds—in space, a medium ordinarily without enough landmarks to make real velocity very apparent. And, like all Okies, he had traveled on planets in creeping ground vehicles which seemed to be making dangerous speed simply because there were so many nearby reference points to make that speed seem great. Now he was finding out what it was like to move among the stars at a comparable velocity.

For at the velocity of Hern VI, the stars became almost as closely spaced as the girders beside a subway track— with the added hazard that the track frequently swerved enough to place two or three girders in a row between the rails. More than once Amalfi stood frozen on the balcony in the belfry of City Hall, watching a star that had been invisible half a second before cannoning directly at his head, swelling to fill the whole sky with glare———

Blackness.

* Amalfi felt irrationally that there should have been an audible whoosh as Hern VI passed that star. His face still tingled with the single blast of its radiation which had bathed him, despite the planet's hard-driven and nearly cross-polarized spindizzy screen, at that momentary perihelion.

There was nothing the matter, of course, with the orbit corrections of the City Fathers.

The difficulty was simply that Hern VI was not a responsive enough space craft to benefit by really quick orbital corrections. It took long seconds for the City Fathers' orders to be translated into enough vector thrust to affect the flight of the dead planet over parsecs of its shambling, paretic stride. And there was another, major reason: when all of Hern VI's axial rotation had been converted to orbital motion, .all of a considerable axial libration had also been converted, and there was nothing that could be done about the kinks this put in the planet's course.

Possibly, had Amalfi spotted his own city's spindizzies over the surface of the planet, as he had those of the all-purpose city and the plague city, Hern VI might have been more sensitive to the space stick; at the very least, the libration could have been left as real libration, for it wouldn't have mattered had the planet heeled a little this way and that as long as it kept a straight course. But Amalfi had left the city's drivers undisturbed for the most cogent of all reasons: for the survival of the city. Only one of the machines was participating at all in the flight of Hern VI, that being the big pivot spindizzy at Sixtieth Street. The others, including the decrepit but now almost cool Twenty-third Street machine, rested.

".. . calling the free planet, calling the free planet ... is there anybody alive on that thing?

. . . EPSILON CRUCIS, HAVE YOU SUCCEEDED IN RAISING THE BODY THAT JU$T

PASSED YOU? . . . CALLING THE FREE PLANET! YOU'RE ON COLLISION COURSE

WITH US—HELL AND DAMNATION! . . . CALLING ETA PALINURI, THE FREE

PLANET JUST GAVE US A HAIRCUT AND IT'S HEADING for you. It's either dead or out of control . . . Calling the free planet, calling^the free pla——"

There was no time to answer such frantic calls, which poured into the city from outside like a chain of spring freshets as inhabited systems were by-passed, skirted, overshot, fringed, or actually penetrated. The calls could have been acknowledged but acknowledgment would demand that some explanation be offered, and Hern VI would be out of ultraphone range of the questioner before more than a few sentences could be exchanged. The most panicky inquiries might have been answered by Dirac, but that had two drawbacks: the minor one, that there were too many inquiries for the city to handle, and no real reason to handle them; the major one, that Earth and one other important party would be able to hear the answer.

Amalfi did not care too much about what the Earth heard—Earth was already hearing plenty about the flight of Hern VI; if Dirac transmission could be spoken of as jammed, even in metaphor (and it could, for an infinite number of possible electron orbits in no way presupposes a Dirac transmitter tuned to each one), then Earth Dirac boards were jampacked with the squalls of alarmed planets along Hern VI's arc.

But about the other party, Amalfi cared a great deal.

O'Brian kept that other party steadily in the center of his drone's field of vision, and a small screen mounted on

the railing of the belfry showed Amalfi the shining, innocuous-looking globe whenever he cared to look at it. The newcomer to the Okie jungle—and to the March on Earth—had made no untoward or even interesting motion since it had arrive^ Jn the Okies' ken.

Occasionally it exchanged chitchat with the King of the jungle; less often, it talked with other cities. Boredom had descended on the jungle, so there was now a fair amount of intercity touring; but the newcomer was not visited as far as O'Brian or Amalfi could tell, nor did any gigs leave it. This, of course, was natural: Okies are solitary by preference, and a refusal to fraternize, providing that it was not actively hostile in tone, would always be understood in any situation. The newcomer, in short, was giving a very good imitation of being just another member of the hegira—just one more Birnam tree on the way to Dunsinane. ...

And if anyone in the jungle had recognized it for what it was, Amalfi could see no signs of it.



A fat star rocketed blue-white over the city and Dop-plered away into the black, shrinking as it faded out. Amalfi spoke briefly to the City Fathers. The jungle would be within sight of Earth within days—and the uproar on the Dirac was now devoted more and more to the approach of the jungle, less and less to Hern VI. Amalfi had considerable faith in the City Fathers, but the terrifying flight of stars past his head could not fail to make him worry about overshooting E-Day, or undershooting it, however accurate the calculations seemed to be.

But the City Fathers insisted doggedly that Hern VI would cross the solar system of Earth on E-Day, and Amalfi had to be as content as he could manage with the answer. On this kind of problem, the City Fathers had never been known to be wrong. He shrugged uneasily and phoned down to Astronomy.

"Jake, this is the mayor. Ever heard of something called 'trepidation'?"

"Ask me a hard one," the astronomer said testily.

"All right. How do I go about introducing some trepidation into this orbit we're following?"

The astronomer sounded his irritating chuckle. "You don't," he said. "It's a condition of space around suns, and you haven't the mass. The bottom limit, as I recall, is one and five-tenths times ten to the thirtieth power kilograms, but ask the City Fathers to be sure. My figure is of the right order of magnitude, anyhow."

"Damn," Amalfi said. He hung up and took time out to light a cigar, a task complicated by the hurtling stars in the corner of his eye; somehow the cigar seemed to flinch every time one went by. He lit the nervous cheroot and called Hazleton next.

"Mark, you once tried to explain to me how a musician plays the beginning and the end of a piece a little bit faster than normal so that he can play the middle section a little bit slower. Is that the way it goes?"

"Yes, that's tempo rubato—literally, 'robbed time.' "

"What I want to do is introduce something like that into the motion of this rock pile as we go across the solar system without any loss in total transit time. Any ideas?"

There was a moment's silence. "Nothing occurs to me, boss. Controlling that kind of thing is almost purely intuitional. You could probably do it better by personal control than O'Brian could set it up in the piloting section."

"Okay. Thanks."'**

Another dud. Personal control was out of the question at this speed, for no human pilot, not even Amalfi, had reflexes fast enough to handle Hern VI directly. It was precisely because he wanted to be able to handle the planet directly for a second or so of its flight that he wanted the trepidation introduced; and even then he would be none too sure of his ability to make the one critical, razor-edged alteration in her course which he knew he would need.

"Carrel? Come up here, will you?"

The boy arrived almost instantly. On the balcony, he watched the hurtling passage of stars with what Amalfi suspected was sternly repressed alarm.

"Carrel, you began with us as an interpreter, didn't you? You must have had frequent occasion to use a voice-writer, then."

"Yes, sir, I did."



"Good. Then you'll remember what happens when the carriage of the machine returns and spaces for another line. It brakes a little in the middle of the return, so it won't deform the carriage stop by constantly slamming into it; isn't that right? Well, what I want to know is: How is that done?"

"On a small machine, the return cable is on a cam

instead of a pulley," Carrel said, frowning. "But the big multiplex machines "that we use at conclaves are electronically controlled by something called a klystron; how that works, I've no idea." .

"Find out," Am|dfi' said. "Thanks, Carrel, that's just what I was looking for. I want such an apparatus cut into our present piloting circuit, so as to give us the maximum braking effect as we cross Earth's solar system that's compatible with our arriving at the cloud on time. Can it be done?"

"Yes, sir, that sounds fairly easy." He went below without being dismissed; a second later, a swollen and spotted red giant sun skimmed the city, seemingly by inches.

The phone buzzed. "Mr. Mayor—O'Brian here. The cities are coming up on Earth. Shall I put you through?"

Amalfi started. Already? The city was still megaparsecs away from the rendezvous; it was literally impossible to conceive of any speed which would make arrival on time possible. The mayor suddenly began to find the subway-pillar flashing of the stars reassuring.





"Yes, O'Brian, hook up the big helmet and stand by. Give me full Dirac on all circuits, and have our alternate course ready to plug in. Has Mr. Carrel gotten in touch with you yet?"

"No, sir," the pilot said. "But there's been some activity from the City Fathers in the piloting banks which I assumed was by your orders or one of the city manager's.

Apparently we're to be out of computer control at opposition."

"That's right. Okay, O'Brian, put me through." Amalfi donned the big helmet...

... and was back in the jungle.

The entire pack of cities, decelerating heavily now, was entering the "local group"—an arbitrary sphere with a radius of fifty light years, with Earth's sun at its center. This was the galaxy's center of population still, despite the . outward movement which had taken place for the past centuries, and the challenges which were now ringing around the heads of the Okies were like voices from history: 40 Eridani, Procyon, Kruger 60, Sirius, 61 Cygni, Altair, RD-4°4048, Wolf 359, Alpha Centauri ... to hear occasionally from Earth itself was no novelty, but these

challenges were almost like being hailed by ancient Greece or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

The jungle King had succeeded by now in drumming the hobo cities into a roughly military formation: a huge cone, eighteen million miles along -its axis. The cone was pointed by smaller towns unlikely to possess more than purely defensive armament. Just behind the point, which was actually rounded into a paraboloid like the head of a comet, the largest cities rode in the body of the cone. These included the King's own town, but did not include the "newcomer," which, despite its size, was flying far behind, roughly on the rim of the cone—it was this positioning which made it possible for Amalfi's drone to see almost the entire cone in the first place, for O'Brian's orders were to keep the big sphere in view regardless of how much of the jungle he had to sacrifice.

The main wall of the cone was made up mostly of medium-sized heavy-duty cities, again unlikely to be heavily armed, but having the advantage of mounting spindizzy equipment which oould be polarized to virtual opacity to any attack but that of a battleship.

All in all, Amalfi thought, a sensible organization of the materials at hand. It suggested power in reserve, plus considerable defensive ability, without at the same time advertising any immediate intention to attack.

He settled the heavy viewing helmet more comfortably on his shoulders and laid one hand on the balcony railing near the space stick. Simultaneously, a voice rang in his ears.

"Earth Security Center calling the Cities," the voice said heavily. "You are ordered to kill your velocity and remain where you are pending an official investigation of your claims."

"Not bloody likely," the King's voice said, "You are further warned that current Rulings in Council forbid any Okie city to approach Earth more closely than ten light years. Current Rulings also forbid gatherings of Okie cities in any numbers greater than four. However, we are empowered to tell you that this latter Ruling will be set aside for the duration of the investigation, provided that the approach limit is not crossed."

"We're crossing it," the King said. "You're going to take a good look at us. We're not going to form another jungle out here—we didn't come this far for nothing."

"Under such circumstances," the speaker at Earth Security continued, wittf the implacable indifference of the desperate bureaucrat operating by the book, "the law prescribes that participating cities be broken up. The full penalty will be applijfed'in this case as in all cases."

"No it won't, either, any more than it is in ninety-four cases out of a hundred. We're not a raiding force and we aren't threatening Earth with anything but a couple of good loud beefs. We're here because we couldn't hope for a fair deal any other way. All we want is justice."

"You've been warned."

"So have you. You can't attack us. You don't dare to. We're citizens, not crooks. We want justice done us, and we're coming on in to see that it gets done."

There was a sudden click as the City Fathers' Dirac scanner picked up a new frequency.

The new voice said: "Attention Police Command Thirty-two, Command HQ speaking for Vice Admiral MacMillan. Blue alert; blue alert. Acknowledge."

Another click, this time to the frequency the King used to communicate with the jungle.

"Pull up, you guys," the King said. "Hold formation, but figure to make camp fifteen degrees north of the ecliptic, in the orbit of Saturn but about ten degrees ahead of the planet. I'll give you the exact coordinates later. If they won't dicker with us there, we'll move on to Mars and really throw a scare into them. But we'll give them a fair chance."

"How do you know they'll give us a fair chance?" someone asked petulantly.

"Go back to the Acolytes if you can't take it here. Damned if I care."

Click.

"Hello Command HQ. Command Thirty-two acknowledging blue alert, for Commander Eisenstein. Command Thirty-two blue alert."

Click.



"Hey, you guys at the base of the cone, pull up! You're piling up on us."

"Not in our tanks, Buda-Pesht."

"Look again, dammit. I'm getting a heavy mass-gain here———"

Click.

"Attention Police Command Eighty-three, Command

HQ speaking for Vice Admiral MacMillan. Blue alert, blue alert. Acknowledge. Attention Police Command Thirty-two, red alert, red alert. Acknowledge."

"Eisenstein, Command Thirty-two, red alert acknowledged."

Click.

"Calling Earth; Proserpine Two station calling Earth Security. We are picking up some of the cities. Instructions?"

("Where the hell is Prosperine?" Amalfi asked the City Fathers.) ("PROSERPINE IS A GAS GIANT, ELEVEN THOUSAND MILES IN DIAMETER, OUTSIDE THE ORBIT OF PLUTO AT^A DISTANCE OF——"

("All right. Shut up.")

"Earth Security. Keep your nose clean, Prosperine Two. Command HQ is handling this situation. Take no action."

Click.

"Hello Commands,HQ. Command Eighty-three acknowledging blue alert; for Lieutenant Commander Fiorelli. Command Eighty-three blue alert."

Click.

"Buda-Pesht, they're bracketing us!"

"I know it. Make camp like I said. They don't dare lay a finger on us until we commit an actual aggression, and they know it. Don't let a show of cops bluff you now."

Click.

"Pluto station. We're picking up the vanguard of the cities."

"Sit tight, Pluto."

"You won't get them again until they've made camp— we're in opposition with Prosperine, but Neptune and Uranus are out of the line of flight entirely——"

"Sit tight."

Earth's sun grew gradually in Amalfi's view, growing only with the velocity of the drone, which was the velocity of the jungle. Earth's sun was still invisible from the city itself. In the helmet it was a yellow spark, without detectable disc, like a carbon arc through a lens-system set at infinity.

But it was, inarguably, the home sun. There was a curious thickness in Amalfi's throat as he looked at it. At this moment, Hern VI was screeching across the center of the galaxy, that center where there was no condensation of stars, such as other galaxies possessed, visible from Earth because of the masking interstellar dust clouds; the hurtling planet had just left behind it a black nebula in which every sun was an apparition, and every escape from those a miracle. Ahead was the opposite limb of the Milky Way, filled with new wonder.

Amalfi could not understand why the tiny, undistinguished yellow spark floating in front of him in the helmet made his eyes sting and water so intolerably.

The jungle was almost at a halt now, already down to interplanetary speeds, and still decelerating. In another ten minutes, the cities were at rest with reference to the sun; and from the drone, Amalfi could see, not very far away as he was accustomed to think of spatial distance, something else he had seen only once before: the planet Saturn.

No Earthly amateur astronomer with a new, uncertain, badly adjusted home reflector ever could have seen the ringed giant with fresher eyes. Amalfi was momentarily stupefied. What he saw was not only incredibly beautiful, but obviously impossible. A gas giant with rigid rings! Why had he ever left the Sol system at all, with a world so anomalous in his very back yard? And the giant had another planet circling it, too—a planet more than 3,000 miles through—in addition to the usual family of satellites of Hern VFs order of size.

Click.

"Make camp," the King was saying. "We'll be here for a while. Dammit, you guys at the base are still creeping on us a little. We're going to have to stop here—can't I pound that into your heads?"

"We're decelerating in good order, Buda-Pesht. It's the new city, the big job, that's creeping. He's in some kind of trouble, looks like."

From the drone, the diagnosis seemed accurate. The enormous spherical object had separated markedly from the main body of the jungle, and was now well ahead of the trailing edge of the cone. The whole sphere was wobbling a little as it moved, and every so often it would go dim as if under unexpected and uncontrollable polarization.

"Call him and ask if he needs help. The rest of you, take up orbits."

Amalfi barked, "O'Brian—time!"

"Course time, sir." *

"How do I know when this space stick comes alive again?"

"It's alive now, Mr. Mayor," the pilot said. "The City Fathers cut out as soon as you touch it. You'll get a warning buzzer five seconds before our deceleration starts into the deep part of its curve, and then a beep every half second after that to the second inflection point. At the last beep, it's all yours, for about the next two and a half seconds. Then the stick will go dead and the City Fathers will be back in control." • Click.

"Admiral MacMillan, what action do you plan to take now—if any?"

Amalfi took an instant dislike to the new voice on the Dirac. It was flat, twangy, and as devoid as a vodeur of emotion, except perhaps for a certain self-righteousness tinged with Angst. Amalfi decided at once that in a face-to-face meeting the speaker would always look somewhere else than into the face of the man to whom he was speaking.

The owner of that voice could not possibly be anywhere on the surface of the Earth, looking aloft for besiegers or going doggedly about his business; he was instead almost surely crouched in some subcellar.

"None, sir, at the moment," said the cops' Command HQ. "They've stopped, and appear to be willing to listen to reason. I have assigned Commander Eisenstein to cover their camp against any possible disturbance."

"Admiral, these cities have broken the law. They're here in defiance of our approach limits, and the very size of their gathering is illegal. Are you aware of that?"

"Yes, Mr. President," Command HQ said respectfully. "If you wish me to order individual arrests——"



"No, no, we can't jail a whole pack of flying tramps. I want action, Admiral. These people need to be taught a lesson. We can't have fleets of cities approaching Earth at will—it's a bad precedent. It indicates a decline of interstellar morality. Unless we return to the virtues of the pioneers, the lights will go out all over Earth, and grass will grow in the space lanes."

"Yes, sir," said Command HQ. "Well spoken, if you will permit me to say so. I stand ready for your orders, Mr. President."

"My orders are to do something. That camp is a fester-

ing sore on our heavens. I hold you personally responsible." *

"Yes, sir." The Admiral's voice was very crisp. "Commander Eisenstein, proceed with Operation A. Command Eighty-two, red ale|t;.Ted alert."

"Command Eighty-two acknowledging red alert."

"Eisenstein calling Command HQ."

"Command HQ."

"MacMillan, I'm taping my resignation over to you. The President's instructions don't specify Operation A. I won't be responsible for it."

"Follow orders, Commander," Command HQ said pleasantly. "I will accept your resignation—when the maneuver is completed."

The cities hung poised tensely in their orbits. For seconds, nothing happened.

Then pear-shaped, bumpy police battleships began springing out of nothingness around the jungle. Almost instantly, four cities raved into boiling clouds of gas.

The Dinwiddie pickup in the proxy backed itself hurriedly down the intensity scale until it could see again through the glare. The cities were still hanging there, seemingly stunned—as was Amalfi, for he had not imagined that Earth could have come to such a pass. Only an ideal combination of guilt and savagery could have produced so murderous a response; but evidently the president and MacMillan made up between them the necessary combination ...

Click.

"Fight!" the King's voice roared. "Fight, you lunkheads! They're going to wipe us out!

Fight!"

Another city went up. The cops were using Bethe blasters; the Dinwiddie circuit, stopped down to accommodate the hydrogen-helium explosions, could not pick up the pale guide beams of the weapons; it would have been decidedly difficult to follow the King's order effectively.

But the city of Buda-Pesht was already sweeping forward out of the head of the cone, arcing toward Earth. It spat murder back at the police ships, and actually caught one.

The mass of incandescent, melting metal appeared as a dim blob in Amalfi's helmet, then faded out again. A few cities followed the King; then a Jarger number; and then, suddenly, a great wave.

Click.

"MacMillan, stop them! I'll have you shot! They're going to invade———"

New police craft sprang into being every second. A haze gradually began to define the area of the Okie encampment: a planetary nebula of gas molecules, dust, and condensations of metal and water vapor. Through it the Bethe guide beams played, just on the edge of visibility now, but the sun, too, was acting on the cloud, and the whole mass was beginning to re-radiate, casting a deepening luminous veil over the whole scene, about which the Dinwiddie circuit could do very little. The whole spectacle reminded Amalfi of NGC, 1435 in Taurus, with exploding cities substituting novas for the Pleiades.

But there were more novas than the cities could account for, novas outside the cone of the encampment. The police craft, Amalfi noted with amazement, were beginning to burst almost as fast as they appeared. The swarming, disorganized cities were fighting back; but their inherent inefficiency as fighting machines ruled them out as the prime causes of such heavy police losses. Something else, something new was happening—something utterly deadly was loose among the cops ...

"Command Eighty-two, Operation A sub a—on the double!"

A police monitor blew up with an impossible, soundless flare.

The cities were winning. Any police battleship could handle any three cities without even beginning to breathe hard, and there had been at least five battleships per city when the pogrom had started. The cities hadn't had a chance.

Yet they were winning. They streamed on toward Earth, boiling with rage, and the police ships, with their utterly deadly weapons, exploded all over the sky like milkweed.

And, a little bit ahead of the maddened cities, an enormous silver sphere wallowed toward Earth, apparently out of control.

Amalfi could now see Earth herself as the tiniest of blue-green dots. He did not try to see it any better, though it was growing to a disc with fantastic speed. He did not want to see it. His eyes were already fogged enough with sentimental tears at the sight of the home sun.

But his eyes kept coming back to it. At its pole he caught the shine of ice ... J

. . . beep ...

The sound shocked him. The buzzer had already sounded, without his havulg .heard it.

The city would cross the solar system within the next two and a half seconds— or less, for he had no idea how many beeps had probed at his ears without response during his hypnotic struggle with the blue-green planet.

He could only guess, with the fullest impact of his intuition, that now was the time ...

Click. .

"PEOPLE OF EARTH. US THE CITY OF SPACES

CALLS UPON YOU ..."

. He moved the space stick out and back in a flat loop about three millimeters long. The City Fathers instantly snatched the stick out of his hand. Earth vanished. So did Earth's sun. Hern VI began to accelerate rapidly, regaining the screeching velocity across the face of the galaxy for which two Okie cities had died.

"... YOUR NATURAL MASTERS TO OKAY, THE MANS OF STARS, WHO THE

UNIVERSE-UNDERSTANDING LONG-LIFE-UNDERSTANDING INHERITORS, THE

INFERIOR HOMESTAYING DECADENT EARTH PEOPLES THEREOVER, THE NEW

RULERS OF, ARE ABOUT TO BE BECOMING. US INSTRUCTS YOU SOON TO

PREPARE——"

The mouthy voice abruptly ceased to exist. The blue fleck of light which had been Amalfi's last sight of his ancestral planet had already been gone for long seconds.

The whole of Hern VI lurched and rang. Amalfl was thrown heavily to the floor of the balcony. The heavy helmet fell askew on his head and shoulders, cutting off his view of the battle in the jungle.

But he didn't care. That impact, and the death of that curious voice, meant the real end of the battle in the jungle. It meant the end of any real threat that might have existed for Earth. And it meant the end of the Okie cities—not just those in the jungle, but all of them, as a class, including Amalfi's own.

For that impact, transmitted to the belfry of City Hall thorough the rock of Hern VI, meant that Amalfi's instant of personal control had been fair and true. Somewhere on the leading hemisphere of Hern VI there was now an

enormous white-hot crater. That crater, and the traces of metal salts which were dissolved in its molten lining, held the grave of the oldest of all Okie legends: The Vegan orbital fort.

It would be forever impossible now to know how long the summated, distilled, and purified power of the Vegan military, conquered once only in fact, had been bowling through the galaxy, awaiting this one unrepeatable clear lane to a strike. Certainly no answer to that question could be found on the degenerate planets of Vega itself; the fort was as much a myth there as it had been any-. where else in the galaxy.

But it had been real all the same. It had been awaiting its one chance to revenge Vega upon Earth, not, certainly, in the hope of re-asserting the blue-white glory of Vega over every other star, but simply to smash the average planet of the average sun which had so inexplicably prevailed over Vega's magnificence. Not even the fort could have expected to prevail against Earth by itself—but in the confusion of the Okies' March on Earth, and under the expectation that Earth would hesitate to burn down its own citizen-cities until too late, it had foreseen a perfect triumph. It had swung in from its long, legend-blurred exile, disguised primarily as a city, secondarily as a fable, to make its last bid.

Residual tremors, T-waves, made the belfry rock gently. Amalfi got to his feet, steadying himself on the railing.

"O'Brian, cast us off. The planet goes on as she is. Switch the city to the alternate orbit."

"To the Greater Magellanic?"

"That's right. Make fast any quake damage; pass the word to Mr, Hazleton and Mr.

Carrel."

"Yes, sir."

The Vegan fortress had nearly won, at that; only the passage of a forlorn and outcast-piloted little world had defeated it. But the Earth would never know more than a fraction of that, only the fraction which was the passage of Hern VI across the solar system. All the rest of the evidence was now seething and amalgamating in a cooling crater on the leading hemisphere of Hern VI; and Amalfi meant to see to it that Hern VI would be lost to Earth forever...

As the Earth was lost to Okies, from now on.

Everyone was in the old office of the mayor: Dee, Hazleton, Carrel, Dr. Schloss, Sergeant Andersen, Jake, O'Brian, the technics; and, by extension, the entire population of the city, through a city-wide, two-way P.A. hookup; even the City Fathers. It was the first such gathering since the last election; that election having been the one which put Hazleton into office, few present now remembered the occasion very well, except for the city Fathers —and they would be the least likely of all to be able to apply that memory fruitfully to the present meeting. Undertones were not their forte.

Amalfi began to speak. His voice was gentle, matter-of-fact, impersonal; it was addressed to everyone, to the city as an organism. But he was looking directly at Hazleton.

"First of all," he said, "it's necessary for everyone to understand our gross physical and astronomical situation. When we cut loose from Hern VI a while back, that planet was well on its way toward the Lesser Magellanic Cloud, which, for those of you who come from the northerly parts of the galaxy, is one of two small satellite galaxies moving away from the main galaxy along the southern limb. Hern Six is still on its way there, and unless something unlikely happens to it, it will go right on to the Cloud, through it, and on into deep intergalactic space.

"We left on it almost all the equipment we had accumulated from other cities while we were in the jungle because we had to. We hadn't the room to take much of it on board our own city; and we couldn't stick with Hern VI because Earth will almost certainly chase the planet, either until the planet leaves the galaxy, or until they're sure we aren't on it any longer."

"Why, sir?" several voices from the G.C. speaker said, almost simultaneously.

"For a long list of reasons. Our flying the planet across the face of the solar system—as well as our flying it through a number of other systems and across main interstellar traffic areas—was a serious violation of Earth laws. Furthermore, Earth has us chalked up as having sideswiped a city as we went by; they don't know the real nature of that 'city.' And incidentally, it's important that they never find out, even if keeping it a secret results in our being written up in the history books as murderers." Dee stirred protestingly. "John, I don't see why we

shouldn't take the credit. Especially since it really was a pretty big thing we did for the Earth."

"Because -we're not through doing it yet. To you, Dee, the Vegans are an ancient people you first heard about only three centuries ago. Before that, on Utopia, you were cut off from the main stream of galactic history. But the fact is that Vega ruled much of the galaxy before Earth did, and that the Vegans always were, and have just shown us that they still are, dangerous people to get involved with. That fort didn't just exist in a vacuum. It had to touch port now and then, just as we do. And being a military machine, it needed more service and maintenance than it could take care of by itself.

"Somewhere in the galaxy there is a colony of Vega which is still dangerous. That colony must be kept in utter ignorance of what happened to its major weapon. It must be made to live on faith; to believe that the fort failed on its first attempt but may some day be back for another try. It must not know that the fort is destroyed, or it will build another one. *

"The second one will succeed where the first one failed. The first one failed because of the nature of the nomadic kind of culture on which Earth has been depending up to now; the Okies defeated it. We happened to have been the particular city to do the job, but it was no accident that we were on hand to do it.

"But for quite a while to come, Okies are not going to be effective or even welcome factors in the galaxy as a whole; and the galaxy, Earth in particular, is going to be as weak as a baby all during that period because of the depression. If the Vegans hear that their fort did strike at Earth, and came within a hair's breadth of knocking it out, they'll be building another fort the same day they get the news. After that...

"No, Dee, I'm afraid we'll have to keep the secret."

Dee, still a little rebellious, looked at Hazleton for support; but he shook his head.

"Our own situation, right now, is neither good nor bad," Amalfi continued. "We still have Hern VI's velocity. It's enough slower than the velocity we hit when we flew the planet of He to make us readily maneuverable, even though clumsily, especially since we're so much less massive than a planet. We will be able to make any port of call which is inside the cone our trajectory would describe

if we rotated it. Finally, Earth has figures only on the path of Hern VI; it has ndne on the present path of the city.

"Cast up against that the fact that our equipment is old and faltering, and will never carry us anywhere again under our own steajn.; When we land at the next port of call, we will be landed for good. We have no money to buy new equipment; without new equipment, we can't make money. So it will pay us to pick our next stop with great care. That's why I've asked everybody to sit in on this conference."

One of the technics said", "Boss, are you sure it's as bad as all that? We should be able to make some kind of repairs——"

"THE CITY WILL NOT SURVIVE ANOTHER LANDING," the City Fathers said flatly. The technie swallowed and subsided.

"Our present orbit," Amalfi said, "would lead us eventually out into the greater of the two Magellanic clouds. At our present velocity, that's about twenty years' journey away still. If we actually want to go there, well have to plan on that period stretching on by another six years, since the clip at which we're traveling now is so great that we'd blow out every driver on board if we undertook normal deceleration.

"I propose that the Greater Magellanic Cloud is exactly where we want to go."

Tumult.

The whole city roared with astonishment. Amalfi raised his hand; those actually in the room quieted slowly, but elsewhere in the city the noise went on for quite a while. It did not seem to be a sound of general protest, but rather the angry buzzing of large numbers of people arguing among thmselves.

"I know how you feel," Amalfi said when he could be sure most of them could hear him again. "It's a long way to go, and though there are supposed to be one or two colonies on the near side of the Cloud, there can be no real interstellar commerce there, and certainly no commerce with the main body of the galaxy. We would have to settle down—maybe even take to dirt farming; it would be a matter of giving up being an Okie, and giving up being a starman. That's a lot to give up, I know.

"But I want you all to remember that there's no longer any work, or any hope of work, for us anywhere in the

main body of the galaxy, even if by some miracle we manage to put our beat-up old city back into good order again. We have no choice. We must find a planet of our own to settle down on, a planet we can claim as our own."

"ESTABLISH THIS POINT," the City Fathers said.

"I'm prepared to do so. You all know what has happened to the galactic economy. It's collapsed completely. As long as the currency was stable in the main commerce lanes, there was some pay we could work for; but that doesn't exist any longer. The drug standard which Earth has rigged up now is utterly impossible for the cities, because the cities have to, use those drugs as drugs, not as money, in order to stay alive long enough to do business at all. Entirely aside from the possibility of plague—and you'll remember, I think, what we saw of that not so long ago—there's the fact that we live, literally, on longevity. We can't trade on it, too.

"And that's only the beginning. The drug standard will collapse, and soonef and more finally than the germanium standard did. The galaxy's a huge place. There will be new monetary standards by the dozens before the economy gets back onto some stable basis. And there will be thousands of local monetary systems in operation before that happens. The interregnum will last at least a century——"

"AT LEAST THREE CENTURIES."

"Very well, three centuries. I was being optimistic. In either case, it's plain that we can't make a living in an economy which isn't at least reasonably stable, and we can't afford to sweat out the waiting period before the galaxy jells again. Especially since we don't know whether the eventual stabilization will have any corner in it for Okies or not.

"Frankly, I don't think the Okies have a prayer of surviving. Earth will be especially hard on them after this 'march,' which I took pains to encourage all the same because I was pretty sure we could suck in the Vegans with it. But even if there had been no march, the Okies would have been made obsolete by the depression. The histories of depressions show that a period of economic chaos is invariably followed by a period of extremely rigid economic controls—during which all the variables, the only partially controllable factors like commodity specula-I

tion, unlimited credit, free marketing, and competitive wages get shut out. -•

"Our city represents nearly the ultimate in competitive labor. Even if it lasts through the interregnum—which it can't—it will be ai| anachronism in the new economy. It will almost surely be forced to berth down on some planet selected by the government. My own proposition is simply that we select our own berth, long before the government gets around to enforcing its own selection; that we pick a place hundreds of parsecs away from the outermost boundary-surface that government will think to claim; a place which is retreating steadily and at good speed from the center of that government and everything it will eventually want to claim; and that once we get there, we dig in. There's a new imperialism starting where we used to be free; to stay free, we'll have to go out beyond any expectable frontier and start our own little empire. "But let's face it. The Okies are through." Nobody said anything. Stunned faces scanned stunned faces.

Then the City Fathers said calmly, "THE POINT IS ESTABLISHED. WE ARE NOW

MAKING AN ANALYSIS OF THE SELECTED AREA, AND WILL HAVE A REPORT

FROM THE ASSIGNED SECTION IN FOUR TO FIVE WEEKS."



Still the silence persisted in the big chamber. The Okies were testing it—almost tasting it.

No more roaming. A planet of their own. A city at rest, and a sun to come up and go down over it on a regular schedule; seasons; a quietness free of the eternal whirling of gravity fields. No fear, no fighting, no defeat, no pursuit; self-sufficiency— and the stars only points of light forever.

A planetbound man presented with a similar revolution in his habits would have rejected it at once, terrified. The Okies, however, were used to change; change was the only stable factor in their lives. It is the only stable factor in the life of a planetbound man, too, but the planetbound man has never had his nose rubbed in it.

Even so, had they not been in addition virtually immortal—had they been, like the people of the old times before space travel, pinned like insects on a spreading-board to a lifespan of less than a century—Amalfi would have been afraid of the outcome. A short lifespan leads to restlessness; somewhere within the next few years, there has to be some El Dorado fdr the ephemerid. But the conquest of age had almost eliminated that Faustian frenzy. After three or four centuries, people grew tired of searching for the unnamable; they learned—they began to think of the future not as holding a haven of placidity and riches, but simply as the realm of things that had not happened yet. They became interested in the budding, the unfolding present, and thought about the future only with an attitude of indifferent acceptance toward whatever catastrophe it might bring. They no longer burned out their lives seeking catastrophe, under the name of

"security."

In short, they grew a little more realistic, and more than a little tired.

Amalfi waited with calm confidence. The smallest objections, he knew, would come first.

He was not anxious to have to cope with them, and the silence had lasted so much longer than he had expected that he began to wonder if his argument had become too abstract toward the end. If so, a note of naive practicality at this point should be proper..

?.

"This solution should satisfy almost everyone," he said briskly. "Hazleton has asked to be relieved of his post, and this will certainly relieve him of it most effectively. It takes us out of the jurisdiction of the cops. It leaves Carrel as city manager if he still wants the post, but it leaves him manager of a grounded city, which satisfies me, since I've no confidence in Carrel as a pilot. It——" "Boss, let me interrupt a minute." "Go ahead, Mark."

"What you say is all very well, but it's too damned extreme. I can't see any reason why we have to go so far afield. Granted that the Greater Magellanic is off the course Hern VI is following; granted that it's pretty remote, granted that even if the cops do go looking for us there, it's too big and unpopulated and complex for them to hope to find us. But couldn't we accomplish the same thing without leaving the galaxy? Why do we have to take up residence in a cloud that's moving away from the galaxy at some colossal speed———"

"THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY-FOUR MILES PER SECOND."

"Oh, shut up. All right, so that's not very fast. Still and all, the cloud is a long way away—and if you give me the

exact figures, I'll bust all your tubes—and if we ever want to get back to the galaxy again, we'll have to fly another planet to do it."

"All right," Amalfi said. "What's your alternative?"

"Why don't we hftle' out in a big cluster in our own galaxy? Not a picayune ball of stars like the Acolyte cluster, but one of the big jobs like the Great Cluster in Hercules. There must be at least one such in the cone of our present orbit; there might even be a Cepheid cluster where spindizzy navigation would be impossible for anybody who didn't know the local space strains. We'd be just as unlikely, to be traced by the cops, but we'd still be on hand inside our own galaxy if conditions began to look up."

Amalfi did not choose to contest the point. Logically, it should be Carrel, who was being deprived of the effective command of a flying city, who should be raising this objection.

The fact that the avowed retired Hazleton had brought it up first was enough for Amalfi.

"I don't care if conditions ever do look up," Dee said, unexpectedly. "I like the idea of our having a planet of our own, and I'd want it to be as far away from the cops as we could possibly make it. If that planet really does become ours, would it make any difference to us whether Okie cities become possible again two or three centuries from now? We wouldn't need to be Okies any longer."

"You'd say that," Hazleton said, "because you haven't lived more than two or three centuries yet, and because you're still used to living on a planet. Some of the rest of us are older; some of the rest of us like wandering. I'm not speaking for myself, Dee, you know that. I'U be happy to get off this junk pile. But this whole proposition has a faint smell to me. Amalfi, are you sure you aren't forcing us to set down simply to block a change of administration? It won't, you know."

Amalfi said, "Of course, I know. I'm submitting my resignation along with yours the moment we touch ground. Right now I'm still an officer of this city, and I'm doing the job I've been assigned to do."

"No, I didn't mean that. Let it go. What I still want to know is why we have to go all the way out to the Greater Megellanic."

"Because it'll be ours," Carrel said abruptly. Hazleton swung on him, obviously astonished; but Carrel's rapt eyes

did not see the older man. "Not only our planet— whichever one we choose—but our galaxy. Both the Magellanics are galaxies in little. I know; I'm a southerner, I grew up on a planet where the Magellanics went across the night sky like tornadoes of sparks. The Greater Magellanic even has its own center of rotation; I couldn't see it from my home planet because we were too close, but from Earth it has a distinct Milne spiral. And both clouds are moving away, taking on their own independence from the main galaxy. Hell, Mark, it isn't a matter of one planet. That's nothing. We won't be able to fly the city, but we can build spaceships. We can colonize. We can settle the economy to suit ourselves.

Our own galaxy! What more could you want?*

"It's too easy," Hazleton said stubbornly. "I'm used to fighting for what I want. I'm used to fighting for the city. I want to use my head, not my back; your spaceships, your colonization, those things are going to be preceded by a lot of plain and simple weeding and plowing. There's the core of my objection to this scheme, Amalfi. It's wasteful. It commits us to a situation where most of what we'll have to do will be outside of our experience."



"I disagree," Amalfi said quietly. "There are already colonies in the Greater Magellanic.

They weren't set up by spaceships. They were set up by cities. No other mechanism could have made the trip at all in those days."

"So?"

"So there's no chance that we'll be able to settle down placidly and get out our hoes.

We'll have to fight to make any part of the Cloud our own. It's going to be the biggest fight we've ever had, because we'll be fighting Okies— Okies who probably have forgotten most of their history «nd their heritage, but Okies all the same, Okies who had this idea long before we did and who are going to defend their patent."

"As they have a right to do. Why should we poach on them when a giant cluster would serve us just as well? Or nearly as well?"

"Because they are poachers themselves—and worse. Why would a city go all the way to the Greater Magellanic in the old days, when cities were solid citizens of the galaxy?

Why didn't they settle down in a giant cluster? Think, Mark! They were bindlestiffs. Cities who had to go

to the Greater Magellanic because they had committed crimes that made every star in the main galaxy their enemies. You could name one such city yourself, and one you know must be, out there in that cloud: the Interstellar Master Traders. An'd not only because Thor Five still remembers it, but because every sentient being in the galaxy burns for the blood of every last man on board it. Where else could it have gone but the Greater Magellanic, even though it starved itself for fifty years to make the trip?"

Hazleton began kneading his hands, slowly, but with great force. His knuckles went alternately white and red as his fingers ground over them.

"Gods of all stars," he said. His lips thinned. "The Mad Dogs. Yes, They went there if they went any place. Now there's an outfit I'd like to meet."

"Bear in mind that you might not, Mark. The Cloud's a

big place."

"Sure, sure. And there may be a few other bindlestifts, too. But if the Mad Dogs are out there, I'd like to meet them. I remember being taken for one of them on Thor Five; that's a taste I'd like to get out of my mouth. I don't care about the others. Except for them, the Greater Magellanic is ours, as far as I'm concerned."

"A galaxy," Dee murmured; almost soundlessly. "A galaxy with a home base, a home base that's ours."

"An Okie galaxy," Carrel said.

The silence sifted back over the city. It was not a contentious silence now. It was the silence of a crowd in which each man is thinking for and to himself.

"HAVE MESSRS. HAZLETON AND CARREL ANY FURTHER ADDITIONS TO THEIR

PLATFORMS?" the City Fathers blared, their vodeur-voice penetrating flatly into every cranny of the hurtling city. As Amalfi had expected, the extended discussion of high policy had convinced the City Fathers that the election was for the office of mayor, rather than for that of city manager. "IF NOT, AND IF THERE ARE NO ADDITIONAL

CANDIDATES, WE ARE READY TO PROCEED WITH THE TABULATION."

For a long instant, everyone looked very blank. Then Hazleton too recognized the mistake the City Fathers had made. He began to chuckle.

"No additions," he- said. Carrel said nothing; he simply grinned, transported. -

Ten seconds later, John Amalfi, Okie, was the mayor-elect of an infant galaxy.

CHAPTER EIGHT: IMT

THE city hovered, and then settled silently through the early morning darkness toward the broad expanse of heath which the planet's Proctors had designated as its landing place. At this hour, the edge of the misty acres of diamonds which were the Lesser Magellanic Cloud was just beginning to touch the western horizon; the whole cloud covered nearly »3 5° of the sky. The cloud would set at 0512; at 0600 the near edge of the home galaxy would rise, but during the summer, the suns rose earlier.

All of which was quite all right with Amalfi. The fact that no significant amount of the home galaxy could begin to show in the night sky for months to come was one of the reasons why he had chosen this planet to settle on. The situation confronting the dying city now, and its citizens, too, posed problems enough without its being recomplicated by an unsatisfiable homesickness.

The city grounded, and the last residual hum of the spindizzies stopped. From below there came a rapidly rising and more erratic hum of human activity, and the clank and roar of heavy equipment getting under way. The geology team was losing no time, as usual.

Amalfi, however, felt no disposition to go down at once. He remained on the balcony of City Hall looking at the thickly set night sky. The star-density in the Greater Magellanic was very high, even outside the clusters— often, the distances between stars were matters of light months rather than light years. Even should it prove impossible to move the city itself again—which was inevitable, considering that the Sixtieth Street spindizzy had just followed the Twenty-third Street machine into the junk pit—it should be possible to set interstellar commerce

going here by cargo ship. The city's remaining drivers, ripped out and remounted on a one-per-hull basis, would provide the nucleus of quite a respectable little fleet.

It would not be jpuch like cruising among the far-scattered, various clvi"zations of the Milky Way had been, but it would be commerce of a sort, and commerce was the Okies'

oxygen.

He looked down. The brilliant starlight showed that the blasted heath extended all the way to the horizon in the west; in the east it stopped about a mile away and gave place to land regularly divided into tiny squares. Whether each of-these minuscule fields represented an individual farm he could not tell, but he had his suspicions. The language the Proctors had used in giving the city permission to land had had decidedly feudal overtones.

While he watched, the black skeleton of some tall structure erected itself swiftly near by, between the city and the eastern stretch of the heath. The geology team already had its derrick in place. The phone at the balcony's rim buzzed, and Amalfi picked it up.

"Boss, we're going to drill now," the voice of Hazleton said. "Coming down?"

"Yes. What do the soundings show?" "Nothing very hopeful, but we'll know for sure shortly. This does look like oil land, I must say."

"We've been fooled before," Amalfi grunted. "Start boring; I'll be right down."



He had barely hung up the phone when the burring roar of the molar drill violated the still summer night, echoing calamitously among the buildings of the city. It was almost certainly the first time any planet in the Greater Magellanic had heard the protest of collapsing molecules, though the technique had been a century out of date back in the Milky Way.

Amalfi was delayed by one demand and another all the way to the field, so that it was already dawn when he arrived. The test bore had been sunk and the drill was being pulled up again; the team had put up a second derrick, from the top of which Hazleton waved to him. Amalfi waved back and went up in the lift.

There was a strong, warm wind blowing at the top, which had completely tangled Hazleton's hair under the earphone clips. To Amalfi, it could make no such difference, but after years-of the city's precise airconditioning, it did obscure things to his emotions.

"Anything yet, Mark?"

"You're just in time. Here she comes."

The first derrick rocked as the long core sprang from the earth and slammed into its side girders. There was no answering black fountain. Amalfi leaned over the rail and watched the sampling crew rope in the cartridge and guide it back down to the ground. The winch rattled and choked off, its motor panting.

"No soap,'" Hazleton said disgustedly. "I knew we shouldn't have trusted the damned Proctors."

"There's oil under here somewhere all the same," Amalfi said. "We'll get it out. Let's go down."

On the ground, the senior geologist had split the cartridge and was telling his way down the boring with a mass-pencil. He shot Amalfi a quick reptilian glance as the mayor's blocky shadow fell across the table.

"No dome," he said succinctly.

Amalfi thought about it. Now that the city was permanently cut off from the home galaxy, no work that it could do for money would mean a great deal to it; what was needed first of all was oil, so that the city could eat. Work that would yield good returns in the local currency would have to come much later. Right now the city would have to work for payment in drilling permits.

At the first contact that had seemed to be easy enough. This planet's natives had never been able to get below the biggest and most obvious oil-domes, so there should be plenty of oil left for the city. In turn, the city could throw up enough low-grade molybdenum and wolfram as a byproduct of drilling to satisfy the terms of the Proctors.

But if there was no oil to crack for food ...

"Sink two more shafts," Amalfi said. "You've got an oil-bearing till down there, anyhow.

We'll pressure jellied gasoline into it and split it. Ride along a Number Eleven gravel to hold the seam open. If there's no dome, we'll boil the oil out."

"Steak yesterday and steak tomorrow," Hazleton murmured. "But never steak today."

Amalfi swung upon the city manager, feeling the blood charging upward through his thick neck. "Do you think you'll get fed any other way?" he growled. "This planet is going to be home for us from now on. Would you rather



take up farming like the natives? I thought you outgrew that notion after the i'aid on Gort."

"That isn't what I meant," Hazleton said quietly. His heavily space-tanned face could not pale, but it blued a little under the tauf, leathered bronze. "I know just as well as you do that' we're here for good. It just seemed funny to me that settling down on a planet for good should begin just like any other job."

"I'm sorry," Amalfi said, mollified. "I shouldn't be so jumpy. Well, we don't know yet how well off we are. The natives never have mined this planet to anything like paydirt depth, and they refine stuff by throwing it into a stewpot. If we can get past this food problem, we've still got a good chance of turning this whole Cloud into a tidy corporation."

He turned his back abruptly on the derricks and began to walk slowly away from the city.

"I feel like a walk," he said. "Like to come along, Mark?"

"A walk?" Hazleton looked puzzled. "Why—sure. Okay, boss."

For a while they trudged in silence over the heath. The going was rough; the soil was clayey and heavily gullied, particularly deceptive in the early morning light. Very little seemed to grow on it: only an occasional bit of low, starved shrubbery, a patch of tough, nettlelike stalks, a few clinging weeds like crab grass.

"This doesn't strike me as good farming land," Hazleton said. "Not that I know a thing about it."

"There's better land farther out, as you saw from the city," Amalfi said. "But I agree about the heath. It's blasted land. I wouldn't even believe it was radiologically safe until I saw the instrument readings with my own eyes."

"A war?"

"Long ago, maybe. But I think geology did most of the damage. The land was let alone too long; the topsoil's all gone. It's odd, considering how intensively the rest of the planet seems to be farmed."

They half-slid into a deep arroyo and scrambled up the other side. "Boss, straighten me out on something," Hazleton said. "Why did we adopt this planet, even after we found that it had people of its own? We passed several others that would have done as well.

Are we going to push

the local population out? We're not too well set up for that, even if it were legal or just."

"Do you think there are Earth cops in the Greater Magellanic, Mark?"

"No," Hazelton said. "But there are Okies, and if I wanted justice, I'd go to Okies, not to cops. What's the answer, Amalfi?"

"We may have to do a little judicious pushing," Amalfi said, squinting ahead. The double suns were glaring directly in their faces. "It's all in knowing where to push, Mark. You heard the character some of the outlying planets gave this place when we spoke to them on the way in."

"They hate the smell of it," Hazelton said, carefully removing a burr from his ankle. "It's my guess that the Proctors made some early expeditions unwelcome. Still—"

Amalfi topped a rise and held out one hand. The city manager fell silent almost automatically, and clambered up beside him.

The cultivated land began only a few meters away. Watching them were two—creatures.

One, plainly, was a man—a naked man, the color of chocolate, with matted blue-black hair. He was standing at the handle of a single-bladed plow, which looked to be made of the bones of some large animal. The furrow that he had been opening stretched behind him beside its fellows, and farther back in the field there was a low hut. The man was standing, shading his eyes, evidently looking across the dusky heath toward the Okie city. His shoulders were enormously broad and muscular, but bowed even when he stood erect, as now.

The figure leaning into the stiff leather straps which drew the plow also was human—a woman. Her head hung down, as did her arms, and her hair, as black as the man's but somewhat longer, fell forward and hid her face.

As Hazleton froze, the man lowered his head until he was looking directly at the Okies.

His eyes were blue and unexpectedly piercing. "Are you the men from the city?" he said.

Hazleton's lips moved. The serf could hear nothing; Hazleton was speaking into his throat mikes, audible only to the receiver imbedded in Amalfi's right mastoid process.

"English, by the gods of all stars! The Proctors speak Interlingua. What's this, boss? Was the Cloud colonized that far back?" *

Amalfi shook his head. "We're from the city," the mayor said aloud, in tthe same tongue.

"What's your name, young fella?" I •*

"Karst, lord."

"Don't call me 'lord.' I'm not one of your Proctors. Is this your land?"

"No, lord. Excuse—I have no other word——"

"My name is Amalfi."

"This is the Proctors' land, Amalfi. I work this land. Are you of Earth?"

Amalfi shot a swift sidelong glance at Hazleton. The city manager's face was expressionless.

"Yes," Amalfi said. "How did you know?"

"By the wonder," Karst said. "It is a great wonder, to raise a city in a single night. IMT

itself took nine men of hands of thumbs of suns to build, the singers say. To raise a second city on the Barrens overnight—such a thing is beyond words."

He stepped away from the plow, walking with painful, hesitant steps, as if all his massive muscles hurt him. The woman raised her head from the traces and pulled the hair back from her face. The eyes that looked forth at the Okies were dull, but there were phosphorescent stirrings of alarm behind them. She reached out and grasped Karst by the elbow.

"It—is nothing," she said.

He shook her off. "You have built a city over one of night," he repeated. "You speak the Engh tongue, as we do on feast days. You speak to such as me, with words, not with the whips with the little tags. You have fine clothes, with patches of color of fine-woven cloth."

It was beyond doubt the longest speech he had ever made in his life. The clay on his forehead was beginning to streak with the effort.

"You are right," Amalfi said. "We are from Earth, though we left it long ago. I will tell you something else, Karst. You, too, are of Earth."

"This is not so," Karst said, retreating a step. "I was born here, and all my people. None claim Earth blood——"



"I understand," Amalfi said. "You are of this planet.

But you are an Earthman. And I will tell you something

else. I do not think the Proctors are Earthmen. I think

they lost the right to call themselves Earthmen long ago, on another planet, a planet named Thor Five."

Karst wiped his callused palm against his thighs. "I want to understand," he said. "Teach me."

"Karst!" the woman said pleadingly. "It is nothing. Wonders pass. We are late with the planting."

"Teach me," Karst said doggedly. "All our lives we furrow the fields, and on the holidays they tell us of Earth. Now there is a marvel here, a city raised by the hands of Earthmen, there are Earthmen in it who speak to us——" He stopped. He seemed to have something in his throat.

"Go on," Amalfi said gently.

"Teach me. Now that Earth has built a city on the Barrens, the Proctors cannot hold knowledge for their own any longer. Even when you go, we will learn from your empty city before it is ruined by wind and rain. Lord Amalfi, if we are Earthmen, teach us as Earthmen are teached."

"Karst," said the'^woman. "It is not for us. It is a magic of the Proctors. All magics are of the Proctors. They mean to take us from our children. They mean us to die on the Barrens. They tempt us."

The serf turned to her. There was something indefinably gentle in the motion of his brutalized, crackle-skinned, thick-muscled body.

"You need not go," he said, in a slurred Interlingua patois which was obviously his usual tongue. "Go on with the plowing, does it please you. But this is no thing of the Proctors.

They would not stoop to tempt slaves as mean as we are. We have obeyed the laws, given our tithes, observed the holidays. This is of Earth."

The woman clenched her horny hands under her chin and shivered. "It is forbidden to speak of Earth except on holidays. But I will finish the plowing. Otherwise our children will die."

"Come, then," Amalfi said. "There is much to learn."

To his complete consternation, the serf went down on both knees. A second later, while Amalfi was still wondering what to do next, Karst was up again, and climbing up onto the Barrens toward them. Hazleton offered him a hand, and was nearly hurled like a flat stone through the air when Karst took it; the serf was as solid and strong as a pile driver, and as sure on his stony feet.

"Karst, will you return before night?"

Karst did not answer. Amalfl began to lead the way back toward the city. Hazleton started down the far side of the rise after them, but something moved him to look back again at the litjle/scrap of farm. The woman's head had fallen forward again, the wind stirring the tangled curtain of her hair. She was leaning heavily into the galling traces, and the plow was again beginning to cut its way painfully through the stony soil. There was now, of course, nobody to guide it.

"Boss," Hazleton said into the throat mike. "Are you listening, or are you too busy playing Messiah?"

"I'm listening."

"I don't think I want to snitch a planet from these people. As a matter of fact, I'm damned if I will!"

Amalfi didn't answer; he knew well enough that there was no answer. The Okie city would never go aloft again. This planet was home. There was no place else to go.

The voice of the woman, crooning as she plowed, dwindled behind them. Her song droned monotonously over unseen and starving children: a lullaby. Hazleton and Amalfi had fallen from the sky to rob her of everything but the stony and now unharvestable soil.

The city was old—unlike the men and women who manned it, who had merely lived a long time, which is quite a different thing. And like any old intelligence, its past sins lay very near the surface, ready for review either in nostalgia or in self-accusation at the slightest cue. It was difficult these days to get any kind of information out of the City Fathers without having to submit to a lecture, couched in as high a moral tone as was possible to machines whose highest morality was survival.

Amalfi knew well enough what he was letting himself in for when he asked the City Fathers for a review of the Violations docket. He got it, and in bells—big bells. The City Fathers gave him everything, right down to the day six hundred years ago when they had discovered that nobody had dusted the city's ancient subways since the managership of deFord. That had been the first time the younger Okies had heard that the city had ever had any subways.

But Amalfi stuck to the job, though his right ear ached with the pressure of the earphone.

Out of the welter of

minor complaints "and wistful recollections of missed opportunities, certain things came through clearly and urgently.

Amalfi sighed. In the end, it appeared that the Earth cops would remember Amalfi's city for two things only. One: The city had a long Violations docket, and still existed to be brought to book on it. Two: The city had gone out toward the Greater Magellanic, just as a far older and blacker city had done centuries before—the city which had perpetrated the massacre on Thor V, the city whose memory still stank in the nostrils of cops and surviving Okies alike.

Amalfi shut off the City Fathers in mid-reminiscence and removed the phone from his aching ear. The control boards of the city stretched before him, still largely useful, but dead forever in one crucial bloc—the bank that had once flown the city from star to new star. The city was grounded; it had no choice now but to accept, and then win, this one poor planet for its own.

// the cops woidd let it. The Magellanic Clouds' were, of course, moving steadily and with increasing velocity away from the home galaxy. It would take the cops time to decide that they should make that enormously long flight in pursuit of one miserable Okie. But in the end they would make that decision. The cleaner the home galaxy became of Okies—and there was no doubt but that the cops had by now broken up the majority of the space-faring cities—the greater the urge would become to track down the last few stragglers.

Amalfi had no faith hi the ability of a satellite star cloud to outrun human technology. By the time the cops were ready to cross from the home lens to the Greater Magellanic, they would have the techniques with which to do it, and techniques far less clumsy than Amalfi's city had used. If the cops wanted to chase the Greater Magellanic, they would find ways to catch it. If ...

Amalfi put the earphone on again. "Question," he said. "Will the need to catch us be urgent enough to produce the necessary techniques in time?"

The City Fathers hummed, drawn momentarily from then- eternal mulling over the past.

At last they said:

"YES, MAYOR AMALFI. BEAR IN MIND THAT WE ARE NOT ALONE IN THIS CLOUD.

REMEMBER THOR FIVE."

There it was: the ancient slogan that had made Okies hated even on planets that had never seen an Okie city, and could never expect to. There was only the smallest chance that the city which had wrought that atrocity had made good its escapf 0 this Cloud; it had all happened a long time ago. But even the narrow chance, if the City Fathers were right, would bring the cops here sooner or later, to destroy Amalfi's own city in expiation of that still-burning crime.

Remember Thor V. No city would be safe until that raped and murdered world could be forgotten. Not even out here, in the virgin satellites of the home lens.

"Boss? Sorry, we didn't know you were busy. But we've got an operating schedule set up, as soon as you're ready to look at it."

"I'm ready right now, Mark," Amain said, turning away frop- the boards. "Hello, Dee. How do you like your plan.t?"

The girl smiled. "It's beautiful," she said simply.

"For the most part, anyway," Hazleton agreed. "This heath is an ugly place, but the rest of the land seems to be excellent—much better than you'd think it from the way it's being farmed. The tiny little fields they break it up into here just don't do it justice, and even I know better cultivation methods than these serfs do."

"I'm not surprised," Amalfl said. "It's my theory that the Proctors maintain their power partly by preventing the spread of any knowledge about farming beyond the most rudimentary kind. That's also the most rudimentary kind of politics, as I don't need to tell you."

"On the politics," Hazleton said evenly, "we're in disagreement. While that's ironing itself out, the business of running the city has to go on."

"All right," Amain said. "What's on the docket?"

"I'm having a small plot on the heath, next to the city, turned over and conditioned for some experimental plantings, and extensive soil tests have already been made. That's purely a stop gap, of course. Eventually we'll have to expand onto good land. I've drawn up a tentative contract of lease between the city and the Proctors, which provides for us to rotate ownership geographically so as to keep displacement of the serfs at a minimum, and at the same time opens a complete spectrum of seasonal plantings to us—essentially it's the old Limited Colony contract, but heavily Weighed in the direction of the Proctors' prejudices. There's no doubt in my mind but that they'll sign it. Then——"

"They won't sign it," Amalfi said. "They can't even be shown it. Furthermore, I want everything you've put into your experimental plot here on the heath yanked out."

Hazleton put a hand to his forehead in frank exasperation. "Oh, hell, boss," he said.

"Don't tell me that we're still not at the end of the old squirrel-cage routine— intrigue, intrigue, and then more intrigue. I'm sick of it, I'll tell you that directly. Isn't a thousand years enough for you? I thought we had come to this planet to settle down!"

"We did. We will. But as you reminded me yourself yesterday, there are other people in possession of this planet at the moment—people we can't legally push out. As matters stand right now, we can't give them the faintest sign that we mean to settle here; they're already intensely suspicious of that very thing, and they're watching us for evidence of it every minute."

"Oh no," Dee said. She came forward swiftly and put a hand on Amalfi's shoulder. "John, you promised us after the March was over that we were going to make a home here. Not necessarily on this planet, but somewhere in the Cloud. You promised, John."

The mayor looked up at her. It was no secret to her, or to Hazleton either, that he loved her; they both knew, as well, the cruelly just Okie law—and the vein of iron loyalty in Amalfi that would have compelled him to act by that law even if it had never existed. Until the crisis in the jungle had forced Amalfi to reveal to Hazleton the existence of that love, neither of the two youngsters had more than suspected it over a period of nearly three centuries.

But Dee was comparatively new to Okie mores, and was, in addition, a woman. Only to know that she was loved had been unable to content her long. She was already beginning to put the knowledge to work.

She was certainly not old enough yet to realize that the crisis had passed, leaving behind only a residuum of devotion useless to her and to Amalfi alike. She could not know that the person who had replaced her in Amalfi's mind was Karst; .that Amalfi was now hearing from the lips of the serf the innocent and vastly touching questions which Dee had once asked; that Amalfi had realized that

his thousand years of;, adult life had fitted him to answer not one question, but a thousand. Had anyone suggested to her that Amalfi was only just now coming into his full maturity, she would .not have understood; possibly, she might have laughed. Jkmalfi had himself smiled when the realization had come to him.

"Of course I promised," he said. "I've delivered on my promises for a millennium now, and I'll continue to do so. This planet will be our home if you'll give me just the minimum of help in winning it. It's the best of all the planets we passed on the way in, for a great many reasons —including a couple that won't begin to show until you see the winter constellations here, and a few more that won't become evident for a century yet. But there's one thing I certainly can't give you, and that's immediate delivery."

"All right," Dee said. She smiled. "I trust you, John, you know that. But it's hard to be patient."

"Is it?" Amalfi said, not much surprised. "Come to think of it, I remember when the same thought occurred to me, back on He. In retrospect the problem doesn't seem large."

"Boss, you'd better give us some substitute courses of action," Hazleton cut in, a little coldly. "With the possible exception of yourself, every man, woman, and alley cat in the city is ready to spread out all over the surface of this planet the moment the starting gun is fired. You gave us every reason to think that that would be the way it would happen. If there's going to be a delay, you have a good many idle hands to put to work."

"Use straight work-contract procedure all the way down the line. No exploiting of the planet that we wouldn't normally do during the usual stopover for a job. That means no truck gardens or any other form of local agriculture; just refilling the oil tanks, re-breeding the Chlorella strains from local sources for heterosis, making up our water losses, and so on. The last I heard, we were still using the Tx 71105 strain of Chlorella pyrenoidosa; that's too high-temp an alga for a planet with a winter season, like this one."

"That won't work," Hazleton said. "It may fool the Proctors, Amalfi, but how can you fool your own people? What are you going to do with the perimeter police, for instance?

Sergeant Andersen's whole crew knows that it

won't ever again have to make up a boarding squad or defend the city or take up any other military duty. Nine-tenths of them are itching to throw off their harness for good and all and start dirt farming. What am I going to tell them?"

"Send 'em out to your experimental patch on the heath," Amalfi said, "on police detail.

Tell 'em to pick up everything that grows."

Hazleton started to turn toward the lift shaft, holding out his hand to Dee. Then, characteristically, he had a third thought and turned back.

"But why, boss?" he said plaintively. "What makes you think the Proctors suspect us of squatting? And what could they do about it if we did?"

"The Proctors have asked for the standard work contract," Amalfi said. "They knew what it was, they got it, and they insist upon its observation, to the letter— including the provision that the city must be off this planet by the date of termination. As you know, that's impossible; we can't leave this planet at all. But we'll have to pretend that we're going to leave up to the last possible minute."

Hazleton looked stubborn. Dee took his hand reassuringly, but it didn't seem to register.

"As for what the Proctors themselves can do about it," Amalfi said, picking up the earphones again, "I don't know. I'm trying to find out. But this much I do know:

"The Proctors have already called the cops."

Under the gray, hazy light in the schoolroom, neutral light which seemed cast like a cloak along the air rather than to illuminate it, voices and visions came thronging even into the conscious and prepared mind of the visitor, pouring from the memory cells of the City Fathers. Amalfi could feel their pressure, just below the surface of his mind; it was vaguely unpleasant, partly because he already knew what they sought to impart, so that the redoubled impressions tended to shoulder forward into the immediate attention, nearly with the vividness of immediate experience.

He waved a hand before his eyes in annoyance and looked for a monitor, found one standing at his elbow, and wondered how long he had been there—or, conversely, how long Amalfi himself had been lulled into the learning trance.

"Where's Karst?" he said brusquely. "The first serf we brought in? I need him."

"Yes, sir. He's in ]a /chair toward the front of the room." The monitor—whose function combined the duties of classroom supervisor and nurse—turned away briefly to a nearby wall treacher, which opened and floated out to him a tall metal tumbler. The monitor took it, and led the way through the room, threading his way among the scattered couches.



Usually most of these were unoccupied, since it took less than 500 hours to bring the average child through tensor calculus and hence to the limits of what he could be taught by passive inculcation alone. Now, however, every couch was occupied, and few of them by children.

One of the eounterpointing, sub-audible voices was murmuring: "Some of the cities which turned bindlestiff did not pursue the usual policy of piracy and raiding, but settled instead upon faraway worlds and established tyrannical rules. Most of these were overthrown by the Earth police; the cities were not efficient fighting machines. Those which withstood the first assault sometimes were allowed to remain in power for various reasons of policy, but such cases were invariably barred from commerce. Some of these involuntary empires may still remain on the fringes of Earth's jurisdiction. Most notorious of these recrudescences of imperialism was the reduction of Thor Five, the work of one of the earliest of the Okies, a heavily militarized city which had already earned itself the popular nickname of 'the Mad Dogs.' The epithet, current among other Okies as well as planetary populations, of course referred primarily..."

"Here's your man," the monitor said in a low voice. Amalfi looked down at Karst. The serf had already undergone a considerable change. He was no longer a distorted and worn caricature of a man, chocolate colored with sun, wind, and ground-in dirt, so brutalized as to be almost beyond pity. He was, instead, rather like a fetus as he lay curled on the couch, innocent and still perfectable, as yet unmarked by any experience which counted.

His past—and there could hardly have been much of it, for although he had said that his present wife, Eedit, had been his fifth, he was obviously scarcely twenty years old—had been so completely monotonous and implacable that, given the chance, he had sloughed it off as easily and totally as one throws away a single garment. He was, Amalfi realized, much more essentially a child than any Okie infant would ever be.

The monitor touched Karst's shoulder and the serf stirred uneasily, then sat up, instantly awake, his intense blue eyes questioning Amalfi. The monitor handed him the anodized aluminum tumbler, now beaded with cold, and Karst drank from it. The pungent liquid made him sneeze, quickly and without seeming to notice that he had sneezed, like a cat.

"How's it coming through, Karst? Amalfi said.

"It is very hard," the serf said. He took another pull at the tumbler. "But once grasped, it seems to bring everything into flower at once. Lord Amalfi, the Proctors claim that IMT

came from the sky on a cloud. Yesterday I only believed that. Today I think I understand it."

"I think you do," Amalfi said. "And you're not alone. We have serfs by scores in the city now, learning—just look around you and you'll see. And they're learning more than just simple physics or cultural morphology. They're learning freedom, beginning with the first one—freedom to hate."

"I know that lesson," Karst said, with a profound and glacial calm. "But you awakened me for something."

"I did," the mayor agreed grimly. "We've got a visitor we think you'll be able to identify: a Proctor. And he's up to something that smells damned funny to me and Hazleton both, but we can't pin down what it is. Come give us a hand, will you?"

"You'd better give him some time to rest, Mr. Mayor," the monitor said disapprovingly.



"Being dumped out of hypnopaedic trance is a considerable shock; he'll need at least an hour."

Amalfi stared at the monitor incredulously. He was about to note that neither Karst nor the city had the hour to spare when it occurred to him that to say so would take ten words where one was plenty. "Vanish," he said.

The monitor did his best.

Karst looked intently at the judas. The man on the screen had his back turned; he was looking into the big operations tank in the city manager's office. The indirect light beamed on his shaved and oiled head. Amalfi watched over Karst's left shoulder, his teeth sunk firmly in a new cigar.

"Why, the man's as bald as I am," the mayor said. "And he can't be i£u#h past his adolescence, judging by his skull; he's forty-five at the most. Recognize him, Karst?"

"Not yet," Karst said. "All the Proctors shave their heads. If he would only turn around—ah. Yes. That's Heldon. I have seen him myself only once, but he is easy to recognize. He is young, as the Proctors go. He is the stormy petrel of the Great Nine—some think him a friend of the serfs. At least he is less quick with the whip than the others."

"What would he be wanting here?"

"Perhaps he will tell us." Karst's eyes remained fixed upon the Proctor's image.

"Your request puzzles me," Hazleton's voice said, issuing smoothly from the speaker above the judas. The city manager could not be seen, but his expression seemed to modulate the sound of his voice almost specifically: the tiger mind masked behind a pussy-cat purr as behind a pussy-cat smile. "We're glad to hear of new services we can render to a client, of course. But we certainly never suspected that antigravity mechanisms even existed in IMT."

"Don't think me stupid, Mr. Hazleton," Heldon said. "You and I know that IMT was once a wanderer, as your city is now. We also know that your city, like all Okie cities, would like a world of its own. Will you allow me this much intelligence, please?"

"For discussion, yes," Hazleton's voice said.

"Then let me say that it's quite evident to me that you're nurturing an uprising. You have been careful to stay within the letter of the contract, simply because you dare not breach it, any more than we; the Earth police protect us from each other to that extent. Your Mayor Amalfi was told that it was illegal for the serfs to speak to your people, but unfortunately it is illegal only for the serfs, not for your citizens. If we cannot keep the serfs out of your city, you are under no obligation to do it for us."

"A point you have saved me the trouble of making," Hazleton said.

"Quite so. I'll add also that when this revolution of

yours comes, I have no doubt that you'll win it. I don't know what kinds of weapons you can put into the hands of our serfs, but I assume that they are better than anything we can muster. We haven't your technology. My fellows disagree with me, but I am a realist."

"An interesting theory," Hazleton's voice said. There was a brief pause. In the silence, a soft pattering sound became evident Hazleton's fingertips, Amalfi guessed, drumming on the desk top, as if with amused impatience. Heldon's face remained impassive.



"The Proctors believe that they can hold what is theirs," Heldon said at last "If you overstay your contract, they will go to war against you. They will be justified, but unfortunately Earth justice is a long way from here. You will win. My interest is to see that we have a way of escape."

"Via spindizzy?"

"Precisely." Heldon permitted a stony smile to stir the corners of his mouth. "I'll be honest with you, Mr. Hazleton. If it comes to war, I will fight as hard as any other Proctor to hold this world of ours. I come to you only because you can repair the spindizzies of IMT. You needn't expect me to enter into any extensive treason on that account."

Hazleton, it appeared, was being obdurately stupid. "I fail to see why I should lift a finger for you," he said.

"Observe, please. The Proctors will fight because they believe that they must. It will probably be a hopeless fight, but it will do your city some damage all the same. As a matter of fact, it will cripple your city beyond repair, unless your luck is phenomenal. Now then: none of the Proctors except one other man and myself know that the spindizzies of IMT are still able to function. That means that they won't try to escape with them; they'll try to knock you out instead. But with the machines in repair, and one knowledgeable hand at the controls——"

"I see," Hazleton said. "You propose to put IMT into flight while you can still get off the planet with a reasonably whole city. In return you offer us the planet and the chance that our own damages will be minimal. Hmm. It's interesting, anyhow. Suppose I take a look at your spin-dizzies, and see if they're in operable condition. It's been a good many years, without doubt, and untended machinery

has a way of gumming up. If they can still be operated at all, we'll talk about a" deal. All right?"

"It will have to do," Heldon grumbled. Amalfi saw in the Proctor's eyes a gleam of cold satisfaction which he recognized at once, §frbm having himself looked out through it often—though never concealing it so poorly. He shut off the screen.

"Well?" the mayor said. "What's he up to?" "Trouble," Karst said slowly. "It would be very foolish to give or trade him any advantage. His stated reasons are not his real ones."

"Of course not," Amalfi said. "Whose are? Oh, hello, Mark. What did you make of our friend?"

Hazleton stepped out of the lift shaft, bouncing lightly once on the resilient concrete of the control-room floor. "He's a dummox," the city manager said, "but he's dangerous. He knows that there's something he doesn't know. He also knows that we don't know what he's driving at, and he's on his home grounds. It's a combination I don't care for."

"I don't like it myself," Amalfi said. "When the enemy starts giving away information, look out! Do you think the majority of the Proctors really don't know that IMT has operable spindizzies?"

"I am sure they do not," Karst offered tentatively. Both men turned to him. "The Proctors do not even believe that you are here to capture the planet. At least, they do not believe that that is what you intend, and I'm sure they don't care, one way or the other."

"Why not?" Hazleton said. "I would." "You have never owned several million serfs," Karst said, without rancor. "You have serfs working for you, and you are paying them wages.



That hi itself is a disaster for the Proctors. And they cannot stop it. They know that the money you are paying is legal, with the power of the Earth behind it. They cannot stop us from earning it. To do so would cause an uprising at once."

Amalfi looked at Hazleton. The money the city was handing out was the Oc dollar. It was legal here—but back in the galaxy it was just so much paper. It was only germanium-backed. Could the Proctors be that naive? Or was IMT simply too old to possess the instantaneous Dirac transmitters which would have told it of the economic collapse of the home lens?

"And the spindizzies?" Amalfi said. "Who else would know of them among the Great Nine?"

"Asor, for one," Karst said. "He is the presiding officer, and the religious fanatic of the group. It is said that he still practices daily the full thirty yogas of the Semantic Rigor, even to chinning himself upon every rung of the Abstraction Ladder. The prophet Maalvin banned the flight of men forever, so Asor would not be likely to allow IMT to fly at this late date."

"He has his reasons," Hazleton said reflectively. "Religions rarely exist in a vacuum.

They have effects on the societies they reflect He's probably afraid of the spindizzies, in the last analysis. With such a weapon it takes only a few hundred men to make a revolution—more than enough to overthrow a feudal setup like this. IMT didn't dare keep its spindizzies working."

"Go on, Karst," Amalfi said, raising his hand impatiently at Hazleton. "How about the other Proctors?"

"There is Bemajdi, but he hardly counts," Karst said. "Let me think. Remember, I have never seen most of these men. The only one who matters, it seems to me, is Larre. He is a dour-faced old man with a pot belly. He is usually on Heldon's side, but seldom travels with Heldon all the way. He will worry less about the money the serfs are earning than will the rest. He will contrive a way to tax it away from us—perhaps by declaring a holiday, in honor of the visit of Earthmen to our planet. The collection of tithes is a duty of his."

"Would he allow Heldon to put IMT's spindizzies hi shape?"

"No, probably not," Karst said. "I believe Heldon was telling the truth when he said that he would have to do that in secret."

"I don't know," Amalfi said. "I don't like it. On the surface, it looks as though the Proctors hope to scare us off the planet as soon as the contract expires, and then collect all the money we've paid the serfs—with the cops to back them up. But when you look closely at it, it's crazy. Once the cops find out the identity of IMT—and it won't take long—they'll break up both cities and be glad of the chance."

Karst said. "Is this because IMT was the Okie city that did—what was done—on Thor Five?"

Amalfi suddenly found that he was having difficulty in-

keeping his Adam's apple where it belonged. "Let that pass, Karst," he growled. "We're not going to import that story into the Cloud. That should have been cut from your learning tape."

"I know it now|" /Karst said calmly. "And I am not surprised. The Proctors never change."



"Forget it. Forget it, do you hear? Forget everything. Karst, can you go back to being a dumb serf for a night?"

"Go back to my land?" Karst said. "It would be awkward. My wife must have a new man by now——"

"No, not back to your land. I want to go with Heldon and look at his spindizzies as soon as he says the word. I'll need to take some heavy equipment, and I'll need some help.

Will you come along?"

Hazleton raised his eyebrows. "You won't fool Heldon, boss."

"I think I will. Of course he knows that we've educated some of the serfs, but that's not a thing he can actually see when he looks at it; his whole background is against it. He just isn't accustomed to thinking of serfs as intelligent. He knows we have thousands of them here, and yet he isn't really afraid of that idea. He thinks we may arm them, make a mob of them. He can't begin to imagine that a serf can learn something better than how to handle a sidearm—something better, and far more dangerous."

"How can you be sure?" Hazleton said.

"By analogue. Remember the planet of Thetis Alpha called Fitzgerald, where they used a big beast called a horse for everything—from pulling carts to racing? All right: suppose you visited a place where you had been told that a few horses had been taught to talk.

While you're working there, somebody comes to give you a hand, dragging a spavined old plug with a straw hat pulled down over its ears and a pack on its back. (Excuse me, Karst, but business is business.) You aren't going to think of that horse as one of the talking ones. You aren't accustomed to thinking of horses as being able to talk at all."

"All right," Hazleton said, grinning at Karst's evident discomfiture. "What's the main strategy from here on out, boss? I gather that you've got it set up. Are you ready to give it a name yet?"

"Not quite," the mayor said. "Unless you like long titles. It's still just- another problem in political pseudomorphism."

Amalfi caught sight of Karst's deliberately incurious face and his own grin broadened.

"Or," he said, "the fine art of tricking your opponent into throwing his head at' you."

CHAPTER NINE: Home

IMT was a squat city, long rooted in the stony soil, and as changeless as a forest of cenotaphs. Its quietness, too, was like the quietness of a cemetery, and the Proctors, carrying the fanlike wands of their office, the pierced fans with the jagged tops and the little jingling tags, were much like friars moving among the dead.

The quiet, of course, could be accounted for very simply. The serfs were not allowed to speak within the walls of IMT unless spoken to, and there were comparatively few Proctors in the city to speak to them. For Amalfi, there was also the imposed silence of the slaughtered millions of Thor V blanketing the air. He wondered if the Proctors themselves could still hear that raw silence.

He got his answer almost at once. The naked brown figure of a passing serf glanced furtively at the party, saw Heldon, and raised a finger to its lips in what was evidently an established gesture of respect. Heldon barely nodded. Amalfi, necessarily, took no overt notice at all, but he thought: Shh, is it? I don't wonder. But it's too late, Heldon. The secret is out.



Karst trudged behind them, shooting an occasional wary glance at Heldon from under his tangled eyebrows. His caution was wasted on the Proctor. They passed through a decaying public square, in the center of which was an almost-obliterated statuary group, so weather-worn as to have lost any integrity it might ever have had. Integrity, Amalfi mused, is not a common characteristic of monuments. Except to a sharp eye, the mass of stone on the old pedestal might have been nothing but a moderately large meteor, riddled .with the twisting pits characteristic of siderites.

Amalfi could see, however, that the spaces sculpted out of the interior of that ,,block of black stone, after the fashion of an ancientl Etarth sculptor named Moore, had once had meaning. Inside the stone there had once stood a powerful human figure, with its foot resting upon the neck of a slighter figure; both surrounded by matter, but cut into space.

Heldon, too, stopped and looked at the monument. There was some kind of struggle going on inside of him. Amalfi did- not know what it was, but he had a good guess.

Heldon was a young man; hence, as a Proctor, he was probably recently elected. Karst's testimony had made it clear that most of the other members of the Great Nine—Asor, Bemajdi, and the rest—had been members of the Great Nine from the beginning. They were, in short, not the descendants of the men who had ravaged Thor V, but those very same men, preserved by a jealous hoarding of anti-agathics right down to the present.

Heldon looked at the monument. The figures inside it made it clear that once upon a time IMT had actually been proud of the memory of Thor V, and the ancients of the Great Nine, while they might not still be proud, were still guilty. Heldon, who had not himself committed that crime, was choosing whether or not to associate himself with it in fact, as he had already associated himself by implication, by being a Proctor at all....

"Ahead is the Temple," Heldon said suddenly, turning away from the statue. "The machinery is beneath it. There should be no one of interest in it at this hour, but I had best make sure. Wait here."

No one of interest: that meant the serfs. Heldon had decided; he was of the Proctors; he had taken Thor V into his pigeon's bosom.

"Suppose somebody notices us?" Amalfi said. "This square is usually avoided. Also, I have men posted around it to divert any chance traffic. If you don't wander away, you'll be safe."

The Proctor gathered in his shirts and strode away toward the big domed building, where he disappeared abruptly down an alleyway. Behind Amalfi, Karst began to sing, in an exceedingly scratchy voice, but very softly— a folk tune of some kind, obviously. The melody, which

once had had to do" with a town named Kazan, was too many thousands of years old for Amalfi to recognize it, even had he not been tune deaf. Nevertheless, the mayor abruptly found himself listening to Karst, with the intensity of a hooded owl sonar-tracking a field mouse. Karst chanted:

"Wild on the wind rose the righteous wrath of Maal-

vin,

Borne like a brand to the burning of the Barrens. Arms of hands of rebels perished then, Stars nor moons bedecked that midnight. IMT made the sky , Fall!"

Seeing that Amalfi was listening to him, Karst stopped with an apologetic gesture. "Go ahead, Karst," Amalfi said at once. "How does the rest go?"

"There isn't time. There are hundreds of verses; every singer adds at least dne of his own to the song. It is always supposed to end with this one:

"Black with their blood was the brick of that barrow, Toppled the tall towers, crushed to the clay. None might live who flouted Maalvin, Earth their souls spurned spaceward, wailing, IMT made the sky Fall!"

"That's great," Amalfi said grimly. "We really are in the soup—just about in the bottom of the bowl, I'd say. I wish I'd heard that song a week ago."

"What does it tell you?" Karst said wonderingly. "It is only an old legend."

"It tells me why Heldon wants his spindizzies fixed. I knew he wasn't telling me the straight goods, but that old Laputa gag never occurred to me—more recent cities aren't strong enough in the keel to risk it. But with all the mass this burg packs, it can squash us flat—and well just have to sit still for it!"

"I don't understand——"

"It's simple enough. Your prophet Maalvin used IMT like a nutcracker. He picked it up, flew it over the opposition, and let it down again. The trick was dreamed up away before space flight, as I recall. Karst, stick close to me; I may have to get a message to you under Heldon's eye, so watch for ... Sst, here he comes."

The Proctor had .been uttered by the alleyway like an untranslatable wordlHe came rapidly toward them across the crumbling flagstones.

"I think," Heldon said, "that we are now ready for your valuable aid, Mayor Amajfi."

Heldon put his foot on a jutting pyramidal stone and pressed down. Amalfl watched carefully, but nothing happened. He swept his flash around the featureless stone walls of the underground chamber, then back again to the floor. Impatiently, Heldon kicked the little pyramid.

This time, there was a protesting rumble. Very slowly, and with a great deal of scraping, a block of stone perhaps five feet long by two feet wide began to rise, as if pivoted or hinged at the far end. The beam of the mayor's flash darted into the opening, picking out a narrow flight of steps.

"I'm disappointed," Amalfi said. "I expected to see Jules Verne come out from under it—or Dean Swift. All right, Heldon, lead on."

The Proctor went cautiously down the steps, holding his skirts up against the dampness.

Karst came last, bent low under the heavy pack, his arms hanging laxly. The steps felt cold and slimy through the thin soles of the mayor's sandals, and little trickles of moisture ran down the close-pressing walls. Amalfi felt a nearly intolerable urge to light a cigar; he could almost taste the powerful aromatic odor cutting through the humidity. But he needed his hands free.

He was almost ready to hope that the spindizzies had been ruined by all this moisture, but he discarded the idea even as it was forming in the back of his mind. That would be the easy way out, and hi the end it would be disastrous. If the Okies were ever to call this planet their own, IMT had to be made to fly again.

How to keep it off his own city's back, once IMT was aloft, he still was unable to figure. He was piloting, as he invariably wound up doing in the pinches, by the seat of his pants.

The steps ended abruptly in a small chamber so small, chilly, and damp that it was little more than a cave. The

flashlight's eyes roved, came to rest on an oval doorway sealed off with dull metal—almost certainly lead. So IMT's spindizzies ran "hot"? That was already bad news; it back-dated them far beyond the year to which Amalfi had tentatively assigned them.

"That it?" he said.

"That is the way," Heldon agreed. He twisted an inconspicuous handle.

Ancient fluorescents flickered into bluish life as the valve drew back, and glinted upon the humped backs of machines. The air was quite dry here—evidently the big chamber was kept sealed—and Amalfi could not repress a fugitive pang of disappointment. He scanned the huge machines, looking for control panels or homologues thereof.

"Well?" Heldon said harshly. He seemed to be under considerable strain. It occurred to Amalfi that Heldon's strategy might well be a personal flyer, not an official policy of the Great Nine; in which case it might go hard with Heldon if his colleagues found him in this particular place of all places with an Okie. "Aren't you going to make any tests?"

"Certainly," Amalfi said. "I was a little taken aback at their size, that's all."

"They are old, as you know," said the Proctor. "Doubtless they are built much larger nowadays."

That, of course, wasn't so. Modern spindizzies ran less than a tenth the size of these.

The comment cast new doubt upon Heldon's exact status. Amalfi had assumed that the Proctor would not let him touch the spindizzies except to inspect; that there would be plenty of men in IMT capable of making repairs from detailed instructions; that Heldon himself, and any Proctor, would know enough physics to comprehend whatever explanations Amalfi might proffer. Now he was not so sure—and on this question hung the amount of tinkering Amalfi would be able to do without being detected.

The mayor mounted a metal stair to a catwalk which ran along the tops of the generators, then stopped and looked down at Karst. "Well, stupid, don't just stand there," he said.

"Come on up, and bring the stuff."

Obediently Karst shambled up the metal steps, Heldon at his heels. Amalfi ignored them to search for an inspection port in the casing, found one, and opened it. Beneath was what appeared to be a massive rectifying circuit, plus the amplifier for some kind of monitor—probably a digital computer. The amplifier involved more vacuum tubes than Amalfi had ever before seen gathered into one circuit, and there was % separate power supply to deliver DC to their heaters. Twd of the tubes were each as big as his fist.

Karst bent over and slung the pack to the deck. Amalfi drew out of it a length of slender black cable and thrust its double prongs into a nearby socket. A tiny bulb on the other end glowed neon-red.

"Your computer's still running," he reported. "Whether it's still sane or not is another matter. May I turn the main banks on, Heldon?"

"I'll turn them on," the Proctor said. He went down the stairs again and across the chamber.



instantly Amalfi was murmuring through motionless lips into the inspection port. The result to Karst's ears must have been rather weird. The technique of speaking without moving one's lips is simply a matter of substituting consonants which do not involve lip movement, such as y, for those which do, such as w. If the resulting sound is picked up from inside the resonating chamber, as it is with a throat mike, it is not too different from ordinary speech, only a bit more blurred. Heard from outside the speaker's nasopharyngeal cavity, however, it has a tendency to sound like Japanese Pidgin.

"Yatch Heldon, Karst. See yhich syitch he kulls, an' nenorize its location. Got it? Good."

The tubes lit. Karst nodded once, very slightly. The Proctor watched from below while Amalfi inspected the lines.

"Will they work?" he called. His voice was muffled, as though he were afraid to raise it as high as he thought necessary.

"I think so. One of these tubes is gassing, and there may have been some failures here and there. Better check the whole lot before you try anything ambitious. You do have facilities for testing tubes, don't you?"

Relief spread visibly over Heldon's face, despite his obvious effort to betray nothing.

Probably he could have fooled any of his own people without effort, but for Amalfi, who, like any Okie mayor, could follow the parataxic "speech" of muscle interplay and posture as readily as he

could spoken dialogue, Heldon's expression was as clear as a signed confession.

"Certainly," the Proctor said. "Is that all?" "By no means. I think you ought to rip out about half of these circuits, and install transistors wherever they can be used; we can sell you the necessary germanium at the legal rate. You've got two or three hundred tubes to a unit here, by my estimate, and if you have a tube failure in flight—well, the only word that fits what would happen then is blooey!"

"Will you be able to show us how?" "Probably," the mayor said. "If you'll allow me to inspect the whole system, I can give you an exact answer." •".'•

"All right," Heldon said. "But don't delay. I can't count on more than another half-day at most."

This was better than Amalfi had expected—miles better. Given that much time, he could trace at least enough of the leads to locate the master control. That Heldon's expression failed totally to match the content of his speech disturbed Amalfi profoundly, but there was nothing that he could do that would alter that now. He pulled paper and stylus out of Karst's pack and began to make rapid sketches of the wiring before him.

After he had a fairly clear idea of the first generator's setup, it was easier to block in the main features of the second. It took time, but Heldon did not seem to tire.

The third spindizzy completed the picture, leaving Amalfi wondering what the fourth one was for. It turned out to be a booster, designed to compensate for the losses of the others wherever the main curve of their output failed to conform to the specs laid down for it by the crude, over all regenerative circuit. The booster was located on the backside of the feedback loop, behind the computer rather than ahead of it, so that all the computer's corrections had to pass through it; the result, Amalfi was sure, would be a small but serious "base surge" every time any correction was applied. The spindiz-zies of IMT seemed to have been wired together by Cro-Magnon Man.



But they would fly the city. That was what counted. Amalfi finished his examination of the booster generator and straightened up painfully, stretching the muscles of his back. He had no idea how many hours he had consumed. It

seemed as though months had passed. Heldon was still watching him, deep* blue circles under his eyes, but still wide awake and watchful.

And Amalfi had found no point anywhere in the underground chamber frqjni%hich the spindizzies of IMT could be controlled. The dontrol point was somewhere else; the main control cable ran into a pipe which shot straight up through the roof of the cavern.

. .. IMT made the sky/ Fall...

Amalfi yawned ostentatiously and bent back to fasten the plate over the booster-generator's observation port. Karst squatted near him, frankly asleep, as relaxed and comfortable as a cat drowsing on a high ledge. Heldon watched.

"I'm going to have to do the job for you," Amalfi said. "It's really major; might take weeks."

"I thought you would say so," Heldon said. "And I was glad to give you the time to find out. But I don't think we'll make any such replacements."

"You need 'em."

"Possibly. But obviously there is a big factor of safety in the apparatus, or we would never have been able to fly the city at all." (Not, Amalfi noticed, "our ancestors," but "we"; Heldon had identified himself with the crime. He would pay.) "You will understand, Mayor Amalfi, that we cannot risk your doing something to the machines that we can't do ourselves, on the unlikely assumption that you're increasing their efficiency. If they will run as they are, that will have to be good enough."

"Oh, they'll run," Amalfi said. He began, methodically, to pack up his equipment. "For a while. I'll tell you flatly that they're not safe to operate, all the same."

Heldon shrugged, and went down the spiral metal stairs to the floor of the chamber.

Amalfi rummaged in the pack a moment more. Then he ostentatiously kicked Karst awake—and kicked hard, for he knew better than to play-act with a born overseer for an audience—and motioned the serf to pick up the bundle. They went down after Heldon.

The Proctor was smiling, and it was not a nice smile. "Not safe?" he said. "No, I never supposed that they were. But I think now that the dangers are mostly political."

"Why?" Amalfi demanded, trying to moderate his Dreathing. He was suddenly almost exhausted; it had taken—how many hours? He had no idea.

"Are you aware of the time, Mayor Amalfi?"

"About morning, I'd judge," Amalfi said dully, jerking the pack more firmly onto Karst's drooping left shoulder. "Damn late, anyhow."

"Very late," Heldon said. He was not disguising his expression now. He was openly crowing. "The contract between your city and mine expired at noon today. It is now nearly an hour after noon; we have been here all night and morning. And your city is still on our soil, in violation of the contract, Mayor Amalfi."

"An oversight——"

"No; a victory." Heldon drew a tiny silver tube from the folds of his robe and blew into it.

"Mayor Amalfi, you may consider yourself a prisoner of war."

The little silver tube had made no audible sound, but there were already ten men in the room. The mesotron rifles they carried were of an ancient design, probably pre-Kammerman, like the spindizzies of IMT.

But, like the spindizzies, they looked as though they would work.

Karst froze; Amalfi unfroze him by jabbing him surreptitiously in the ribs with a finger, and began to unload the contents of his own small pack into Karst's.

"You've called the Earth police, I suppose?" he said.

"Long ago. That way of escape will be cut off by now. Let me say, Mayor Amalfi, that if you expected to find down here any controls that you might disable—and I was quite prepared to allow you to search for them—you expected too much stupidity from me."

Amalfi said nothing. He went on methodically repacking the equipment.

"You are making too many motions, Mayor Amalfi. Put your hands up in the air and turn around very slowly."

Amalfi put up his hands and turned. In each hand he held a small black object about the size and shape of an egg.

"I expected only as much stupidity as I got," he said conversationally. "You can see what I'm holding up there. I can and will drop one or both of them if I'm shot. I may drop them anyhow. I'm tired of your back-cluster ghost town."

Heldon snorted. "Explosives? Gas? Ridiculous; nothing so small could contain enough energy to destroy the city; and you have no ma$ks-.' Do you take me for a fool?"

"Events prove ydu one," Amalfi said steadily. "The possibility was quite large that you would try to ambush me, once you had me in IMT. I could have forestalled that by bringing a guard with me. You haven't met my perimeter police; they're tough boys, and they've been off duty so long that they'd love the chance to tangle with your palace crew.

Didn't it occur to you that I left my city without a bodyguard only because I had less cumbersome ways of protecting myself?"

"Eggs," Heldon said scornfully.

"As a matter of fact, they are eggs; the black color is an analine stain, put on the shells as a warning. They contain chick embryos inoculated with a two-hour alveo-lytic mutated Terrestrial rickettsialpox—a new airborne strain developed in our own BW lab. Free space makes a wonderful laboratory for that kind of trick; an Okie town specializing in agronomy taught us the techniques a couple of centures back. Just a couple of eggs—but if I were to drop them, you would have to crawl on your belly behind me all the way back to my city to get the antibiotic shot that's specific for the disease; we developed that ourselves, too."

There was a brief silence, made all the more empty by the hoarse breathing of the Proctor. The armed men eyed the black eggs uneasily, and the muzzles of their rifles wavered out of line. Amalfi had chosen his weapon with great care; static feudal societies classically are terrified by the threat of plague—they have seen so much of it.

"Impasse," Heldon said at last. "All right, Mayor Amalfi. You and your slave have safe-conduct from this chamber——"

"From the building. If I hear the slightest sound of pursuit up the stairs, I'll chuck these down on you. They burst hard, by the way—the virus generates a lot of gas in chick-embryo medium."

"Very well," Heldon said, through his teeth. "From the building, then. But you have won nothing, Mayor Amalfi. If you can get back to your city, you'll be just in time to be an eyewitness of the victory of IMT—the victory you helped make possible. I think you'll be surprised at how thorough we can be."

"No, I won't," Amalfi said, in a flat, cold, and quite merciless voice. "I know all about IMT, Heldon. This is the end of the line for the Mad Dogs. When you die, you and your whole crew of Interstellar Master Traders, remember Thor Five."

Heldon turned the color of unsized paper, and so, surprisingly, did at least four of his riflemen. Then the color began to rise in the Proctor's plump, fungoid cheeks. "Get out,"

he croaked, almost inaudibly. Then, suddenly, at the top of his voice: "Get out; Get out!"

Juggling the eggs casually, Amalfi walked toward the lead radiation lock. Karst shambled after him, cringing as he passed Heldon. Amalfi thought that the serf might be overdoing it, but Heldon did not notice; Karst might as well have been—a horse.

The lead plug swung to, blocking out Heldon's furious, frightened face and * the glint of the fluorescents on the ancient spindizzies. Amalfi plunged one hand into Karst's pack, depositing one egg hi the siliconefoam nest from which he had taken it, and withdrew the hand again grasping an ugly Schmeisser acceleration pistol. This he thrust into the waistband of his breeches.

"Up the stairs, Karst. Fast. I had to shave it pretty fine. Go on, I'm right behind you.

Where would the controls for those machines be, by your guess? The control lead went up through the roof of that cavern."

"On the top of the Temple," Karst said. He was mounting the narrow steps in huge bounds, but it did not seem to cost him the slightest effort. "Up there is Star Chamber, where the Great Nine meets. There isn't any way to get to it that I know."

They burst up into the cold stone antechamber. Amalfi's flash roved over the floor, found the jutting pyramid; Karst kicked it. With a prolonged groan, the tilted slab settled down over the flight of steps and became just another block in the floor. There was certainly some way to raise it again from below, but Heldon would hesitate before he used it; the slab was noisy in motion, noisy enough to tell Amalfi that he was being followed. At the first such squawk, Amalfi would lay a black egg, and Heldon knew it.

"I want you to get out of the city, and take every serf that you can find with you," Amalfl said. "But it's going to take timing. Somebody's got to pull that switch down below that I asked Y.OU to memorize, and I can't do it; I've got to get into Stafl Chamber. Heldon will guess that I'm going up there, and he'll follow me. After he's gone by, Karst, you have to go down there and open that switch."

Here was the low door through which Heldon had first admitted them to the Temple.

More stairs ran up from it. Strong daylight poured under it.

Amalfi inched the old door open and peered out. Despite the brightness of the afternoon, the close-set, chunky buildings of IMT turned the alleyway outside into a confusing multitude of twilights. Half a dozen leaden-eyed serfs were going by, with a Proctor walking behind them, half asleep.

"Can you find your way back into that crypt?" Amalfi whispered, leaving the door ajar.

"There's only one way to go."

"Good. Go back, then. Dump the pack outside the door here; we don't need it any more.

As soon as Heldon's crew goes on up these stairs, get back down there and pull that switch. Then get out of the city; you'll have about four minutes of accumulated warm-up time from all those tube stages; don't waste a second of it. Got it?"

"Yes, but——"

Something went over the Temple like an avalanche of gravel and dwindled into some distance. Amalfi closed one eye and screwed the other one skyward. "Rockets," he said.

"Sometimes I don't know why I insisted on a planet as primitive as this. But maybe I'll learn to love it. Good luck, Karst."

He turned toward the stairs.

"They'll trap you up there," Karst said.

"No, they won't. Not Amalfi. But me no huts, Karst. Git."

Another rocket went over, and far away there was a heavy explosion. Amalfi charged like a bull up the new flight of stairs toward Star Chamber.

The staircase was long and widely curving, as well as narrow, and both its risers and its treads were inf uriatingly small. Amalfi remembered that the Proctors did not themselves climb stairs; -they were carried up them on the forearms of serfs. Such pussy-ant steps made for sure footing, but not for fast transit.

As far as Amalfi was able to compute, the steps rose gently along "the outside curvature of the Temple's dome, following a one-and-a-half helix to the summit. Why? Presumably, the Proctors didn't require themselves to climb long flights of stairs for nothing, even with serfs to carry them. Why couldn't Star Chamber be under the dome with the spindizzies, for instance, instead of atop it?

Amalfi was not far past the first half-turn before one good reason became evident. There was a rustle of voices jostling its way through ,the chinks in the dome from below; a congregation, .evidently, was gathering. As Amalfi continued to mount the flat spiral, the murmuring became more and more discreet, until individual voices could almost be separated out from it. Up there at what mathematically would be the bottom of the bowl, where the floor of Star Chamber was, the architect of the Temple evidently had contrived a whispering gallery—a vault to which a Proctor might put his ear and hear the thinnest syllable of conspiracy in the crowd of suppliants below.

It was ingenious, Amalfi had to admit. Conspirators on church-bearing planets generally tend to think of churches as safe places for quiet plotting. In Amalfi's universe any planet which sponsored churches probably had a revolt coming to it.

Blowing like a porpoise, he scrambled up the last arc of the long Greek-spiral staircase.

A solidly-closed double door, worked all over with phony-Byzantine scrolls, stood looking down at him. He didn't bother to stop to admire it; he hit it squarely under the paired, patently synthetic sapphires just above its center, and hit it hard. It burst.

Disappointment stopped him for a moment. The chamber was an ellipse of low eccentricity, monastically bare and furnished only with a heavy wooden table and nine chairs, now drawn back against the wall. There were no controls here, nor any place where they could be concealed. The chamber was windowless.

The lack of windows told him what he wanted to know. The other, the compelling reason why Star Chamber was on top of the Temple dome was that it harbored, somewhere, the pilot's cabin of IMT. And that, in as old a city

as IMT, meant that visibility would be all-important— requiring a situation8 atop the tallest structure in the city, and as close to 360° visibility as could be managed. Obviously, Amalfi was not yet up high enough.

He looked up at|he ceiling. One of the big stone slabs had a semi-circular cup in it, not much bigger than a large coin. The flat edge was much worn.

Amalfi grinned and looked under the wooden table. Sure enough, there it was—a pole with a hooked bill at one end, rather like a halberd, slung in clips. He yanked it out, straightened, and fitted the bill into the opening in the stone.

The slab came down easily, hinged at one end as the block down below over the generator room had been. The ancestors of the Proctors had not been much given to varying their engineering principles. The free end of the slab almost touched the table top. Amalfi sprang onto the table and scrambled up the tilted face of the stone; as he neared the top, the translating center of gravity which he represented actuated a counterweighting mechanism somewhere, and the slab closed, bearing him the rest of the way.

This was the control cabin, all right. It was tiny and packed with panels, all of which were thick in dust. Bull's-eyes of thick glass looked out over the city at the four compass points, and there was one set overhead, A single green light was glowing on one of the panels. While he walked toward it, it went out.

That had been Karst, cutting the power. Amalfi hoped that the peasant would get out again. He had grown to like him. There was something in his weathered, immovable, shockproof courage, and in the voracity of his starved intelligence, that reminded the mayor of someone he had once known. That that someone was Amalfi as he had been at the age of twenty-five, Amalfi did not know, and there was no one else alive who would be able to tell him.

Spindizzies in essence are simple; Amalfi had no difficulty in setting and locking the controls the way he wanted them, or in performing sundry small tasks of highly selective sabotage. How he was to conceal what he had done, when every move left huge smears in the heavy dust, was a tougher problem. He solved it at length in the only possible way: he took off his shirt and flailed it at all of

the boards. The result made him sneeze until his eyes watered, but it worked.

Now all he had to do was get out.

There were already sounds below in Star Chamber, but he was not yet worried about a direct attack. He still had a black egg, and the Proctors knew it. Furthermore, he also had the pole with the hooked bill, so that in order to open up the control room at all, the Proctors would have to climb on each other's shoulders. They weren't in good physical shape for gymnastics, and besides, they would know that men indulging in such stunts could be defeated temporarily by nothing more complicated than a kick in the teeth.

Nevertheless, Amalfi had no intention of spending the rest of his life in the control room of IMT. He had only about six minutes to get out of the city altogether.

After thinking very rapidly for approximately four seconds, Amalfi stood on the stone slab, overbalanced it, and slid solemnly down onto the top of the table in Star Chamber.



*

After a stunned instant, half a dozen pairs of hands grabbed him at once. Heldon's face, completely unrecognizable with fury and fear, was thrust into his.

"What have you done? Answer, or I'll order you torn to pieces."

"Don't be a lunkhead. Tell your men to let go of me. I still have your safe-conduct—and in case you're thinking of repudiating it, I still have the same weapon I had before. Cast off, by God, or——"

Heldon's guards released him before he had finished speaking. Heldon lurched heavily up onto the table top and began to claw his way up the slab. Several other robed, bald-headed men jostled after him—evidently Heldon had been driven by a greater fear to tell some of the Great Nine what he had done. Amalfi walked backwards out of Star Chamber and down two steps. Then he bent, desposited his remaining black egg carefully on the threshold, thumbed his nose at the furious soldiery, and took off down the spiral stairs at a dead run.

It would take Heldon a while, perhaps as much as a minute after he switched on the controls, to discover that the generators had been cut out while he was chasing Amalfi; and another minute, at best, to get a flunky down

into the basement to turn them on again. Then there would be a warm-up* time of four minutes. After that— IMT would go aloft.

Amain1 shot out intojthe alleyway and thence into the street, caroming off %ri*

astounded Proctor. A shout rose behind him. He doubled over and kept running.

The street was nearly dark in the twilight of the twin suns. He kept in the shadows and made for the nearest corner. The cornice of the building ahead of him abruptly turned lava-white, then began to dim through the red. He never did hear the accompanying scream of the mesotron rifle. He was concentrating on something else.

Then he was around the corner. The quickest route to the edge of the city, as well as he could recall, was down the street he had just quitted, but that was now out of the question; he had no desire to be burned down. Whether or not he could get out of IMT in time by any alternate route remained to be seen.

Doggedly, he kept running. He was fired on once more, by a man who did not really know on whom he was firing. Here, Amalfi was just a running man who failed to fit the categories; any first shot at him would be a reflex of disorientation, and aimed accordingly badly....

The ground shuddered, ever so delicately, like the hide of a monster twitching at flies in its sleep. Somehow Amalfi managed to run still faster.

The shudder came again, stronger this time. A long, protracted groan followed it, traveling in a heavy wave through the bedrock of the city. The sound brought Proctors and serfs alike boiling out of the buildings.

At the third shock, something toward the center of the city collapsed with a sullen roar.

Amalfi was caught up in the aimless, terrified eddying of the crowd, and fought with hands, teeth, and bullet head....

The groaning grew louder. Abruptly, the ground bucked. Amalfi pitched forward. With him went the whole milling mob, falling in wind-rows like stacked grain. There was frantic screaming everywhere, but it was worst inside the buildings. Over Amalfi's head a window shattered explosively, and a woman's body came twisting and tumbling through the shuddering air.

Amalfi heaved himself up, spitting blood, and ran again. The pavement ahead was cracked in great, irregular

shards, like a madman's mosaic. Just beyond, the blocks were tilted all awry, reminding Amalfi irrelevantly of a breakwater he had seen on some other planet, in some other century....

He was clambering over them before he realized that these could only mark the rim of the original city of IMT. There were still more buildings on the other side of the huge, rock-filled trench, but the trench itself showed where the perimeter of the ancient Okie city had been sunk into the soil of the planet. Fighting for air with saw-edged rales, he threw himself from stone to stone toward the far edge of the trench. This was the most dangerous ground of all; if IMT were to lift now, he would be ground as fine as mincemeat in the tumbling rocks. If he could just reach the marches of the Barrens....

Behind him, the groaning rose steadily in pitch, until it sounded like the tearing of an endless sheet of metal. Ahead, across the Barrens, his own city gleamed in the last rays of the twin suns. There was fighting around it; little bright flashes were sputtering at its edge. The rockets Amalfi had heard, four of them, were arrowing across the sky, and black things dropped from them. The Okie city responded with spouts of smoke.

Then there was an unbearably bright burst. After Amalfi could see again, there were only three rockets. In another few seconds there wouldn't be any: the City Fathers never missed.

Amalfi's lungs burned. He felt sod under his sandals. A twisted runner of furze lashed across his ankle, and he fell again.

He tried to get up and could not. The seared turf, on which an ancient rebel city once had stood, rumbled threateningly. He rolled over. The squat towers of IMT were swaying, and all around the edge of the city, huge Mocks and clods heaved and turned over, like surf.

Impos-«bly, a thin line of light, intense and ruddy, appeared above the moiling rocks. The suns were shining under the ory...

The line of light widened. The old city took the air with

•n immense bound, and the rending of the long-rooted foundations was ear-splitting.

From the sides of the huge

•ass, human beings threw themselves desperately toward

the Barrens; most of them, Amalfi saw, were serfs. The Proctors, of course, were still trying to control the flight of IMT....

The city rose majestically. It was gaining speed. Amalfi's heart hsfenmered. If Heldon and his crew could figure out in time what Amalfi had done to the controls, Karst's old ballad would be re-enacted; and the crushing rule of the Proctors made safe forever.

But Amalfi had done his work well. The city of IMT did not stop rising. With a profound, visceral shock, Amalfi realized that it was already nearly a mile up, and still accelerating.

The air would be thinning up there, and the Proctors had forgotten too much to know what to do. ...

A mile and a half.

Two miles.

It grew smaller, At five miles it was just a wavery ink blot, lit on one side. At seven miles it was a point of dim light.

A bristle-topped head and a pair of enormous shoulders lifted cautiously from a nearby gully. It was Karst. He continued to look aloft for a moment, but IMT at ten miles was invisible. He looked down to Amalfi.

"Can—can it come back?" he said huskily.

"No," Amalfi said, his breathing gradually coming under control. "Keep watching, Karst. It isn't over yet. Remember that th'e Proctors had called the Earth cops At that same moment, the city of IMT reappeared—in a way. A third sun flowered in the sky. It lasted for three or four seconds. Then it dimmed and died.

"The cops were warned," Amalfi said softly, "to watch for an Okie city trying to make a getaway. They found it, and they dealt with it. Of course they got the wrong city, but they don't know that. They'll go home now—and now we're home, and so are you and your fellow men. Home on Earth, for good."

Around them^ there was a murmuring of voices, hushed with disaster, and with something else, too—something so old, and so new, that it hardly had a name on the planet that IMT had ruled. It was called freedom. ,

"On Earth?" Karst repeated. He and the mayor climbed painfully to their feet. "What do you mean? This is not Earth——"

Across the Barrens, the Okie city glittered—the city that had pitched camp to mow some lawns. A cloud of stars was rising behind it.

"It is now," Amalfi said. "We're all Earthmen, Karst. Earth is more than just one little planet, buried in another galaxy than this. Earth is much more important than that.

"Earth isn't a place. It's an idea."





