
STEEL BEACH
John Varley


"In five years, the penis will be obsolete," said the salesman.
He paused to let this planet-shattering information sink into our amazed
brains. Personally, I didn't know how many more wonders I could absorb
before lunch.
"With the right promotional campaign," he went on, breathlessly, "it
might take as little as two years.
He might even have been right. Stranger things have happened in my
lifetime. But I decided to hold off on calling my broker with frantic orders
to sell all my jock-strap stock.
The press conference was being held in a large auditorium belonging to
United Bioengineers. It could seat about a thousand; it presently held about
a fifth that number, most of us huddled together in the front rows.
The UniBio salesman was non-nondescript as a game-show host. He
had one of those voices, too. A Generic person. One of these days they'll
standardize every profession by face and body type. Like uniforms.
He went on:

"Sex as we know it is awkward, inflexible, unimaginative. By the time
you're forty, you've done everything you possibly could with our present,
'natural' sexual system. In fact, if you're even moderately active, you've
done everything a dozen times. It's become boring. And if it's boring at
forty, what will it be like at eighty, or a hundred and forty? Have you ever
thought about that? About what you'll be doing for a sex life when you're
eighty? Do you really want to be repeating the same old acts?"
"Whatever I'm doing, it won't be with him," Cricket whispered in my
ear.
"How about with me?" I whispered back. "Right after the show."
"How about after I'm eighty?" She gave me a sharp little jab in the ribs,
but she was smiling. Which is more than I could say for the hulk sitting in
front of us. He worked for Perfect Body, weighed about two hundred
kilos—none of it fat—and was glaring over the slope of one massive
trapezius, flexing the muscles in his eyebrows. I wouldn't have believed he
could even turn his head, much less look over his shoulder. You could hear
the gristle popping.
We took the hint and shut up.
"At United Bioengineers," the pitch went on, "we have no doubt that,
given twenty or thirty million years, Mother Nature would have remedied
some of these drawbacks. In fact," and here he gave a smile that managed to
be sly and aw-shucks at the same time, "we wonder if the grand old lady
might have settled on this very System . . . that's how good we think it is.
"And how good is that? I hear you saying. There have been a lot of
improvements since the days of Christine Jorgensen. What makes this one
so special?"
"Christine who?" Cricket whispered, typing rapidly with the fingers of
her right hand on her left forearm.
"Jorgensen. First male-to-female sex change, not counting opera
singers. What are they teaching you in journalism school these days?"
"Get the spin right, and the factoids will follow. Hell, Hildy, I didn't
realize you dated the lady."
"I've done worse since. If she hadn't kept trying to lead on the dance
floor . . . "
This time an arm—it had to be an arm, it grew out of his shoulder,
though I could have put both my legs into one of his sleeves—hooked itself

over the back of the chair in front of me, and I was treated to the whole
elephantine display, from the crew-cut yellow hair to the jaw you could have
used to plow the south forty, to the neck wider than Cricket's hips. I held up
my hands placatingly, pantomimed locking up my lips and throwing away
the key. His brow beetled even more—god help me if he thought I was
making fun of him—then he turned back around. I was left wondering
where he got the tiny barbells he must have used to get those forehead
muscles properly pumped up.
In a word, I was bored.
I'd seen the Sexual Millennium announced before. As recently as the
previous March, in fact, and quite regularly before that. It was like end-ofthe-world stories, or perpetual motion machines. A journalist figured to
encounter them every few weeks as long as his career lasted. I suspect it
was the same when headlines were chiseled into stone tablets and the
Sunday Edition was tossed from the back of a woolly mammoth. I had lost
track of how many times I'd sat in audiences just like this, listening to a glib
young man/woman with more teeth than God intended proclaim the
Breakthrough of the Age. It was the price a feature reporter had to pay.
It could have been worse. I could have had the political beat.
" . . . tested on over two thousand volunteer subjects . . . random
sampling error of plus or minus one percent . . . "
I was having a bad feeling. That the story would not be one hundredth
as revolutionary as the guy was promising was a given. The only question
was, would there be enough substance to hack out a story I could sell to
Walter?
" . . . registered a sixty-three percent increase in orgasmic sensation, a
two to one rise in the satisfaction index, and a complete lack of post-coital
depression."
And as my old uncle J. Walter Thompson used to say, makes your wash
fifty percent whiter, cleans your teeth, and leaves your breath alone.
I reached down to the floor and recovered the faxpad each of us had
been given as we came through the door. I called up the survey questions
and scanned through them quickly. My bullshit detector started beeping so
loudly I was afraid Mister Dynamic Tension would turn around again.
The questions were garbage. There are firms whose purpose is to work
with pollsters and guard against the so-called "brown-nose effect," that

entirely human tendency to tell people what they want to hear. Ask folks if
they like your new soda pop, they'll tend to say yes, then spit it out when
your back is turned. UniBio had not hired one of these firms. Sometimes
that in itself indicates a lack of confidence in the product.
"And now, the moment you've been waiting for." There was a flourish
of trumpets. The lights dimmed. Spotlights swirled over the blue velvet
drapes behind the podium, which began to crawl toward the wings with the
salesman aboard.
"United Bioengineers presents—"
"Drum roll," Cricket whispered, a fraction of a second early. I hit her
with my elbow.
"—the future of sex . . . ULTRA-Tingle!"
There was polite applause and the curtains parted to reveal a nude
couple standing, embracing, beneath a violet spot. Both were hairless. They
turned to face us, heads high, shoulders back. Neither seemed to be male or
female. The only real distinction between them was the hint of breasts and a
touch of eye shadow on the smaller one. There was flat, smooth skin
between each pair of legs.
"Another touchie-feelie," Cricket said. "I thought this was going to be
all new. Didn't they introduce the Tingle system three years ago?"
"They sure did. Paid a fortune to get half a dozen celebs to convert, and
they still didn't get more than ten, twenty thousand subscribers. I doubt
there's a hundred of them left."
What can you do? They hold a press conference, we have to send
somebody. They throw chum in the water, we start to feed.
Five minutes into the ULTRA-Tingle presentations (that's how they
insisted it be spelled, with caps) I could see this turkey would be of interest
only to the trades. I'm sure my beefy buddy up front was tickled down to the
tips of his muscle-bound toes.
There were a dozen nude, genderless dancers on stage now, caressing
each others' bodies and posing artistically. Blue sparks flew from their
fingertips.
"That's it for me," I said to Cricket. "You sticking around?"
"There's a drawing later. Three free conversions—"
"—to the fabulous ULTRA-Tingle System," the salesman said, finishing

her sentence for her.
"Win free sex," I said.
"What's that?"
"Walter says it's the ultimate padloid headline."
"Shouldn't it have something about UFO's in it?"
"Okay. 'Win Free Sex Aboard a UFO to Old Earth.'"
"I'd better stick around for the drawing. My boss would kill me if I won
and wasn't around to collect."
"If I win, they can bring it around to the office." I got up, put my hand
on a massive shoulder, leaned down.
"Those pecs could use some more work," I told the gorilla hybrid, and
got out in a hurry.
#
The foyer had been transformed since my arrival. Huge blue holos of
ULTRA-Tingle convertees entwined erotically in the corners, and long
banquet tables had been wheeled in. Men in traditional English butler
uniforms stood behind the tables polishing silver and glassware.
It's known as perks. I seldom turn down a free trip in the course of my
profession, and I never turn down free food.
I went to the nearest table and stuck a knife into a pâté sculpture of
Sigmund Freud and spread the thick brown goo over a slice of black bread.
One of the butlers looked worried and started toward me, but I glared him
back into his place. I put two thick slices of smoked ham on top of the pâté,
spread a layer of cream cheese, a few sheets of lox sliced so thin you could
read newsprint through it, and topped it all off with three spoonfuls of black
Beluga caviar. The butler watched the whole operation in increasing
disbelief.
It was one of the all-time great Hildy sandwiches.
I was about to bite into it when Cricket appeared at my elbow and
offered me a tulip glass of blue champagne. The crystal made an icy clear
musical note when I touched it to the rim of her glass.
"Freedom of the press," I suggested.
"The fourth estate," Cricket agreed.

#
The UniBio labs were at the far end of a new suburb nearly seventy
kilometers from the middle of King City. Most of the slides and escalators
were not working yet. There was only one functioning tube terminal and it
was two kilometers away. We'd come in a fleet of twenty hoverlimos. They
were still there, lined up outside the entrance to the corporate offices, ready
to take us back to the tube station. Or so I thought. Cricket and I climbed
aboard.
"It distresses me greatly to tell you this," the hoverlimo said, "but I am
unable to depart until the demonstration inside is over, or until I have a
passenger load of seven individuals."
"Make an exception," I told it. "We have deadlines to meet."
"Are you perhaps declaring an emergency situation?"
I started to do just that, then bit my tongue. I'd get back to the office, all
right, then have a lot of explaining to do and a big fine to pay.
"When I write this story," I said, trying another tack, "and when I
mention this foolish delay, portraying UniBio in an unfavorable light, your
bosses will be extremely upset."
"This information disturbs and alarms me," said the hoverlimo. "I,
being only a sub-program of an incompletely-activated routine of the UniBio
building computer, wish only to please my human passengers. Be assured I
would go to the greatest lengths to satisfy your desires, as my only purpose
is to provide satisfaction and speedy transportation. However," it added,
after a short pause, "I can't move."
"Come on," Cricket said. "You ought to know better than to argue with
a machine." She was already getting out. I knew she was right, but there is
a part of me that has never been able to resist it, even if they don't talk to me.
"Your mother was a garbage truck," I said, and kicked it in the rubber
skirt.
"Undoubtedly, sir. Thank you, sir. Please come back soon, sir."
#
"Who programmed that toadying thing?" I wondered, later.
"Somebody with a lot of lipstick on his ass," Cricket said. "What are
you so sour about? It's just a short walk. Take in the scenery."
It was a rather pleasant place, I had to admit. There were very few

people around. You grow up with the odor of people all around you, all the
time, and you really notice it when the scent is gone. I took a deep breath
and smelled freshly-poured concrete. I drank the sights and sounds and
scents of a new-born world: the sharp primary colors of wire bundles
sprouting from unfinished walls like the first buds on a bare bough, the
untarnished gleam of copper, silver, gold, aluminum, titanium; the whistle of
air through virgin ducts, undeflected, unmuffled, bringing with it the crisp
sharpness of the light machine oil that for centuries has coated new
machinery, fresh from the factory . . . all these things had an effect on me.
They meant warmth, security, safety from the eternal vacuum, the victory of
humanity over the hostile forces that never slept. In a word, progress.
I began to relax a little. We picked our way through jumbles of stainless
steel and aluminum and plastic and glass building components and I felt a
peace as profound as I suspect a Kansas farmer of yesteryear might have
felt, looking out over his rippling fields of wheat.
"Says here they've got an option where you can have sex over the
telephone."
Cricket had gotten a few paces ahead of me, and she was reading from
the UniBio faxpad handout.
"That's nothing new. People started having sex over the telephone about
ten minutes after Alexander Graham Bell invented it."
"You're pulling my leg. Nobody invented sex."
I liked Cricket, though we were rivals. She works for The Straight Shit,
Luna's second largest padloid, and has already made a name for herself even
though she's not quite thirty years old. We cover many of the same stories
so we see a lot of each other, professionally.
She'd been female all the time I'd known her, but she'd never shown any
interest in the tentative offers I had made. No accounting for taste. I'd about
decided it was a matter of sexual orientation—one doesn't ask. It had to be
that. If not, it meant she just wasn't interested in me. Altogether unlikely.
Which was a shame, either way, because I'd harbored a low-grade lust
for her for three years.
"'Simply attach the Tinglemodem (sold separately) to the primary
sensory cluster,'" she read, "'and it's as if your lover were in the room with
you.' I'll bet Mr. Bell didn't figure on that."
Cricket had a child-like face with an upturned nose and a brow that

tended to wrinkle appealingly when she was thinking—all carefully
calculated, I have no doubt, but no less exciting because of that. She had a
short upper lip and a long lower one. I guess that doesn't sound so great, but
Cricket made it work. She had one green, normal eye, and the other one was
red, without a pupil. My eyes were the same except the normal one was
brown. The visible red eyes of the press never sleep.
She was wearing a frilly red blouse that went well with her silver-blonde
hair, and the second badge of our profession: a battered gray fedora with a
card reading PRESS stuck into the brim. She had recently had herself
heeled. It was coming back into fashion. Personally, I tried it and didn't like
it much. It's a simple operation. The tendons in the soles of the feet are
shortened, forcing your heels up in the air and shifting the weight to the balls
of the feet. In extreme cases it put you right up on your toes, like a ballerina.
Like I said, a rather silly fad, but I had to admit it produced attractive lines in
the calf, thigh, and buttock muscles.
It could have been worse. Women used to cram their feet into pointed
horrors with ten-centimeter heels and hobble around in a one-gee field to get
more or less the same effect. It must have been crippling.
"Says there's a security interlock available, to insure fidelity."
"What? Where's that?"
She gave me the faxpad reference. I couldn't believe what I was
reading.
"Is that legal?" I asked her.
"Sure. It's a contract between two people, isn't it? Nobody's forced to
use it."
"It's an electronic chastity belt, that's what it is."
"Worn by both husband and wife. Not like the brave knight off to the
Crusades, getting laid every night while his wife looks for a good locksmith.
Good for the goose, good for the gander."
"Good for nobody, if you ask me."
Frankly, I was shocked, and not much shocks me. To each his or her
own, that's basic to our society. But ULTRA-Tingle was offering a coded
security system whereby each partner had a password, unknown to the other,
to lock or unlock his or her partner's sexual response. Without the password,
the sexual center of the brain would not be activated, and sex would be about
as exciting as long division.

To use it would require giving someone veto power over my own mind.
I can't imagine trusting anyone that much. But people are crazy. That's
what my job's all about.
"How about over there?" Cricket said.
"Over where? I mean, what about it?" She was headed toward a patch
of green, an area that, when completed, would be a pocket park. Trees stood
around in pots. There were great rolls of turf stacked against one wall, like a
carpet shop.
"It's probably the best spot we'll find."
"For what?"
"Have you forgotten your offer already?" she asked.
To tell the truth, I had. After this many years, it had been made more in
jest than anything else. She took my hand and led me onto an unrolled
section of turf. It was soft and springy and cool. She reclined and looked up
at me.
"Maybe I shouldn't say it, but I'm surprised."
"Well, Hildy, you never really asked, you know?"
I felt sure I had, but maybe she was right. My style is more to kid
around, make what used to be known as a pass. Some women don't like that.
They'd rather have a direct question.
I stretched out on top of her and we kissed.
We disarranged some of my clothes. She wasn't wearing enough to
worry about. Soon we were moving to rhythms it had taken Mother Nature
well over a billion years to compose. It was awkward, messy, it lacked
flexibility and probably didn't show much imagination. It sure wasn't
ULTRA-Tingle. That didn't prevent it from being wonderful.
"Wow," she whispered, as I rolled off her and we lay side by side on the
grass. "That was really . . . obsolete."
"Not nearly as obsolete as it was for me."
We looked at each other and burst out laughing.
After a while, she sat up and glanced at the figures displayed on her
wrist.
"Deadline in three hours," she said.

"Me, too." We heard a low hum, looked up, and saw our old friend the
hoverlimo headed in our direction. We ran to catch it, leaped over the
rubber skirt and landed with seven others, who grumbled and groused and
eventually made room for us.
"I am overjoyed to transport you," said the hoverlimo.
"I take that back about the garbage truck," I said.
"Thank you, sir."

CHAPTER TWO

This is not a mystery story. The people you will meet along the way are

not suspects. The things that happen to them are not clues. I promise not to
gather everyone together at the end and dramatically denounce a culprit.
This is not an adventure story. The survival of the universe will not be
thrown into jeopardy during the course of it. Some momentous events will
occur, and I was present at some of them but, like most of us, I was simply
picked up by the tornado of history and deposited, like Judy Garland, in a
place I never expected to be. I had little or no hand in the outcome. In fact,
this being real life and not an adventure story, it can be said there has been
no outcome. Some things will change, and some will remain the same, and
most things will simply go on as they were. If I were a writer of adventure
fiction, if I were manufacturing myself as the adventure's protagonist, I
would certainly have placed myself in the center of more of the plot's
turning points. I would have had myself plunging into peril, fighting mighty
battles, and saving humanity, or something like that. Instead, many of the
most important things I'm going to tell you about happened far from my
sight. I just tried to stay alive . . .
Don't expect me to draw my sword and set things aright. Even if I had a
sword and knew how to use it, I seldom saw an unambiguous target, and
when I thought I did it was too large and too far away for my puny
swordsmanship to have any effect.
This is not a nuts-and-bolts story. Here you will find—among many
other howlers—the Hildy Johnson Explanation of Nanobots, their uses,
functions, and methods of working. I'm sure much of it is wildly inaccurate,
and all of it is surely written about fifty I.Q. points below the layman's level .
. . and so what? If you want a nuts-and-bolts story, there have been many
written about the events I will describe. Or you could always read the
instruction manual.
Maybe the nanobot stuff could have come out, but I will also deal with
the central technological conundrum of our time: that undeniably sentient,
great big spooky pile of crystalline gray matter, wonderful humanitarian,
your friend and mine, the Central Computer. That was unavoidable, but I
will say it once and you'd do well to remember it: I am not a tech. The
things I have to say about matters cybernetic should be taken with an
asteroid-sized tablet of sodium chloride. Literally thousands of texts have
been written concerning how what happened happened, and why it can't
happen again, to any degree of complexity you're capable of handling, so I
refer the interested reader to them, and good riddance. But I will divulge to
you a secret, because if you've come this far with me I can't help but like

you: take what those techs say with a grain of salt, too. Nobody knows
what's going on with the CC.
So I've told you what kind of story this isn't. Well, what is it?
That's always harder to say. I thought of calling it How I Spent the
Bicentennial Year, but where's the sex in that? Where's the headline appeal?
I could have called it To The Stars! That remains to be seen, and it will be
my intention throughout not to lie to you.
What I was afraid it was when I began was the world's longest suicide
note. It's not: I survived. Damn! I just gave away the ending. But I would
hope the more astute of you had already figured that one out.
All I can promise you is that it's a story. Things do happen. But people
will behave in unrepentantly illogical ways. Mammoth events will remain
resolutely off-stage. Dramatic climaxes will fizzle like wet firecrackers.
Questions will go unanswered. An outline of this story would be a sorry
thing to behold; any script doctor in the world could instantly suggest dozens
of ways to spruce it up. Hey, have you tried outlining your own life lately?
I will be the most illogical character of them all. I will miss
opportunities where I could have made a difference, do the wrong thing, and
just generally sleepwalk through some critical events in my life. I'm sorry,
and I hope you all do better than I have, but I wonder if you will. I will
ramble and digress. If Walter couldn't get me to stop doing that, no one
could. I will inject bits of my rag-tag personal philosophy; I am an
opinionated son of a bitch, or bitch, as the case may be, but when things
threaten to get too heavy I will inject some inappropriate humor. Though
anything one writes will have a message, I will not try too hard to sell mine
to you, partly because I'm far from sure what it is.
But you can relax on one account: this is not a metaphorical story. I
will not turn into a giant cockroach, nor will I perish in existential despair.
There's even some rock 'em sock 'em action, for those of you who wandered
in from the Saturday Matinee. What more could you ask?
So you've been warned. From here on in, you're on your own.
#
The tube capsule back to King City was a quarter full. I used the time to
try to salvage something from the wasted afternoon. Looking around me, I
saw that all my colleagues were busy at the same task. Eyes were rolled up,
mouths hung open, here and there a finger twitched. It had to be either a day

trip from the Catatonic Academy, or the modern press at work.
Call me old-fashioned. I'm the only reporter I know who still uses his
handwriter except to take notes. Cricket was young enough I doubted she'd
ever had one installed. As for the rest of them, over the last twenty years I'd
watched as one after the other surrendered to the seductions of Direct
Interface, until only I was left, plodding along with antique technology that
happened to suit me just fine.
Okay, so I lied about the open mouths. Not all D.I. users look like
retarded zombies when they interface. But they look asleep, and I've never
been comfortable sleeping in public places.
I snapped the fingers of my left hand. I had to do it twice more before
the handwriter came on. That worried me; it was getting harder to find
people who still knew how to work on handwriters.
Three rows of four colored dots appeared on the heel of my left hand.
By pressing the dots in different combinations with my fingertips I was
able to write the story in shorthand, and watch the loops and lines scrawl
themselves on a strip of readout skin on my wrist, just where a suicide would
slash himself.
There couldn't be that many of us left who knew Gregg. I wondered if I
ought to apply for a grant under the Preservation of Vanishing Skills act.
Shorthand was certainly useless enough to qualify. It was at least as
obsolete as yodeling, and I'd once covered a meeting of the Yodeling
Society. While I was at it, maybe I could drum up some interest in the
Preservation of the Penis.
#
(File #Hildy*next avail.*)(code Unitingle)
(headline to come)
#
How far do you trust your spouse? Or better yet, how much does your
spouse trust you!
That's the question you'll be asking yourself if you subscribe to United
Bioengineers' new sex system known as ULTRA-Tingle.
ULTRA-Tingle is the new, improved, up-dated version of UniBio's
mega-flop of a few years back, known simple as Tingle. Remember Tingle?
Well, don't feel bad. Nobody else does, either. Somewhere, in some remote

cavern in this great dusty globe we feel sure there must be someone who
converted and stayed that way. Maybe even two of them. Maybe tonight
they're Tingling each other. Or maybe one of them has a tingle-ache.
If you are a bona fide Tingler, call this padloid immediately, because
you've won a prize! Ten percent off on the cost of your conversion to
ULTRA-Tingle. Second prize: a discount on two conversions!
What does ULTRA-Tingle offer the dedicated sexual adventurer? In a
word: Security!
Maybe you thought sex was between your legs. It's not. It's in your
head, like everything. And that is the miracle of ULTRA-Tingle. Merely by
saying the word you can have the great thrill of caponizing your mate. You,
too, can be a grinning gelding. Imagine the joys of cerebral castration! Be
the first in your sector to re-discover the art of psychic infibulation! Who
but UniBio could raise impotence into the realm of integrated circuits,
elevate frigidity from aberration to abnegation?
You don't believe me? Here's how it works:
(to come: *insert UniBio faxpad #4985 ref. 6-13.*)
You may ask yourself: Whatever happened to old-fashioned trust?
Well, folks, it's obsolete. Just like the penis, which UniBio assures us will
soon go the way of the Do-do bird. So those of you who still own and
operate a trouser-snake, better start thinking of a place to put it.
No, not there, you fool! That's obsolete, too!
(no thirty)
#
The vocabulary warning light was blinking wildly on the nail of my
index finger. It turned on around paragraph seven, as I had known it would.
But it's fun to write that sort of thing, even if you know it'll never make it
into print. When I first started this job I would have gone back and worked
on it, but now I know it's better to leave something obvious for Walter to
mess with, in the hope he'll leave the rest alone.
Okay, so the Pulitzer Prize was safe for another year.
#
King City grew the way many of the older Lunar settlements had: one
bang at a time.
The original enclave had been in a large volcanic bubble several

hundred meters below the surface. An artificial sun had been hung near the
top, and engineers drilled tunnels in all directions, heaping the rubble on the
floor, pulverizing it into soil, turning the bubble into a city park with
residential corridors radiating away from it.
Eventually there were too many people for that park, so they drilled a
hole and dropped in a medium-sized nuclear bomb. When it cooled, the
resulting bubble became Mall Two.
The city fathers were up to Mall Seventeen before new construction
methods and changing public tastes halted the string. The first ten malls had
been blasted in a line, which meant a long commute from the Old Mall to
Mall Ten. They started curving the line, aiming to complete a big oval.
Now a King City map had seventeen circles tracing out the letter J, woven
together by a thousand tunnels.
My office was in Mall Twelve, level thirty-six, 120 degrees. It's in the
editorial offices of The News Nipple, the padloid with the largest circulation
in Luna. The door at 120 opens on what is barely more than an elevator
lobby wedged between a travel agency and a florist. There's a receptionist, a
small waiting room, and a security desk. Behind that are four elevators that
go to actual offices, on the Lunar surface.
Location, location, and location, says my cousin Arnie, the real estate
broker. The way I figure it, time plays a part in land values, too. The Nipple
offices were topside because, when the rag was founded, topside meant
cheap. Walter had had money even way back then, but he'd been a cheap
son of a bitch since the dawn of time. He got a deal on the seven-story
surface structure, and who cared if it leaked? He liked the view.
Now everybody likes views, and the fine old homes in Bedrock are the
worst slums in King City. But I suspect one big blow-out could turn the
whole city topsy-turvy again.
I had a corner office on the sixth floor. I hadn't done much with it other
than to put in a cot and a coffeemaker. I tossed my hat on the cot, slapped
the desk terminal until it lighted up, and pressed my palm against a read-out
plate. My story was downloaded into the main computer in just under a
second. In another second, the printer started to chatter. Walter prefers hard
copy. He likes to make big blue marks on it. While I waited I looked out
over the city. My home town.
The News Nipple Tower is near the bottom of the J of King City. From
it you can see the clusters of other buildings that mark the sub-surface Malls.

The sun was still three days from rising. The lights of the city dwindled in
the distance and blended in with the hard, unblinking stars overhead.
Almost on the horizon are the huge, pearly domes of King City farms.
It's pretty by night, not so lovely by day. When the sun came up it
would bathe every exposed pipe and trash pile and abandoned rover in
unsympathetic light; night pulled a curtain over the shameful clutter.
Even the parts that aren't junk aren't all that attractive. Vacuum is useful
in many manufacturing processes and walls are of no use for most of them.
If something needed to be sheltered from sunlight, a roof was enough.
Loonies don't care about the surface. There's no ecology to preserve, no
reason at all to treat it as other than a huge and handy dumping ground. In
some places the garbage was heaped to the third story of the exterior
buildings. Give us another thousand years and we'll pile the garbage a
hundred meters deep from pole to pole.
There was very little movement. King City, on the surface, looked
bombed out, abandoned.
The printer finished its job and I handed the copy to a passing
messenger. Walter would call me about it when it suited him. I thought of
several things I could do in the meantime, failed to find any enthusiasm for
any of them. So I just sat there and stared out over the surface, and presently
I was called into the master's presence.
#
Walter Editor is what is known as a natural.
Not that he's a fanatic about it. He doesn't subscribe to one of those
cults that refuse all medical treatment developed since 1860, or 1945, or
2020. He's not impressed with faith healing. He's not a member of
Lifespan, those folks who believe it's a sin to live beyond the Biblical
threescore and ten, or the Centenarians, who set the number at one hundred.
He's just like most of the rest of us, prepared to live forever if medical
science can maintain a quality life for him. He'll accept any treatment that
will keep him healthy despite a monstrously dissolute life style.
He just doesn't care how he looks.
All the fads in body styling and facial arrangement pass him by. In the
twenty years I have known him he has never changed so much as his hair
style. He had been born male—or so he once told me—one hundred and
twenty-six years ago, and had never Changed.

His somatic development had been frozen in his mid-forties, a time he
often described to all who would listen as "the prime of life." As a result, he
was paunchy and balding. This suited Walter fine. He felt the editor of a
major planetary newspaper ought to be paunchy and balding.
An earlier age would have called Walter Editor a voluptuary. He was a
sensualist, a glutton, monstrously self-indulgent. He went through stomachs
in two or three years, used up a pair of lungs every decade or so, and needed
a new heart more frequently than most people change gaskets on a pressure
suit. Every time he exceeded what he called his "fighting weight" by fifty
kilos, he'd have seventy kilos removed. Other than that, with Walter what
you saw was what he was.
I found him in his usual position, leaning back in his huge chair, big feet
propped up on the antique mahogany desk whose surface displayed not one
item made after 1880. His face was hidden behind my story. Puffs of
lavender smoke rose from behind the pages.
"Sit down, Hildy, sit down," he muttered, turning a page. I sat, and
looked out his windows, which had exactly the same view I'd seen from my
windows but five meters higher and three hundred degrees wider. I knew
there would be three of four minutes while he kept me waiting. It was one
of his managerial techniques. He'd read in a book somewhere that an
effective boss should keep underlings waiting whenever possible. He
spoiled the effect by constantly glancing up at the clock on the wall.
The clock had been made in 1860 and had once graced the wall of a
railway station somewhere in Iowa. The office could be described as
Dickensian. The furnishings were worth more than I was likely to make in
my lifetime. Very few genuine antiquities had ever been brought to Luna.
Most of those were in museums. Walter owned much of the rest.
"Junk," he said. "Worthless." He scowled and tossed the flimsy sheets
across the room. Or he tried to. Flimsy sheets resist attaining any great
speed unless you wad them up first. These fluttered to the floor at his feet.
"Sorry, Walter, but there just wasn't any other—"
"You want to know why I can't use it?"
"No sex."
"There's no sex in it! I send you out to cover a new sex system, and it
turns out there's no sex in it. How can that be?"
"Well, there's sex in it, naturally. Just not the right kind. I mean, I

could write a story about earthworm sex, or jellyfish sex, but it wouldn't turn
anybody on but earthworms and jellyfish."
"Exactly. Why is that, Hildy? Why do they want to turn us into
jellyfish?"
I knew all about this particular hobbyhorse, but there was nothing to do
but ride it.
"It's like the search for the Holy Grail, or the Philosopher's Stone," I
said.
"What's the Philosopher's Stone?"
The question had not come from Walter, but from behind me. I was
pretty sure I knew who it was. I turned, and saw Brenda, cub reporter, who
for the past two weeks had been my journalistic assistant—pronounced
"copy girl."
"Sit down, Brenda," Walter said. "I'll get to you in a minute."
I watched her dither around pulling up a chair, folding herself into it like
a collapsible ruler with bony joints sticking out in all directions, surely too
many joints for one human being. She was very tall and very thin, like so
many of the younger generation. I had been told she was seventeen, out on
her first vocational education try-out. She was eager as a puppy and not half
as graceful.
She irritated the hell out of me. I'm not sure why. There's the
generational thing. You wonder how things can get worse, you think that
these kids have to be the rock bottom, then they have children and you see
how wrong you were.
At least she could read and write, I'll give her that. But she was so
damnably earnest, so horribly eager to please. She made me tired just
looking at her. She was a tabula rasa waiting for someone to draw animated
cartoons on. Her ignorance of everything outside her particular uppermiddle class social stratum and of everything that had happened more than
five years ago was still un-plumbed.
She opened the huge purse she always carried around with her and
produced a cheroot identical to the one Walter was smoking. She lit up and
exhaled a cloud of lavender smoke. Her smoking dated to the day after she
met Walter Editor. Her name dated to the day after she met me. Maybe it
should have amused or flattered me that she was so obviously trying to
emulate her elders; it just made me angry. Adopting the name of a famous

fictional reporter had been my idea.
Walter gestured for me to go on. I sighed, and did so.
"I really don't know when it started, or why. But the basic idea was,
since sex and reproduction no longer have much to do with each other, why
should we have sex with our reproductive organs? The same organs we use
for urination, too, for that matter."
"'If it ain't broke, don't fix it,'" Walter said. "That's my philosophy. The
old-fashioned system worked for millions of years. Why tamper with it?'
"Actually, Walter, we've already tampered with it quite a bit."
"Not everybody."
"True. But well over eighty percent of females prefer clitoral relocation.
The natural arrangement didn't provide enough stimulation during the
regular sex act. And just about that many men have had a testicle tuck.
They were too damn vulnerable hanging out there where nature put them."
"I haven't had one," he said. I made note of that, in case I ever got into a
fight with him.
"Then there's the question of stamina in males," I went on. "Back on
Earth, it was the rare male over thirty who could consistently get an erection
more than three or four times a day. And it usually didn't last very long.
And men didn't have multiple orgasms. They just weren't as sexually
capable as women."
"That's horrible," Brenda said. I looked at her; she was genuinely
shocked.
"That's an improvement, I'll have to admit," Walter said.
"And there's the entire phenomenon of menstruation," I added.
"What's menstruation?"
We both looked at her. She wasn't joking. Walter and I looked at each
other and I could read his thoughts.
"Anyway," I said, "you just pointed out the challenge. Lots of people
get altered in one way or another. Some, like you, stay almost natural.
Some of the alterations aren't compatible with others. Not all of them
involve penetration of one person by another, for instance. What these
newsex people are saying is, if we're going to tamper, why not come up with
a system that is so much better than the others that everyone will want to be
that way? Why should the sensations we associate with 'sexual pleasure' be

always and forever the result of friction between mucous membranes? It's
the same sort of urge people had about languages back on Earth, back when
there were hundreds of languages, or about weights and measures. The
metric system caught on, but Esperanto didn't. Today we have a few dozen
languages still in use, and more types of sexual orientation than that."
I settled back in my chair, feeling foolish. But I'd done my part. Now
Walter could get on with whatever he had in mind. I glanced at Brenda, and
she was staring at me with the wide-eyed look of an acolyte to a guru.
Walter took another drag on his cheroot, exhaled, and leaned back in his
chair, fingers laced behind his head.
"You know what today is?" he asked.
"Thursday," Brenda supplied. Walter glanced at her, but didn't bother to
reply. He took another drag.
"It's the one hundred and ninety-ninth anniversary of the Invasion and
Occupation of the Planet Earth."
"Remind me to light a candle and say a novena."
"You think it's funny."
"Nothing funny about it," I said. "I just wonder what it has to do with
me."
Walter nodded, and put his feet down on the floor.
"How many stories have you seen on the Invasion in the last week? The
week leading up to this anniversary?"
I was willing to play along.
"Let's see. Counting the stuff in the Straight Shit, the items in the
Lunarian and the K.C. News, that incisive series in Lunatime, and of course
our own voluminous coverage . . . none. Not a single story."
"That's right. I think it's time somebody did something about that."
"While we're at it, let's do a big spread on the Battle of Agincourt, and
the first manned landing on Mars."
"You do think it's funny."
"I'm merely applying a lesson somebody taught me when I started here.
If it happened yesterday, it ain't news. And the News Nipple reports the
news."

"This isn't strictly for the Nipple," Walter admitted.
"Uh-oh."
He ignored my expression, which I hoped was sufficiently sour, and
plowed ahead.
"We'll use cuts from your stories in the Nipple. Most of 'em, anyway.
You'll have Brenda to do most of the leg work."
"What are you talking about?" Brenda asked Walter. When that didn't
work, she turned to me. "What's he talking about?"
"I'm talking about the supplement."
"He's talking about the old reporters' graveyard."
"Just one story a week. Will you let me explain?"
I settled back in my chair and tried to turn off my brain. Oh, I'd fight it
hard enough, but I knew I didn't have much choice when Walter got that
look in his eye.
The News Nipple Corporation publishes three pads. The first is the
Nipple itself, updated hourly, full of what Walter Editor liked to think of as
"lively" stories: the celebrity scandal, the pseudo-scientific breakthrough,
psychic predictions, lovingly bloody coverage of disasters. We covered the
rougher and more proletarian sports, and a certain amount of politics, if the
proposition involved could be expressed in a short sentence. The Nipple had
so many pictures you hardly needed to read the words. Like the other
padloids, it would not have bothered with any copy but for the government
literacy grants that often provided the financial margin between success and
failure. A daily quota of words was needed to qualify for the grants. That
exact number of words appeared in each of our issues, including "a," "an,"
"and," and "the."
The Daily Cream was the intellectual appendix to the swollen intestine
of the Nipple. It came free to every subscriber of the pad—those
government grants again—and was read by about one in ten, according to
our more optimistic surveys. It published thousands of times more words
per hour, and included most of our political coverage.
Somewhere between those two was the electronic equivalent of the
Sunday supplement, published weekly, called Sundae.
"Here's what I want," Walter went on. "You'll go out and cover your
regular beats. But I want you to be thinking Sundae while you do that.

Whatever you're covering, think about how it would have been different two
hundred years ago, back on Earth. It can be anything at all. Like today, sex.
There's a topic for you. Write about what sex was like back on Earth, and
contrast it to what it's like now. You could even throw in stuff about what
people think it's gonna be like in another twenty years, or a century."
"Walter, I don't deserve this."
"Hildy, you're the only man for it. I want one article per week for the
entire year leading up to the bicentennial. I'm giving you a free hand as to
what they're about. You can editorialize. You can personalize, make it like
a column. You've always wanted a column; here's your chance at a by-line.
You want expensive consultants, advisors, research? You name it, you got it.
You need to travel? I'm good for the money. I want only the best for this
series."
I didn't know what to say to that. It was a good offer. Nothing in life is
ever exactly what you asked for, but I had wanted a column, and this seemed
like a reasonable shot at it.
"Hildy, during the twentieth century there was a time like no other time
humans have seen before or since. My grandfather's great-grandfather was
born in the year the Wright brothers made the first powered flight. By the
time he died, there was a permanent base on Luna. My grandfather was ten
when the old man died, and he's told me many times how he used to talk
about the old days. It was amazing just how much change that old man had
seen in his lifetime.
"In that century they started talking about a 'generation gap.' So much
happened, so many things changed so fast, how was a seventy-year-old
supposed to talk to a fifteen-year-old in terms they both could understand?
"Well, things don't change quite that fast anymore. I wonder if they
ever will again? But we've got something in common with those people.
We've got kids like Brenda here who hardly remember anything beyond last
year, and they're living side by side with people who were born and grew up
on the Earth. People who remember what a one-gee gravity field was like,
what it was to walk around outside and breathe free, un-metered air. Who
were raised when people were born, grew up, and died in the same sex.
People who fought in wars. Our oldest citizens are almost three hundred
now. Surely there's fifty-two stories in that.
"This is a story that's been waiting two hundred years to be told. We've
had our heads in the sand. We've been beaten, humiliated, suffered a racial

set-back that I'm afraid . . . "
It was as if he suddenly had heard what he was saying. He sputtered to
a stop, not looking me in the eye.
I was not used to speeches from Walter. It made me uneasy. The
assignment made me uneasy. I don't think about the Invasion much—which
was precisely his point, of course—and I think that's just as well. But I
could see his passion, and knew I'd better not fight it. I was used to rage, to
being chewed out for this or that. Being appealed to was something brand
new. I felt it was time to lighten the atmosphere a little.
"So how big a raise are we talking about here?" I asked.
He settled back in his chair and smiled, back on familiar ground.
"You know I never discuss that. It'll be in your next paycheck. If you
don't like it, gripe to me then."
"And I have to use the kid on all this stuff?"
"Hey! I'm right here," Brenda protested.
"The kid is vital to the whole thing. She's your sounding board. If a fact
from the old days sounds weird to her, you know you're onto something.
She's contemporary as your last breath, she's eager to learn and fairly bright,
and she knows nothing. You'll be the middle man. You're about the right
age for it, and history's your hobby. You know more about old Earth than
any man your age I've ever met."
"If I'm in the middle . . . "
"You might want to interview my grandfather," Walter suggested. "But
there'll be a third member of your team. Somebody Earth-born. I haven't
decided yet who that'll be.
"Now get out of here, both of you."
I could see Brenda had a thousand questions she still wanted to ask. I
warned her off with my eyes, and followed her to the door.
"And Hildy," Walter said. I looked back.
"If you put words like abnegation and infibulation in these stories, I'll
personally caponize you."

CHAPTER THREE

I pulled the tarp off my pile of precious lumber and watched the
scorpions scuttle away in the sunlight. Say what you want about the sanctity
of life; I like to crush 'em.
Deeper in the pile I'd disturbed a rattlesnake. I didn't see him, but could
hear him warning me away. Handling them from the ends, I selected a plank
and pulled it out. I shouldered it and carried it to my half-finished cabin. It
was evening, the best time to work in West Texas. The temperature had
dropped to ninety-five in the old-style scale they used there. During the day
it had been well over a hundred.
I positioned the plank on two sawhorses near what would be the front
porch when I was finished. I squatted and looked down its length. This was
a one-by-ten—inches, not centimeters—which meant it actually measured
about nine by seven eighths, for reasons no one had ever explained to me.
Thinking in inches was difficult enough, without dealing in those odd ratios
called fractions. What was wrong with decimals, and what was wrong with
a one-by-ten actually being one inch by ten inches? Why twelve inches in a
foot? Maybe there was a story in it for the bicentennial series.
The plank had been advertised as ten feet long, and that measurement
was accurate. It was also supposed to be straight, but if it was they had used
a noodle for a straightedge.
Texas was the second of what was to be three disneylands devoted to the
eighteenth century. Out here west of the Pecos we reckoned it to be 1845,
the last year of the Texas Republic, though you could use technology as
recent as 1899 without running afoul of the anachronism regulations.
Pennsylvania had been the first of the triad, and my plank, complete with
two big bulges in the width and a depressing sag when held by one end, had
been milled there by "Amish" sawyers using the old methods. A little oval
stamp in a corner guaranteed this: "Approved, Lunar Antiquities
Reproduction Board." Either the methods of the 1800's couldn't reliably
produce straight and true lumber, or those damn Dutchmen were still
learning their craft.
So I did what the carpenters of the Texas Republic had done. I got out
my plane (also certified by the L.A.R.B.), removed the primitive blade,
sharpened it against a home-made whetstone, re-attached the blade, and
began shaving away the irregularities.

I'm not complaining. I was lucky to get the lumber. Most of the cabin
was made of rough-hewn logs notched together at the ends, chinked with
adobe.
The board had turned gray in the heat and sun, but after a few strokes I
was down to the yellow pine interior. The wood curled up around the blade
and the chips dropped around my bare feet. It smelled fresh and new and I
found myself smiling as the sweat dripped off my nose. It would be good to
be a carpenter, I thought. Maybe I'd quit the newspaper business.
Then the blade broke and jammed into the wood. My palm slipped off
the knob in front and tried to skate across the fresh-planed surface, driving
long splinters into my skin. The plane clattered off the board and went for
my toe with the hellish accuracy of a pain-guided missile.
I shouted a few words rarely heard in 1845, and some uncommon even
in the 23rd century. I hopped around on one foot. Another lost art, hopping.
"It could have been worse," a voice said in my ear. It was either
incipient schizophrenia, or the Central Computer. I bet on the CC.
"How? By hitting both feet?"
"Gravity. Consider the momentum such a massive object could have
attained, had this really been West Texas, which lies at the bottom of a
space-time depression twenty-five thousand miles per hour deep."
Definitely the CC.
I examined my hand. Blood was oozing from it, running down my
forearm and dripping from the elbow. But there was no arterial pumping.
The foot, though it still hurt like fire, was not damaged.
"You see now why laborers in 1845 wore work boots."
"Is that why you called, CC? To give me a lecture about safety in the
work place?"
"No. I was going to announce a visitor. The colorful language lesson
was an unexpected bonus of my tuning in on—"
"Shut up, will you?"
The Central Computer did so.
The end of a splinter protruded from my palm, so I pulled on it. I got
some, but a lot was still buried in there. Others had broken off below skin
level. All in all, a wonderful day's work.

A visitor? I looked around and saw no one, though a whole tribe of
Apaches could have been hiding in the clumps of mesquite. I had not
expected to see any sign of the CC. It uses the circuitry in my own head to
produce its voice.
And it wasn't supposed to manifest itself in Texas. As is often the case,
there was more to the CC than it was telling.
"CC, on-line, please."
"I hear and obey."
"Who's the visitor?"
"Tall, young, ignorant of tampons, with a certain puppy-like charm—"
"Oh, Jesus."
"I know I'm not supposed to intrude on these antique environments, but
she was quite insistent on learning your location, and I thought it better for
you to have some forewarning than to—"
"Okay. Now shut up."
I sat in the rickety chair which had been my first carpentry project.
Being careful of the injured hand, I pulled on the work boots I should have
been wearing all along. The reason I hadn't was simple: I hated them.
There was another story for Walter. Shoes. If Lunarians wear them,
they tend to be the soft kind, like moccasins, or socks. Reason: in a
crowded urban environment of perfectly smooth floors and carpets and a
majority of bare-foot people, hard shoes are anti-social. You could break
someone else's toes.
Once I had my feet jammed into the smelly things I had to search for the
buttonhook. Buttons, on shoes! It was outrageous. How had people ever
tolerated such things? To add insult to inutility, the damn things had cost me
a fortune.
I stood and was about to head into town when the CC spoke again.
"If you leave those tools out and it rains, they will combine with the
oxygen in the air in a slow combustion reaction."
"Rust is too poor a word for you, right? It rains out here . . . what?
Once every hundred days?"
But my heart wasn't in it. The CC was right. If button-up torture
devices were expensive, period tools were worth a king's ransom. My plane,

saw, hammer and chisel had cost a year's salary. The good news was I could
re-sell them for more than I paid . . . if they weren't rusted.
I wrapped them in an oiled cloth and stowed them carefully in my
toolbox, then headed down the trail toward town.
#
I was in sight of New Austin before I spied Brenda, looking like an
albino flamingo. She was standing on one leg while the other was turned
around so the foot was at waist level, sole upward. To do it she had twisted
at hip and knee in ways I hadn't thought humanly possible. She was nude,
her skin a uniform creamy white. She had no pubic hair.
"Hi, there, seven foot two, eyes of blue."
She glanced at me, then pointed at her foot, indignantly.
"They don't keep these paths very tidy. Look what it did to my foot.
There was a stone, with a sharp point on it."
"They specialize in sharp points around here," I said. "It's a natural
environment. You've probably never seen one before."
"My class went to Amazon three years ago."
"Sure, on the moving walkway. While I'm at it, I'd better tell you the
plants have sharp points, too. That big thing there is a prickly pear. Don't
walk through it. That thing behind you is a cactus, too. Don't step on it.
This bush has thorns. Over there is cenizo. It blooms after a rain; real
pretty."
She looked around, possibly realizing for the first time that there was
more than one kind of plant, and that they all had names.
"You know what they're all called?"
"Not all. I know the big ones. Those spiky ones are yucca. The tall
ones, like whips, those are ocotillo. Most of those short bushes are creosote.
That tree is mesquite."
"Not much of a tree."
"It's not much of an environment. Things here have to struggle to stay
alive. Not like Amazon, where the plants fight each other. Here they work
too hard conserving water."
She looked around again, wincing as her injured foot touched the
ground.

"No animals?"
"They're all around you. Insects, reptiles, mostly. Some antelope.
Buffalo further east. I could show you a cougar lair." I doubted she had any
idea what a cougar was, or antelope and buffalo, for that matter. This was a
city girl through and through. About like me before I moved to Texas, three
years ago. I relented and went down on one knee.
"Let me see that foot."
There was a ragged gash on the heel, painful but not serious.
"Hey, your hand is hurt," she said. "What happened?"
"Just a stupid accident." I noticed as I said it that she not only lacked
pubic hair, she had no genitals. That used to be popular sixty or seventy
years ago, for children, as part of a theory of the time concerning something
called "delayed adolescence." I hadn't seen it in at least twenty years,
though I'd heard there were religious sects that still practiced it. I wondered
if her family belonged to one, but it was much too personal to ask about.
"I don't like this place," she said "It's dangerous." She made it sound
like an obscenity. The whole idea offended her, as well it should, coming as
she did from the most benign environment ever created by humans.
"It's not so bad. Can you walk on that?"
"Oh, sure." She put her foot down and walked along beside me, on her
toes. As if she weren't tall enough already. "What was that remark about
seven feet? I've got two feet, just like everyone else."
"Actually, you're closer to seven-four, I'd guess." I had to give her a
brief explanation of the English system of weights and measures as used in
the West Texas disneyland. I'm not sure she understood it, but I didn't hold
it against her, because I didn't, either.
We had arrived in the middle of New Austin. This was no great feat of
walking; the middle is about a hundred yards from the edge. New Austin
consists of two streets: Old Spanish Trail and Congress Street. The
intersection is defined by four buildings: The Travis Hotel, the Alamo
Saloon, a general store and a livery stable. The hotel and saloon each have a
second story. At the far end of Congress is a white clapboard Baptist
church. That, and a few dozen other ramshackle buildings strung out
between the church and Four Corners, is New Austin.
"They took all my clothes," she said.

"Naturally."
"They were perfectly good clothes."
"I'm sure they were. But only contemporary things are allowed in here."
"What for?"
"Think of it as a living museum."
I'd been headed for the doctor's office. Considering the time of day, I
thought better of it and mounted the steps to the saloon. We entered through
the swinging doors.
It was dark inside, and a little cooler. Behind me, Brenda had to duck to
get through the doorway. A player piano tinkled in the background, just like
an old western movie. I spotted the doctor sitting at the far end of the bar.
"Say, young lady," the bartender shouted. "You can't come in here
dressed like that." I looked around, saw her looking down at herself in
complete confusion.
"What's the matter with you people?" she shouted. "The lady outside
made me leave all my clothes with her."
"Amanda," the bartender said, "you have anything she could wear?" He
turned to Brenda again. "I don't care what you wear out in the bush. You
come into my establishment, you'll be decently dressed. What they told you
outside is no concern of mine."
One of the bar girls approached Brenda, holding a pink robe. I turned
away. Let them sort it out.
Ever since moving to Texas, I'd played their games of authenticity. I
didn't have an accent, but I'd picked up a smattering of words. Now I groped
for one, a particularly colorful one, and came up with it.
"I hear tell you're the sawbones around these parts," I said.
The doctor chuckled and extended his hand.
"Ned Pepper," he said, "at your service, sir."
When I didn't shake his hand he frowned, and noticed the dirty bandage
wrapped around it.
"Looks like you threw a shoe, son. Let me take a look at that."
He carefully unwrapped the bandage, and winced when he saw the
splinters. I could smell the sourness of his breath, and his clothes. Doc was

one of the permanent residents, like the bartender and the rest of the hotel
staff. He was an alcoholic who had found a perfect niche for himself. In
Texas he had status and could spend most of the day swilling whiskey at the
Alamo. The drunken physician was a cliché from a thousand horse operas
of the twentieth century, but so what? All we have in reconstructing these
past environments is books and movies. The movies are much more helpful,
one picture being equal to a kilo-word.
"Can you do anything with it?" I asked.
He looked up in surprise, and swallowed queasily.
"I guess I could dig 'em out. Couple quarts of rye—maybe one for you,
too—though I freely admit the idea makes me want to puke." He squinted at
my hand again, and shook his head. "You really want me to do it?"
"I don't see why not. You're a doctor, aren't you?"
"Sure, by 1845 standards. The Board trained me. Took about a week. I
got a bag full of steel tools and a cabinet full of patent elixirs. What I don't
have is an anaesthetic. I suppose those splinters hurt going in."
"They still hurt."
"It's nothing to how it'd hurt if I took the case. Let me . . . Hildy? Is
that your name? That's right, I remember now. Newspaperman. Last time I
talked to you you seemed to know a few things about Texas. More than
most weekenders."
"I'm not a weekender," I protested. "I've been building a cabin."
"No offense meant, son, but it started out as an investment, didn't it?"
I admitted it. The most valuable real estate in Luna is in the lessdeveloped disneylands. I'd quadrupled my money so far and there were no
signs the boom was slowing.
"It's funny how much people will pay for hardship," he said. "They
warn you up front but they don't spend a lot of time talking about medical
care. People come here to live, and they tell themselves they'll live
authentic. Then they get a taste of my medicine and run to the real world.
Pain ain't funny, Hildy. Mostly I deliver babies, and any reasonably
competent woman could do that herself."
"Then what are you good for?" I regretted it as soon as I said it, but he
didn't seem to take offense.
"I'm mostly window dressing," he admitted. "I don't mind it. There's

worse ways of earning your daily oxygen."
Brenda had drifted over to catch the last of our conversation. She was
wrapped in a ridiculous pink robe, still favoring one foot.
"You fixed up yet?" she asked me.
"I think I'll wait," I said.
"Another lame mare?" the doctor asked. "Toss that hoof up here, little
lady, and let me take a look at it." When he had examined the cut he grinned
and rubbed his hands together. "Here's an injury within my realm of
expertise," he said. "You want me to treat it?"
"Sure, why not?"
The doctor opened his black bag and Brenda watched him innocently.
He removed several bottles, cotton swabs, bandages, laid it all out carefully
on the bar.
"A little tincture of iodine to cleanse the wound," he muttered, and
touched a purplish wad of cotton to Brenda's foot. She howled, and jumped
four feet straight up, using only the un-injured foot. If I hadn't grabbed her
ankle she would have hit the ceiling.
"What the hell is he doing?" she yelled at me.
"Hush, now," I soothed her.
"But it hurts."
I gave her my best determined-reporter look, grabbing her hand to
intensify the effect.
"There's a story in here, Brenda. Medicine then and now. Think how
pleased Walter will be."
"Well, why doesn't he work on you, too?" she pouted.
"It would have involved amputation," I said. And it would have, too; I'd
have cut off his hand if he laid it on me.
"I don't know if I want to—"
"Just hold still and I'll be through in a minute."
She howled, she cried, but she held still enough for him to finish
cleaning the wound. She'd make a hell of a reporter one day.
The doctor took out a needle and thread.
"What's that for?" she asked, suspiciously.

"I have to suture the wound now," he said.
"If suture means sew up, you can suture yourself, you bastard."
He glared at her, but saw the determination in her eyes. He put the
needle and thread away and prepared a bandage.
"Yes sir, it was hard times, 1845," he said. "You know what caused
people the most trouble? Teeth. If a tooth goes bad here, what you do is
you go to the barber down the street, or the one over in Lonesome Dove,
who's said to be quicker. Barbers used to handle it all; teeth, surgery, and
hair cutting. But the thing about teeth, usually you could do something.
Yank it right out. Most things that happened to people, you couldn't do
anything. A little cut like this, it could get infected and kill you. There was
a million ways to die and mostly the doctors just tried to keep you warm."
Brenda was listening with such fascination she almost forgot to protest
when he put the bandage over the wound. Then she frowned and touched
his hand as he was about to knot it around her ankle.
"Wait a minute," she said. "You're not finished."
"I sure as hell am."
"You mean that's it?"
"What else do you suggest?"
"I still have a hole in me, you idiot. It's not fixed."
"It'll heal in about a week. All by itself."
It was clear from her look that she thought this was a very dangerous
man. She started to say something, changed her mind, and glared at the
bartender.
"Give me some of that brown stuff," she said, pointing. He filled a shot
glass with whiskey and set it in front of her. She sipped it, made a face, and
sipped again.
"That's the idea, little lady," the doctor said. "Take two of those every
morning if symptoms persist."
"What do we owe you, doc?" I asked
"Oh, I don't think I could rightly charge you . . . " His eyes strayed to
the bottles behind the bar.
"A drink for the doctor, landlord," I said. I looked around, and smiled at
myself. What the hell. "A drink for the house. On me." People started

drifting toward the bar.
"What'll it be, doc?" the bartender asked. "Grain alcohol?"
"Some of that clear stuff," the doctor agreed.
#
We were a quarter mile out of town before Brenda spoke to me again.
"This business about covering up," she ventured. "That's a cultural
thing, right? Something they did in this place?"
"Not the place so much as the time. Out here in the country no one
cares whether you cover up or not. But in town, they try to stick to the old
rules. They stretched a point for you, actually. You really should have been
wearing a dress that reached your ankles, your wrists, and covered most of
your neck, too. Hell, a young lady really shouldn't have been allowed in a
saloon at all."
"Those other girls weren't wearing all that much."
"Different rule. They're 'Fallen flowers.'" She was giving me a blank
look again. "Whores."
"Oh, sure," she said. "I read an article that said it used to be illegal.
How could they make that illegal?"
"Brenda, they can make anything illegal. Prostitution has been illegal
more often than not. Don't ask me to explain it; I don't understand, either."
"So they make a law in here, and then they let you break it?"
"Why not? Most of those girls don't sell sex, anyway. They're here for
the tourists. Get your picture taken with the B-girls in the Alamo Saloon.
The idea of Texas is to duplicate what it was really like in 1845, as near as
we can determine. Prostitution was illegal but tolerated in a place like New
Austin. Hell, the Sheriff would most likely be one of the regular customers.
Or take the bar. They shouldn't have served you, because this culture didn't
approve of giving alcoholic drinks to people as young as you. But on the
frontier, there was the feeling that if you were big enough to reach up and
take the drink off the bar, you were big enough to drink it." I looked at her
frowning intently down at the ground, and knew most of this was not getting
through to her. "I don't suppose you can ever really understand a culture
unless you grew up in it," I said.
"These people were sure screwed up."
"Probably so."

We were climbing the trail that led toward my apartment. Brenda kept
her eyes firmly on the ground, her mind obviously elsewhere, no doubt
chewing over the half-dozen crazy things I'd told her in the past hour. By
not looking around she was missing a sunset spectacular even by the lavish
standards of West Texas. The air had turned salmon pink when the sun
dipped below the horizon, streaked by wispy curls of gold. Somehow the
waning light made the surrounding rocky hills a pale purple. I wondered if
that was authentic. A quarter of a million miles from where I stood, the real
sun was setting on the real Texas. Were the colors as spectacular there?
Here, of course, the "sun" was sitting in its track just below the forcedperspective "hills." A fusion tech was seeing to the shut-down process, after
which the sun would be trucked through a tunnel and attached to the eastern
end of the track, ready to be lit again in a few hours. Somewhere behind the
hills another technician was manipulating colored mirrors and lenses to
diffuse the light over the dome of the sky. Call him an artist; I won't argue
with you. They've been charging admission to see the sunsets in
Pennsylvania and Amazon for several years now. There's talk of doing that
here, too.
It seemed unlikely to me that nature, acting at random, could produce
the incredible complexity and subtlety of a disneyland sunset.
#
It was almost dark by the time we reached the Rio Grande.
The entrance to my condo was on the south, "Mexican" side of the river.
West Texas is compressed, to display as wide a range of terrain and biome
as possible. The variety of geographical features that, on Earth, spread over
five hundred miles and included parts of New Mexico and Old Mexico here
had been made to fit within a sub-lunar bubble forty miles in diameter. One
edge duplicated the rolling hills and grassland around the real Austin, while
the far edge had the barren rocky plateaus to be found around El Paso.
The part of the Rio Grande we had reached mimicked the land east of
the Big Bend in the real river, an area of steep gorges where the water ran
deep and swift. Or at least it did in the brief rainy season. Now, in the
middle of summer, it was no trick to wade across. Brenda followed me
down the forty-foot cliff on the Texas side, then watched me splash through
the river. She had said nothing for the last few miles, and she said nothing
now, though it was clear she thought someone should have stopped this
massive water leak, or at least provided a bridge, boat, or helicopter. But
she sloshed her way over to me and stood waiting as I located the length of

rope that would take us to the top.
"Aren't you curious about why I'm here?" she asked.
"No. I know why you're here." I tugged on the rope. It was dark
enough now that I couldn't see the ledge, fifty feet up, where I had secured
it. "Wait till I call down to you," I told her. I set one booted foot on the cliff
face.
"Walter's been pretty angry," she said. "The deadline is just—"
"I know when the deadline is." I started up the rope, hand over hand,
feet on the dark rocks.
"What are we going to write about?" she called up at me.
"I told you. Medicine."
I had knocked out the introductory article on the Invasion Bicentennial
the night after Brenda and I got the assignment. I thought it had been some
of my best work, and Walter had agreed. He'd given us a big spread, the
cover, personality profiles of both of us that were—in my case, at least—
irresistibly flattering. Brenda and I had then sat down and generated a list of
twenty topics just off the tops of our heads. We didn't anticipate any trouble
finding more when the time came.
But since that first day, every time I tried to write one of Walter's
damnable articles . . . nothing happened.
Result: the cabin was coming along nicely, ahead of schedule. Another
few weeks like the past one and I'd have it finished. And be out of a job.
I crested the top of the cliff and looked down. I could just see the white
blob that was Brenda. I called down to her and she swarmed up like a
monkey.
"Nicely done," I said, as I coiled the rope. "Did you ever think what that
would have been like if you weighed six times what you weigh now?"
"Oddly enough, I have," she said. "I keep trying to tell you, I'm not
completely ignorant."
"Sorry."
"I'm willing to learn. I've been reading a lot. But there's just so much,
and so much of it is so foreign . . . " She ran a hand through her hair.
"Anyway, I know how hard it must have been to live on the Earth. My arms
wouldn't be strong enough to support my weight down there." She looked
down at herself, and I thought I could see a smile. "Hell, I'm so lunified I

wonder if my legs could support my weight."
"Probably not, at first."
"I got five friends together and we took turns trying to walk with all the
others on our shoulders. I managed three steps before I collapsed."
"You're really getting into this, aren't you?" I was leading the way down
the narrow ledge to the cave entrance.
"Of course I am. I take this very seriously. But I'm beginning to
wonder if you do."
I didn't have an answer to that. We had reached the cave, and I started
to lead her in when she pulled back violently on my hand.
"What is that?"
She didn't need to elaborate; I came through the cave twice a day, and I
still wasn't used to the smell. Not that it seemed as bad now as it had at first.
It was a combination of rotting meat, feces, ammonia, and something else
much more disturbing that I had taken to calling "predator smell."
"Be quiet," I whispered. "This is a cougar den. She's not really
dangerous, but she had a litter of cubs last week and she's gotten touchy
since then. Don't let go of my hand; there's no light till we get to the door."
I didn't give her a chance to argue. I just pulled on her hand, and we
were inside.
The smell was even stronger in the cave. The mother cougar was fairly
fastidious, for an animal. She cleaned up her cubs' messes, and she made
her own outside the cave. But she wasn't so careful about disposing of the
remains of her prey before they started to get ripe. I think she had a different
definition of "ripe." Her own fur had a rank mustiness that was probably
sweet perfume to a male cougar, but was enough to stun the unprepared
human.
I couldn't see her, but I sensed her in a way beyond sight or hearing. I
knew she wouldn't attack. Like all the large predators in disneylands, she
had been conditioned to leave humans alone. But the conditioning set up a
certain amount of mental conflict. She didn't like us, and wasn't shy about
letting us know. When I was halfway through the cave, she let fly with a
sound I can only describe as hellish. It started as a low growl, and quickly
rose to a snarling screech. Every hair on my body stood at attention. It's
sort of a bracing feeling, once you get used to it; your skin feels thick and
tough as leather. My scrotum grew very small and hard as it tried its best to

get certain treasures out of harm's way.
As for Brenda . . . she tried to run straight up the backs of my legs and
over the top of my head. Without some fancy footwork on my part we both
would have gone sprawling. But I'd been ready for that reaction, and hurried
along until the inner door got out of our way with a blast of light from the far
side. Brenda didn't stop running for another twenty meters. Then she
stopped, a sheepish grin on her face, breathing shallowly. We were in the
long, utilitarian hallway that led to the back door of my condo.
"I don't know what got into me," she said.
"Don't worry," I said. "Apparently that's one of the sounds that is part of
the human brain's hard wiring. It's a reflex, like when you stick your finger
in a flame, you don't think about it, you instantly draw it back."
"And you hear that sound, your bowels turn to oatmeal."
"Close enough."
"I'd like to go back and see the thing that made that sound."
"It's worth seeing," I agreed. "But you'll have to wait for daylight. The
cubs are cute. It's hard to believe they'll turn into monsters like their
mother."
#
I hesitated at the door. In my day, and up until fairly recently, you just
didn't let someone enter your home lightly. Luna is a crowded society.
There are people wherever you turn, tripping over your feet, elbowing you,
millions of intrusive, sweaty bodies. You have to have a small place of
privacy. After you'd known someone five or ten years you might, if you
really liked the person, invite her over for drinks or sex in your own bed.
But most socializing took place on neutral ground.
The younger generation wasn't like that. They thought nothing of
dropping by just to say hello. I could make a big thing of it, driving yet
another wedge between the two of us, or I could let it go.
What the hell. We'd have to learn to work together sooner or later. I
opened the door with my palm print and stepped aside to let her enter.
She hurried to the washroom, saying something about having to take a
mick. I assumed that meant urinate, though I'd never heard the term. I
wondered briefly how she'd accomplish that, given her lack of obvious
outlet. I could have found out—she left the door open. The young ones

were no longer seeking privacy even for that.
I looked around at the apartment. What would Brenda see here? What
would a pre-Invasion man see?
What they wouldn't see was dirt and clutter. A dozen cleaning robots
worked tirelessly whenever I was away. No speck of dust was too small for
their eternal vigilance, and no item could ever be out of its assigned place
longer than it took me to walk to the tube station.
Could someone read anything about my character from looking at this
room? There were no books or paintings to give a clue. I had all the
libraries of the world a few keystrokes away, but no books of my own. Any
of the walls could project artwork or films or environments, as desired, but
they seldom did.
There was something interesting. Unlimited computer capacity had
brought manufacturing full circle. Primitive cultures produced articles by
hand, and no two were identical. The industrial revolution had standardized
production, poured out endless streams of items for the "consumer culture."
Finally, it became possible to have each and every manufactured item
individually ordered and designed. All my furniture was unique. Nowhere
in Luna would you find another sofa like that . . . like that hideous
monstrosity over there. And what a blessing that was, I mused. Two of
them might have mated. Damn, but it was ugly.
I had selected almost nothing in this room. The possibilities of taste had
become so endless I had simply thrown up my hands and taken what came
with the apartment.
Maybe that was what I'd been reluctant to let Brenda see. I supposed
you could read as much into what a man had not done to his environment as
what he had done.
While I was still pondering that—and not feeling too happy about it—
Brenda came out of the washroom. She had a bloody piece of gauze in her
hand, which she tossed on the floor. A low-slung robot darted out from
under the couch and ate it, then scuttled away. Her skin looked greased,
and the pinkish color was fading as I watched. She had visited the doc.
"I had radiation burns," she said. "I ought to take the disneyland
management to court, get them to pay the medical bill." She lifted her foot
and examined the bottom. There was a pink area of new skin where the cut
had been. In a few more minutes it would be gone. There would be no scar.
She looked up, hastily. "I'll pay, of course. Just send me the bill."

"Forget it," I said. "I just got your lead. How long were you in Texas?"
"Three hours? Four at the most."
"I was there for five hours, today. Except for the gravity, it's a pretty
good simulation of the natural Earthly environment. And what happened to
us?" I ticked the points off on my fingers. "You got sunburned.
Consequences, in 1845: you would have been in for a very painful night.
No sleep. Pain for several days. Then the outer layer of your skin would
slough off. Probably some more dermatological effects. I think it might
even have caused skin cancer. That would have been fatal. Research that
one, see if I'm right.
"You injured the sole of your foot. Consequence, not too bad, but you
would have limped for a few days or a week. And always the danger of
infection to an area of the body difficult to keep clean.
"I got a very nasty injury to my hand. Bad enough to require minor
surgery, with the possibility of deep infection, loss of the limb, perhaps
death. There's a word for it, when one of your limbs starts to mortify. Look
it up.
"So," I summed up. "Three injuries. Two possibly fatal, over time. All
in five hours. Consequences today: an almost negligible bill from the
automatic doc."
She waited for me to go on. I was prepared to let her wait a lot longer,
but she finally gave in.
"That's it? That's my story?"
"The lead, goddamit. Personalize it. You went for a walk in the park,
and this is what happened. It shows how perilous life was back then. It
shows how lightly we've come to regard injury to our bodies, how
completely we expect total, instant, painless repairs to them. Remember
what you said? 'It's not fixed!' You'd never had anything happen to you that
couldn't be fixed, right now, with no pain."
She looked thoughtful, then smiled.
"That could work, I guess."
"Damn right it'll work. You take it from there, work in more detail.
Don't get into optional medical things; we'll keep that for later. Make this
one a pure horror story. Show how fragile life has always been. Show how
it's only in the last century or so that we've been able to stop worrying about
our health."

"We can do that," she said.
"We, hell. I told you, this is your story. Now get out of here and get to
it. Deadline's in twenty-four hours."
I expected more argument, but I'd ignited her youthful enthusiasm. I
hustled her out the door, then leaned against it and heaved a sigh of relief.
I'd been afraid she'd call me on it.
#
Not long after she left I went to the doc and had my own hand healed.
Then I ran a big tubful of water and eased myself into it. The water was so
hot it turned my skin pink. That's the way I like it.
After a while I got out, rummaged in a cabinet, and found an old home
surgery kit. There was a sharp scalpel in it.
I ran some more hot water, got in again, lay back and relaxed
completely. When I was totally at peace with myself, I slashed both my
wrists right down to the bone.

CHAPTER FOUR

Dirty Dan the Dervish went into his trademark spin late in the third
round. By that time he had the Cytherian Cyclone staggering.
I'm not a slash-boxing fan, but the spin was something to see. The
Dervish pumped himself up and down like a top, balancing on the toes of his
left foot. He'd draw his right leg in to spin faster, until he was almost a blur,
then, without warning, the right foot would flash out, sometimes high,
sometimes low, sometimes connecting. Either way, he'd instantly be
pumping up and down with the left leg, spinning as if he were on ice.
"Dervish! Dervish! Dervish!" the fans were chanting. Brenda was
shouting as loud as anyone. She was beside me, at ringside. Most of the
time she was on her feet. As for me, they issued clear plastic sheets to
everyone in the first five rows, and I spent most of my time holding mine
between me and the ring. The Dervish had a deep gash on his right calf, and
the slashing spin could hurl blood droplets an amazing distance.
The Cyclone kept retreating, unable to come up with any defense. He
tried ducking under and attacking with the knife in his right hand, and
received another wound for his trouble. He leaped into the air, but the
Dervish was instantly with him, slashing up from below, and as soon as their
feet hit the mat again he went into his whirl. Things were looking desperate
for the Cyclone, when he was suddenly saved by the bell.
Brenda sat down, breathing hard. I supposed that, without sex, one
needed something for release of tensions. Slash-boxing seemed perfectly
designed for that.
She wiped some of the blood from her face with a cloth, and turned to
look at me for the first time since the round began. She seemed disappointed
that I wasn't getting into the festivities.
"How does he manage that spin?" I asked her.
"It's the mat," she said, falling instantly into the role of expert—which
must have been quite a relief for her. "Something to do with the molecular
alignment of the fibers. If you lean on it in a certain way, you get traction,
but a circular motion reduces the friction till it's almost like ice skating."
"Do I still have time to get a bet down?"

"No point in it," she said. "The odds will be lousy. You should have bet
when I told you, before the match started. The Cyclone is a dead man."
He certainly looked it. Sitting on his stool, surrounded by his pit crew,
it seemed impossible he would answer the bell for the next round. His legs
were a mass of cuts, some covered with bloody bandages. His left arm
dangled by a strip of flesh; the pit boss was considering removing it entirely.
There was a temporary shunt on his left jugular artery. It looked horribly
vulnerable, easy to hit. He had sustained that injury at the end of the second
round, which had enabled his crew to patch it at the cost of several liters of
blood. But his worst wound had also come in the second round. It was a
gash, half a meter long, from his left hip to his right nipple. Ribs were
visible at the top, while the middle was held together with half a dozen hasty
stitches of a rawhide-like material. He had sustained it while scoring his
only effective attack on the Dervish, bringing his knife in toward the neck,
achieving instead a ghastly but minimally disabling wound to the Dervish's
face—only to find the Dervish's knife thrust deep into his gut. The upward
jerk of that knife had spilled viscera all over the ring and produced the first
yellow flag of the match, howls of victory from Dirty Dan's pit, and chants
of "Dervish! Dervish! Dervish!" from the crowd.
The Cyclone's handlers had hacked away the torn tangle of organs under
the caution flag, repaired the neck artery during the second pit stop and
retired glumly to their corner to watch their man walk into the meat grinder
again.
The Dervish was sitting erect while his crew did more work to the facial
wound. One eyeball was split open and useless. Blood had temporarily
blinded him during the second round, rendering him unable to fully exploit
the terrible wound he'd inflicted on his opponent. Brenda had expressed
concern during the lull that the Dervish might not employ his famous spin
now that his depth perception had been destroyed. But the Dervish was not
about to disappoint his fans, one eye or not.
A red light went on over the Cyclone's corner. It made the crowd
murmur excitedly.
"Why do they call it a corner?" I asked.
"Huh?"
"It's a round ring. It doesn't have any corners."
She shrugged. "It's traditional, I guess." Then she smiled maliciously.
"You can research it before you write this up for Walter."

"Don't be ridiculous."
"Why the hell not? 'Sports, Then and Now.' It's a natural."
She was right, of course, but that didn't make it any harder to swallow. I
wasn't particularly enjoying this role reversal. She was supposed to be the
ignorant one.
"What about that red light? What's it mean?"
"Each of the fighters gets ten liters of blood for transfusions. See that
gauge on the scoreboard? The Cyclone just used his last liter. Dervish has
seven liters left."
"So it's just about over."
"He'll never last another round."
And he didn't.
The last round was an artless affair. No more fancy spins, no flying
leaps. The crowd shouted a little at first, then settled down to watch the kill.
People began drifting out of the arena to get refreshments before the main
bout of the evening. The Dervish moved constantly away as the dazed
Cyclone lumbered after him, striking out from time to time, opening more
wounds. Bleeding his opponent to death. Soon the Cyclone could only
stand there, dumb and inert with loss of blood. A few people in the crowd
were booing. The Dervish slashed the Cyclone's throat. Arterial blood
spurted into the air, and the Cyclone crashed to the mat. The Dervish bent
over his fallen foe, worked briefly, and then held the head high. There was
sporadic applause and the handlers moved in, hustling the Dervish down to
the locker rooms and hauling away both pieces of the Cyclone. The
zamboni appeared and began mopping up the blood.
"You want some popcorn?" Brenda asked me.
"Just something to drink," I told her. She joined the throngs moving
toward the refreshment center.
I turned back toward the ring, savoring a feeling that had been all too
rare of late: the urge to write. I raised my left hand and snapped my fingers.
I snapped them again before I remembered the damn handwriter was not
working. It hadn't been working for five days, since Brenda's visit to Texas.
The problem seemed to be in the readout skin. I could type on the keyboard
on the heel of my hand, but nothing appeared on the readout. The data was
going into the memory and could later be downloaded, but I can't work that
way. I have to see the words as they're being formed.

Necessity is the mother of invention. I slipped through the program
book Brenda had left on her chair, found a blank page. Then I rummaged
through my purse and found a blue pen I kept for hand corrections to hard
copy.
#
(File Hildy*next avail.*)(code Bloodsport)
(headline to come)
#
There may be no evidence of it, but you can bet cave men had
sporting events. We still have them today, and if we ever reach the
stars, we'll have sports out there, too.
Sports are rooted in violence. They usually contain the threat of
injury. Or at least they did until about a hundred and fifty years ago.
Sports today, of course, are totally non-violent.
The modern sports fan would be shocked at the violence of sports
as it existed on Earth. Take for example one of the least violent
sports, one we still practice today, the simple foot race. Runners
rarely completed a career without numerous injuries to knees, ankles,
muscles, or spine. Sometimes these injuries could be repaired, and
sometimes they couldn't. Every time a runner competed, he faced the
possibility of injury that would plague him for the rest of his life.
In the days of the Romans, athletes fought each other with swords
and other deadly weapons—not always voluntarily. Crippling injury
or death was certain, in every match.
Even in later, more "enlightened" days, many sports were little
more than organized mayhem. Teams of athletes crashed into each
other with amazing disregard for the imperfect skills of contemporary
healers. People strapped themselves into ground vehicles or flying
machines and raced at speeds that would turn them into jelly in the
event of a sudden stop. Crash helmets, fist pads, shoulder, groin,
knee, rib, and nose protectors tried to temper the carnage but by their
mere presence were testimony to the violent potential in all these
games.
Did I hear someone protesting out there? Did someone say our
modern sports are much more violent than those of the past?

What a ridiculous idea.
Modern athletes typically compete in the nude. No protection is
needed or wanted. In most sports, bodily damage is expected,
sometimes even desired, as in slash boxing. A modern athlete just
after a competition would surely be a shocking sight to a citizen of
any Earth society. But modern sports produce no cripples.
It would be nice to think this universal non-violence was the
result of some great moral revolution. It just ain't so. It is a purely
technological revolution. There is no injury today that can't be fixed.
The fact is, "violence" is a word that no longer means what it used
to. Which is the more violent: a limb being torn off and quickly reattached with no ill effects, or a crushed spinal disc that causes its
owner pain every second of his life and cannot be repaired?
I know which injury I'd prefer.
That kind of violence is no longer something to fear, because
(discuss Olympic games, influence of local gravity in venues)
(mention Deathmatches)
(Tie to old medicine article?)(ask Brenda)
#
I hastily scribbled the last few lines, because I saw Brenda returning
with the popcorn.
"What're you doing?" she asked, resuming her seat. I handed her the
page. She scanned it quickly.
"Seems a little dry," was her only comment.
"You'll hype it up some," I told her. "This is your field." I reached over
and took a kernel of popcorn from her, then took a big bite out of it. She had
bought the large bag: a dozen fist-sized puffs, white and crunchy, dripping
with butter. It tasted great, washed down with the big bottle of beer she
handed me.
While I was writing there had been an exhibition from some children's
slash-boxing school. The children were filing out now, most of them crosshatched with slashes of red ink from the training knives they used. Medical
costs for children were high enough without letting them practice with real
knives.

The ringmaster appeared and began hyping the main event of the
evening, a Deathmatch between the champion Manhattan Mugger and a
challenger known as One Mean Bitch.
Brenda leaned toward me and spoke out of the side of her mouth.
"Put your money on the Bitch," she said.
"If she's gonna win, what the hell are we doing here?"
"Ask Walter. This was his idea."
The purpose of our visit to the fights was to interview the Manhattan
Mugger—also known as Andrew MacDonald—with an eye toward hiring
him as our Earth-born consultant on the bicentennial series. MacDonald was
well over two hundred years old. The trouble was, he had elected to fight to
the death. If he lost, his next interview would be with St. Peter. But Walter
had assured us there was no way his man was going to lose.
"I was talking to a friend out at the concessions," Brenda went on.
"There's no question the Mugger is the better fighter. This is his tenth
Deathmatch in the last two years. What this guy was saying is, ten is too
much for anybody. He said the Mugger was dogging it in the last match.
He won't get away with that against the Bitch. He says the Mugger doesn't
want to win anymore. He just wants to die."
The contestants had entered the ring, were strutting around, showing off,
as holo pictures of their past bouts appeared high in the air and the
announcer continued to make it sound as if this would be the fight of the
century.
"Did you bet on her?"
"I put down fifty, for a kill in the second."
I thought that over, then beckoned to a tout. He handed me a card,
which I marked and thumbed. He stuck the card in the totaliser on his belt,
then handed me the marker. I pocketed it.
"How much did you invest?"
"Ten. To win." I didn't tell her it was on the Mugger.
The contestants were in their "corners," being oiled down, as the
announcer continued his spiel. They were magnificent specimens,
competing in the highest body-mass class, matched to within a kilogram.
The lights flashed on their glistening browned skins as they shadow-boxed
and danced, skittish as race horses, bursting with energy.

"This bout is being conducted under the sporting by-laws of King City,"
the announcer said, "which provide for voluntary Deathmatches for one or
both parties. The Manhattan Mugger has elected to risk death tonight. He
has been advised and counseled, as required by law, and should he die
tonight, it will be deemed a suicide. The Bitch has agreed to deliver the
coup de grace, should she find herself in a position to do so, and understands
she will not be held responsible in any way."
"Don't worry about it!" the Mugger shouted, glaring at his opponent. It
got a laugh, and the announcer looked grateful for the interruption in the
boring paragraphs the law required him to read.
He brought them out to the middle of the ring and read them the rule—
which was simply to stop fighting when they heard the bell. Other than that,
there were no rules. He had them shake hands, and told them to come out
fighting.
#
"The first stinking round. I can't believe it."
Brenda was still complaining, half an hour after the finish of the match.
It had not been a contest that would go down in history.
We were waiting in the reception area outside the entrance to the locker
rooms. MacDonald's manager had told us we could go in to see him as soon
as the pit crew had him patched up. Considering the small amount of
damage he had suffered, I didn't expect that to be too much longer.
I heard a commotion and turned to see the Cyclone emerging into a
small group of dedicated fans, mostly children. He got out a pen and began
signing autographs. He was dressed in black shirt and pants, and had a
bulky brace around his neck, which seemed a small enough inconvenience
for a man whose head had been rolling around the ring an hour earlier. He'd
wear it until the new muscles had been conditioned enough to support his
head. I figured that wouldn't be long; the brain of a man in his profession
couldn't weigh all that much.
The door opened again and MacDonald's manager beckoned to us.
We followed him down a dim corridor lined with numbered doors. One
of them was open and I could hear moaning coming from it. I glanced in as
we passed. There was a bloody mess on a high table, with half a dozen pit
crew clustered around.
"You don't mean to tell me . . . "

"What?" Brenda said, and glanced into the room. "Oh. Yeah, she fights
without nerve deadening."
"I thought—"
"Most fighters turn their pain center way down, just enough so they
know when they've been hit. But a few feel that trying to avoid real pain
makes them quicker on their feet."
"It sure would make me quicker."
"Yeah, well, obviously it wasn't enough tonight."
I was glad I'd had only the one piece of popcorn.
The Manhattan Mugger was sitting in a diagnostic chair, wearing a robe
and smoking a cheroot. His left leg was propped up and being worked on by
one of his trainers. He smiled when he saw us, and held out his hand.
"Andy MacDonald," he said. "Pardon me for not getting up."
We both shook his hand, and he waved us into seats. He offered us
drinks, which a member of his entourage brought us.
Then Brenda launched into a breathless recap of the match, full of
glowing praise for his martial skills. You'd never have known she just lost
fifty on him. I sat back and waited, fully expecting we'd spend the next hour
talking about the finer points of slash boxing. He was smiling faintly as
Brenda went on and on, and I figured I had to say something, if only to be
polite.
"I'm not a sports fan," I said, not wishing to be too polite, "but it seemed
to me your technique was different from the others I saw tonight."
He took a long drag on his cheroot, then examined the glowing tip as he
slowly exhaled purple smoke. He transferred his gaze to me, and some of
the heat seemed to go with it. There was a deepness to his eyes I hadn't
noticed at first. You see that sometimes, in the very old. These days, of
course, it is usually the only way you can tell someone is old. MacDonald
certainly had no other signs of age. His body looked to be in its midtwenties, but he'd had little choice in its features, given his profession. Slash
boxers inhabit fairly standardized bodies, in nine different formulas or
weight classes, as a way of minimizing any advantage gained by sheer body
mass. His face seemed a bit older, but that could have been just the eyes. It
wasn't old enough for age to have impressed a great deal of character on it.
Neither was it one of those generic "attractive" faces about half the
population seem to prefer. I got the feeling this was pretty much the way he

might have looked in his youth, which—I remembered, with a little shock—
had been spent on Earth.
The Earth-born are not precisely rare. The CC told me there were
around ten thousand of them still alive. But they look like anyone else,
usually, and tend not to announce themselves. There were some who made a
big thing about their age—the perennial talk-show guests, story-tellers,
professional nostalgics—but by and large the Earth-born were a closeted
minority. I had never wondered why before.
"Walter said you'd talk me into joining this project of his," MacDonald
said, finally, ignoring my own comment. "I told him he was wrong. Not
that I intend to be stubborn about it; if you can give me a good reason why I
should spend a year with you two, I'd like to hear it."
"If you know Walter," I countered, "you'll know he's possibly the least
perceptive man in Luna, where other people are concerned. He thinks I'm
enthusiastic about this project. He's wrong. As far as I know, Walter is the
only one interested in this project. It's just a job to me."
"I'm interested," Brenda piped up. MacDonald shifted his gaze to her,
but didn't feel the need to leave it there long. I had the feeling he had
learned all he needed to know about her in that brief look.
"My style," he said, "is a combination of ancient fighting techniques that
never got transplanted to Luna. Some well-meaning but foolish people
passed a law a long time ago banning the teaching of these oriental
disciplines. That was back when the conventional wisdom was we ought to
live together in peace, not ever fight each other again, certainly not ever kill
each other. Which is a nice idea, I guess.
"It even worked, partially. The murder rate is way, way down from
what it was in any human society on Earth."
He took another long drag on his smoke. His attendants finished their
work on his leg, packed up, and left us alone. I began to wonder if that was
all he had to say, when he finally spoke again.
"Opinions shift. You live as long as I have, you'll see that over and
over."
"I'm not as old as you, but I've seen it."
"How old are you?" he asked.
"One hundred. Three days ago." I saw Brenda look at me, open her
mouth to say something, then close it again. Probably I'd get chewed out for

not telling her so she could throw a centennial birthday party for me.
MacDonald looked at me with even more interest than before,
narrowing those disturbing eyes.
"Feel any different?"
"You mean because I'm a hundred years old? Why should I?"
"Why, indeed. It's a milestone, certainly, but it doesn't really mean
anything. Right?"
"Right."
"Anyway, to get back to the question . . . there were always those who
felt that, with natural evolutionary processes no longer working, we should
make some attempt to foster a certain amount of aggressiveness. Without
sanctioning real killing, we could at least learn how to fight. So boxing was
re-introduced, and that eventually led to the blood sports you see today."
"This is just the sort of perspective Walter wants," I pointed out.
"Yes. I didn't say I didn't have the perspective you need. I'm just
curious as to why I should use it for you."
"I've been thinking that one over, too," I said. "Just as an exercise, you
understand. And you know, I can't think of anything that's likely to
convince a man in the middle of a protracted suicide to put it off for a year
and join us in writing a series of useless stories."
"I used to be a reporter, you know."
"No, I didn't."
"Is that what you think I'm doing? Committing suicide?"
Brenda looked at him earnestly. I could almost feel her concern.
"If you get killed in the ring, that's what they'll call it," she said.
He got up and went to a small bar at the side of the room. Without
asking what we wanted, he poured three glasses of a pale green liqueur and
brought them back to us. Brenda sniffed it, tasted, then took a longer drink.
"You can't imagine the sense of defeatism after the Invasion," he said. It
was apparently impossible to keep him on any subject, so I relaxed to the
inevitable. As a reporter you learn to let the subject talk.
"To call it a war is a perversion of the word. We fought, I suppose, in
the sense that ants fight when the hill is kicked over. I suppose ants can

fight valiantly in such a situation, but it hardly matters to the man who
kicked the hill. He barely notices what he has done. He may not even have
had any actual malice toward ants; it might have been an accident, or a sideeffect of another project, like plowing a field. We were plowed under in a
single day.
"Those of us here in Luna were in a state of shock. In a way, that state
of shock lasted many decades. In a way . . . it's still with us today."
He took another drag on his cheroot.
"I'm one of those who was alarmed at the non-violence movement. It's
great, as an ideal, but I feel it leaves us in a dead end, and vulnerable."
"You mean evolution?" Brenda asked.
"Yes. We shape ourselves genetically now, but are we really wise
enough to know what to select for? For a billion years the selection was
done naturally. I wonder if it's wise to junk a system that worked for so
long."
"Depends on what you mean by 'worked,'" I said.
"Are you a nihilist?"
I shrugged.
"All right. Worked, in the sense that life forms got more complex.
Biology seemed to be working toward something. We know it wasn't us—
the Invaders proved there are things out there a lot smarter than we are. But
the Invaders were gas giant beings, they must have evolved on a planet like
Jupiter. We're hardly even related. It's commonly accepted that the Invaders
came to Earth to save the dolphins and whales from our pollution. I don't
know of any proof of that, but what the hell. Suppose it's true. That means
the aquatic mammals have brains organized more like the Invaders than like
us. The Invaders don't see us as truly intelligent, any more than other
engineering species, like bees, or corals, or birds. True or not, the Invaders
don't really have to concern us anymore. Our paths don't cross; we have no
interests in common. We're free to pursue our own destiny . . . but if we
don't evolve, we don't have a destiny."
He looked from one of us to the other and back again. This seemed
pretty important to him. Personally, I'd never given much thought to the
matter.
"There's something else," he went on. "We know there are aliens out
there. We know space travel is possible. The next time we meet aliens they

could be even worse than the Invaders. They might want to exterminate us,
rather than just evict us. I think we ought to keep some fighting skills alive
in case we meet some disagreeable critters we can fight."
Brenda sat up, wide-eyed.
"You're a Heinleiner," she said.
It was MacDonald's turn to shrug.
"I don't attend services, but I agree with a lot of what they say. But we
were talking about martial arts."
Is that what we were talking about? I'd lost track.
"Those arts were lost for almost a century. I spent ten years studying
thousands of films from the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, and I
pieced them back together. I spent another twenty years teaching myself
until I felt I was adept. Then I became a slash boxer. So far, I'm undefeated.
I expect to remain that way until someone else duplicates my techniques."
"That would be a good subject for an article," Brenda suggested.
"Fighting, then and now. People used to have all kinds of weapons, right?
Projectile weapons, I mean. Ordinary citizens could own them."
"There was one country in the twentieth century that made their
possession almost mandatory. It was a civil right, the right to own firearms.
One of the weirder civil rights in human history, I always thought. But I'd
have owned one, if I'd lived there. In an armed society, the unarmed man
must be a pretty nervous fellow."
"It's not that I don't find all this perfectly fascinating," I said, standing
and stretching my arms and legs to get the circulation going again. "I don't,
but that's beside the point. We've been here about half an hour, and already
Brenda has suggested plenty of topics you could be helpful with. Hell, you
could write them yourself, if you remember how. So how about it? Are you
interested, or should we start looking for someone else?"
He leaned his elbows on his knees and looked at me.
Before long I began to wonder when the theremin music would begin.
A look like that belonged in a horror holo. Eyes like that should be set in a
face that begins to sprout hair and fangs, or twist like putty into some
Nameless Evil Thing. I mentioned before how deep his eyes seemed. They
had been reflecting pools compared to this.
I don't wish to be superstitious. I don't wish to attribute powers to

MacDonald simply because he had attained a venerable age. But, looking at
those eyes, one could not help but think of all the things they had seen, and
wonder at the wisdom that might have been attained. I was one hundred
years old, which is nothing to sneer at in the longevity department, or hadn't
been until recent human history, but I felt like a child being judged by his
grandfather, or maybe by God himself.
I didn't like it.
I tried my best to return the gaze—and there was nothing hostile in it, no
challenge being issued to me. If a staring match was in progress, I was the
only one competing. But before long I had to turn away. I studied the walls,
the floor, I looked at Brenda and smiled at her—which startled her, I think.
Anything to avoid those eyes.
"No," he said, at last. "I don't think I'll join this project, after all. I'm
sorry to have wasted your time."
"No problem," I said, and got up and started for the door.
"What do you mean, 'after all,'" Brenda asked. I turned, wondering if I
could get away with grabbing her arm and dragging her away.
"I mean, I was considering it, despite everything. Some aspects of it
were beginning to look like fun."
"Then what changed your mind?"
"Come on, Brenda," I said. "I'm sure he has his own reasons, and
they're none of our business." I took her arm, and tugged at it.
"Stop it," she said, annoyed. "Stop treating me like a child." She glared
at me until I let her go. I suppose it would have been unkind to point out
that she was a child.
"I'd really like to know," she told MacDonald.
He looked at her, not unkindly, then looked away, seeming embarrassed.
I simply report the fact; I have no idea why he might have been embarrassed.
"I only work with survivors," he said, quietly. Before either of us had a
chance to reply he was on his feet. He limped slightly as he went to the door
and held it open for us.
I got up and jammed my hat on my head. I was almost out the door
when I heard Brenda.
"I don't understand," she was saying. "What makes you think I'm not a
survivor?"

"I didn't say you weren't," he said.
I turned on him.
"Brenda," I said, slowly. "Correct me if I'm wrong. Did I just hear
myself accused of not being a survivor by a man who risks his life in a
game?"
She didn't say anything. I think she realized that, whatever was going
on here, it was between him and me. I wished I knew what it was, and why
it had made me so angry.
"Risks can be calculated," he said. "I'm still alive. I plan to stay that
way."
Nothing good lasts forever. Brenda piped up again.
"What is it about Hildy that makes you—"
"That's none of my business," he interrupted, still looking at me. "I see
something in Hildy. If I were to join you two, I'd have to make it my
business."
"What you see, pal, is a man who takes care of his own business, and
doesn't let some gal with a knife do it for him."
Somehow that didn't come out like I'd intended. He smiled faintly. I
turned and stomped out the door, not waiting to see if Brenda followed.
#
I lifted my head from the bar. Everything was too bright, too noisy. I
seemed to be on a carousel, but what was that bottle doing in my hand?
I kept tightly focused on the bottle and things slowly stopped spinning.
There was a puddle of whiskey under the bottle, and under my arm, and the
side of my face was wet. I'd been lying in the puddle.
"If you throw up on my bar," the man said, "I'll beat you bloody."
Swinging my gaze toward him was a major project. It was the
bartender, and I told him I wasn't going to throw up, then I almost choked
and staggered toward the swinging doors and made a mess in the middle of
Congress Street.
When I was done I sat down there in the road. Traffic was no problem.
There were a few horses and wagons tied up behind me, but nothing moved
on the dark streets of New Austin. Behind me were the sounds of revelry,
piano music, the occasional gunshot as the tourists sampled life in the old

west.
Somebody was holding a drink before my face. I followed the arm up to
bare shoulders, a long neck, a pretty face surrounded by curly black hair.
Her lipstick was black in the dim light. She wore a corset, garters,
stockings, high heels. I took the drink and made it vanish. I patted the
ground beside me and she sat, folding her arms on her knees.
"I'll remember your name in a minute," I said.
"Dora."
"Adorable Dora. I want to rip off your clothes and throw you into bed
and make passionate love to your virginal body."
"We already did that. Sorry about the virginal part."
"I want you to have my babies."
She kissed my forehead.
"Marry me, and make me the happiest man in the moon."
"We did that, too, sweetheart. It's a shame you don't remember it." She
held her hand out to me and I saw a gold wedding ring with a little diamond
chip. I squinted at her face again. There was some kind of filmy aura
around it . . .
"That's a bridal veil!" I shouted. She was looking dreamy, smiling up at
the stars.
"We had to sober the parson up, then go bang on the jeweler's door and
send somebody around to find Silas to open the general store for my gown,
but we got it done. The service was right there in the Alamo, Cissy was my
maid of honor and old Doc stood up for you. All the girls cried."
I must have looked dubious, because she laughed and patted me on the
back.
"The tourists loved it," she said. "It's not every night we get as colorful
as that." She twisted the ring off her finger and handed it to me. "But I'm
too much of a lady to hold you to vows you made while not in your right
mind." She peered closer at me. "Are you back in your right mind?"
I was back enough to remember that any marriage performed by the
"parson" in "Texas" was not legally binding in King City. But to get an idea
of how far gone I'd been, I'd really been worried for a moment there.
"A whore with a heart of gold," I said.

"We all have our parts to play. I've never seen the 'town drunk' done
better. Most people omit the vomit."
"I strive for authenticity. Did I do anything disgraceful?"
"You mean aside from marrying me? I don't mean to be unkind, but
your fourth consummation of our marriage was pretty disgraceful. I won't
spread it around; the first three were rather special."
"What do you mean?"
"Well, the tongue work was some of the best I've—"
"No, I mean . . . "
"I know what you mean. I know there's a word for it. Inability,
immobility . . . a limp cock."
"Impotence."
"That's it. My grandmother told me about it, but I never expected to see
it."
"Stick with me, honey, and I'll show you even more wonders."
"You were pretty drunk."
"You've finally said something boring."
She shrugged. "I can't swap repartee with a cynic like you forever."
"Is that what I am? A Cynic?":
She shrugged again, but I thought I saw some concern in her expression.
It was hard to tell, with just moonlight and swimming eyeballs.
She helped me to my feet, brushed me off, kissed me. I promised to call
on her when I was in town. I don't think she believed me. I had her point
me toward the edge of town, and started home.
#
Morning was smearing up the sky like pale pink lipstick. I'd been
hearing the rippling of the river for some time.
My efforts at reconstructing the day had brought back some broad
outlines. I recalled taking the tube from the Arena to Texas, and I knew I'd
spent some time working on the cabin. In there somewhere I saw myself
throwing finished lumber into a ravine. I remembered seriously thinking of
burning the cabin to the ground. The next thing I knew I was sitting at the
bar in the Alamo Saloon, tossing down one drink after another. Then the

clouds rolled in and the memory transcription ended. I had a hazy picture of
the Parson swaying slightly as he pronounced us man and wife. What a
curious phrase. I supposed it was historically accurate.
I heard a sound, and looked up from the rocky path.
A pronghorn antelope was standing not ten feet in front of me. He held
his head high, alert and proud, but not frightened of me. His chest was
snowy white and his eyes were moist and brown and wise. He was the most
beautiful thing I had ever seen.
On his worst day he was ten times better than I had ever been. I sat
down on the path and cried for a while. When I looked up, he was gone.
I felt calm for the first time in many years. I found the cliff face, located
the climbing rope, and hoisted myself to the top. The sun was still below the
horizon but there was a lot of yellow in the sky now. My hands toyed with
the rope. How did it go . . . the rabbit goes in the hole, the dog chases the
rabbit around the tree, two, three, four . . .
After several tries, I got it right. I slipped it around my neck and looked
down the cliff. Your acceleration is low in Luna, but your body mass is
constant. You need a big drop, six times what would do on Earth. I tried to
do the calculations in my head but kept losing track.
To be on the safe side, I picked up a large rock and held it tightly to my
chest. Then I jumped. You get plenty of time for regrets, but I had none. I
remember looking up and seeing Andrew MacDonald looking down at me.
Then came the jerk.

$$
CHAPTER FIVE

"If you're going to build a barn for brontosaurs," I told Brenda, "You'd
better make the ceiling at least twenty meters high."
"And why is that, Mr. Bones?"
Where she'd learned about minstrel shows I had no idea, but she'd been
using the term for a while now, whenever I got into lecture mode—which,
considering the state of her ignorance, was most of the time. I wasn't going
to let it annoy me.
She was looking up at the ceiling, which was twenty-five meters above
us. Myself, I wasn't looking up all that much lately. For several days I'd had
a persistent and painful stabbing pain in my neck whenever I turned my head
in a certain position. I kept meaning to visit the medico and get it fixed, but
it would spontaneously remit for a few hours and I'd forget to make an
appointment. Then it would creep up and stab me when I least expected it.
"Brontosaurs are not real bright. When they get alarmed they raise their
heads and rear up on their hind legs to take a look around. If the ceiling is
too low they smash their teeny heads against it and stun themselves."
"You've spent time around dinosaurs?"
"I grew up on a dinosaur ranch." I took her elbow and steered her out of
the way of a manure loader. We watched as it scooped up a pile of
watermelon-sized pellets.
"What a stench."
I said nothing. The smell had both good and bad associations for me. It
took me back to my childhood, where one of my jobs had been operating the
manure loader.
Behind us, the massive doors to the swamp began rumbling open, letting
in a blast of air even hotter and more humid than that inside the barn. In a
moment a long neck poked inside the door, ending in an almost negligible,
goofy-looking head. The neck kept coming in for a very long time before
the massive body made its entrance. By then another head and neck had
appeared.
"Let's get back here out of the way," I suggested to Brenda. "They won't
step on you if they see you, but they tend to forget where you are not long
after they look away from you."
"Where are they going?"

I pointed toward the open gate across from us. The sign on it said
"Mating Pen Number One."
"Mating season's just about over. Wait till Callie gets them penned up,
then we can take a look. It's pretty interesting."
One of the brontosaurs made a mournful honk and moved along a little
faster. In one-sixth gee, even a thunder lizard could be sprightly. I doubt
they set any speed records back on Old Earth. In fact, I wondered how they
stood up at all, out of the water.
The reason for the burst of speed was soon apparent. Callie entered the
barn, mounted on a tyrannosaur. The big predator responded instantly to
every touch of the reins, hurrying to block an attempted retreat by the male,
rearing up and baring its teeth when it looked as if the female might make a
stand. The big herbivores waddled quickly into the mating pen. The doors
closed automatically behind them.
The thing the ancient paleontologists had never got right about
dinosaurs was their color. You'd think the examples of so many modern
reptiles might have given them a hint. But if you look at old artists'
conceptions of dinosaurs, the predominant colors were mud-brown and
khaki-green. The real item was much different.
There are several strains of b-saur but the type Callie prefers are called
Cal Tech Yellowbellies, after the lab that first produced them. In addition to
the canary undersides, they range from that old reliable mud-brown on their
backs to a dark green, emerald green, and kelly green on their sides and
necks. They have streaks of iridescent violet trailing back from their eyes,
and white patches under their throats.
Tyrannosaurs, of course, are predominately red. They have huge,
dangling wattles under their necks, like iguanas, which can be puffed up to
make an outrageous booming mating call. The wattles are usually deep
blue, though purple and even black are not unknown.
You can't ride a t-saur like a horse; the back is too steep. There are
different methods, but Callie preferred a sort of narrow platform she could
either sit or stand on, depending on what she was doing. It strapped around
the beast's shoulders. Considering the amount of lizard still rising above that
point, she spent most of her time on her feet, barely able to peer over the
head.
"It looks unstable," Brenda said. "What if she falls off?"

"You don't want to do that," I told her. "They're likely to snap at you if
you come in view suddenly. But don't worry; this one is muzzled."
An assistant leaped up to join Callie in the saddle. He took the reins
from her and she jumped to the ground. As the t-saur was being ridden out
the barn door she glanced at us, did a double-take, and waved at me. I
waved back, and she gestured for us to come over. Not waiting, she started
toward the breeding pen.
I was about to join her when something poked through the metal railing
behind us. Brenda jumped, then relaxed. It was a brontosaur pup looking
for a treat. Looking into the dim pen behind us, I could see several dozen of
the elephant-sized young ones, most of them snugged into the mud, a few
others gathered around the feeding trough.
I turned out my pockets to show the brute I didn't have anything on me.
I used to carry chunks of sugar-cane, which they love.
Brenda didn't have any pockets to turn out, for the simple reason that
she wasn't wearing any pants. Her outfit for the day was knee-length soft
leather boots, and a little black bolero top. This was intended to let me know
that she had acquired something new: primary and secondary sexual
characteristics. I was fairly sure she hoped I'd suggest we put them to use
one of these days soon. I'd first caught on that she had a crush on me when
she learned that Hildy Johnson was not my born name, but one I had
selected myself after a famous fictional reporter from a play called The
Front Page. Soon she was "Brenda Starr."
I must say she looked more reasonable now. Neuters had always made
me nervous. She had not gone overboard with the breasts. The pubic hair
was natural, not some of the wilder styles that come and go.
But I was in no mood to try it out. Let her find a child of her own age.
#
We joined Callie at the breeding pen, climbed up to the top of the tenmeter gate and stood with her, looking over the top rail at the nervously
milling behemoths.
"Brenda," I said, "I'd like you to meet Calamari Cabrini. She owns this
place. Callie, meet Brenda, my . . . uh, assistant."
The women reached across me to shake hands, Brenda almost losing her
balance on the slippery steel bars. All three of us were dripping wet. Not
only was it hot and humid in the barn, but ceiling sprinklers drenched the

place every ten minutes because it was good for the skins of the livestock.
Callie was the only one who looked comfortable, because she wore no
clothes. I should have remembered and worn less myself; even Brenda was
doing better than me.
Nudity was not a sometime thing for Callie. I'd known her all my life,
and in that time had never seen her wear so much as a pinky ring. There was
no big philosophy behind her life-long naturism. Callie went bare simply
because she liked it, and hated picking out clothes in the morning.
She was looking good, I thought, considering that, except for Walter,
she took less notice of her body's needs than anyone I knew. She never did
any preventive maintenance, never altered anything about her appearance.
When something broke down she had it fixed or replaced. Her medico bills
were probably among the smallest in Luna. She swore she had once used a
heart for one hundred and twenty years.
"When it finally gave out," she had told me, "the medico said the valves
could have come out of a forty-year-old."
If you met her on the street, you would know immediately that she was
Earth-born. During her childhood, humans had been separable into many
"races," based on skin color, facial features, and type of hair. Post-Invasion
eugenics had largely succeeded in blending these so that racial types were
now very rare. Callie had been one of the white, or Caucasian race, which
dominated much of human history since the days of colonization and
industrialization. Caucasian was a pretty slippery term. Callie's imperious
nose would have looked right at home on an old Roman coin. One of Herr
Hitler's "Aryans" would have sneered at her. The important racial concept
then was "white," which meant not-black, not-brown.
Which was a laugh, because Callie's skin was burned a deep, reddishbrown from head to toe, and looked as leathery as some of her reptiles. It
was startling to touch it and find it actually quite soft and supple.
She was tall—not like Brenda, but certainly tall for her age—and
willowy, with an unkept mane of black hair streaked with white. Her most
startling feature was her pale blue eyes, a gift from her Nordic father.
She released Brenda's hand and gave me a playful shove.
"Mario, you never come see me anymore," she chided.
"The name is Hildy now," I said. "It has been for thirty years."
"You prove my point. I guess that means you're still working for that

bird-cage liner."
I shrugged, and noticed Brenda's uncomprehending expression.
"Newspads used to be printed out on paper, then they'd sell the paper," I
explained. "When people were through reading it, they'd use it on the
bottoms of their birdcages. Callie never abandons a clich, no matter how
dated."
"And why should I? The clich business has suffered a radical decline
since the Invasion. What we need are new and better clichs, but nobody
seems to be writing them. Present company excepted, of course."
"From Callie, that's almost a compliment," I told Brenda. "And nobody
would line a birdcage with the Nipple, Callie. The stories would put the
birds right off their food."
She considered it. "I don't think so, Mario. If we had electronic birds,
your newspad would be the perfect liner.
"Could be. I do find it useful for wrapping my electronic fish."
Most of this had gone right over Brenda's head, of course. But she had
never been one to let a little ignorance bother her.
"To catch the shit?" she said.
We both looked at her.
"At the bottom of the birdcage," she explained.
"I think I like her," Callie said.
"Of course you do. She's an empty vessel, waiting to be filled with your
tall tales of the old days."
"That's one reason. You've been using her as your own personal
birdcage liner. She needs my help."
"She doesn't seem to mind."
"But I do," Brenda said, unexpectedly. Callie and I looked at her again.
"I know I don't know much about ancient history." She saw Callie's
expression, and squirmed. "Sorry. But how much do you expect me to
know about things that happened hundreds of years ago? Or care?"
"It's okay," Callie said. "I may not have used the word 'ancient'—I still
think of the Roman Empire when that word comes up—but I can see it must
seem ancient to you. I said the same thing to my parents when they talked

about things that happened before I was born. The difference is, when I was
young the old eventually had the good manners to die. A new generation
took over. Your generation faces a different situation. Hildy seems very old
to you, but I'm more than twice his age, and I don't have any plans to die.
Maybe that's not fair to your generation, but it's a fact."
"The gospel according to Calamari," I said.
"Shut up, Mario. Brenda, it's never going to be your world. Your
generation will never take over from us. It's not my world anymore, either,
because of you. All of us, from both generational extremes, have to run this
world together, which means we have to make the effort to understand each
other's viewpoints. It's hard for me, and I know it must be hard for you. It's
as if I had to live with my great-great-great-great-grandparents, who grew up
during the industrial revolution and were ruled by kings. We'd barely even
have a language in common."
"That's okay with me," Brenda said. "I do make the effort. Why doesn't
he?"
"Don't worry about him. He's always been like that."
"Sometimes he makes me so mad."
"It's just his way."
"Yoo-hoo, ladies. I'm here."
"Shut up, Mario. I can read him like a book, and I can tell he likes you.
It's just that, the more he likes you, the worse he tends to treat you. It's his
way of distancing himself from affection, which he's not sure he's able to
return."
I could see the wheels turning in Brenda's head and, since she was not
stupid, just ignorant, she eventually followed that statement out to its
logical—if you believed the premise in the first place—conclusion, which
was that I must love her madly, because I treated her very badly. I looked
ostentatiously around at the walls of the barn.
"It must be hanging in your office," I said.
"What's that?"
"Your degree in psychology. I didn't even know you went back to
school."
"I've been in school every day of my life, jerk. And I sure wouldn't need
a degree to see through you. I spent thirty years learning how to do that."

There was more, something about how just because I was a hundred years
old now, I shouldn't think I'd changed so much. But it was all in Italian, so I
only got the gist.
Callie gets a modest yearly stipend from the Antiquities Preservation
Board for staying fluent in Italian—something she would have done anyway,
since it was her native language and she had firm ideas about the extinction
of human knowledge. She had tried to teach it to me but I had no aptitude
beyond a few kitchen words. And what was the point? The Central
Computer stored hundreds of languages no one spoke anymore, from
Cheyenne to Tasmanian, including all the languages that had suffered a
drastic drop in popularity because they never got established on Luna before
the Invasion. I spoke English and German, like most everybody else, with a
little Japanese thrown in. There were sizable groups of Chinese speakers,
and Swahili, and Russian. Other than that, languages were preserved by
study groups of a few hundred fanatics like Callie.
I doubt Brenda even knew there was an Italian language, so she listened
to Callie's tirade with a certain wariness. Ah, yes, Italian is a fine language
for tirades.
"I guess you've known each other a long time," Brenda said to me.
"We go way back."
She nodded, unhappy about something. Callie shouted, and I turned to
see her jump down into the breeding pen and stride toward the crew of
helpers, who were chivying the two brutes into final mating position.
"Not yet, you idiots," she shouted. "Give them time." She reached the
group of people and started handing out orders right and left. Callie had
never been able to find good help. I had been part of that help for a great
many years, so I know what I'm talking about. It took me a long time to
realize that no one would ever be good enough for her; she was one of those
people who never believed anyone could do a job as well as she could do it
herself. The maddening thing was, she was usually right.
"Back off, they're not ready yet. Don't rush them. They'll know when
it's time. Our job is to facilitate, not initiate."If I have any skills as a lover,"
I told Brenda, "it's because of that."
"Because of her?"
"'Give them time. We're not on a schedule here. Show a little finesse.'
I heard that so many times I guess I took it to heart."

And it did take me back, watching Callie working the stock again. Of
the major brontosaur ranchers in Luna, she was the only one who didn't use
artificial insemination at breeding time. "If you think helping a pair copulate
is tough," she always said, "try getting a semen sample from a brontosaur
bull."
And there was a rough sort of poetry about dinosaur mating, particularly
brontosaurs.
Tyrannosaurs went about it as you might expect, full of sound and fury.
Two bulls would butt heads over a prospective mate until one staggered
away like a dusted-up nerg addict to nurse an epic headache. I don't suppose
the victor fared a lot better except for the chance to grapple the tiny claw of
his lady fair.
Brontosaurs were more dainty. The male would spend three or four
days doing his dance, when he remembered to. These creatures had short
attention spans, even when in heat. He would rear up on his hind legs and
do a comical samba around and around the female. She typically showed
minimal interest for the first two days. Then the seduction moved to the
love-bite stage, with the male nipping her around the base of the tail while
she placidly chewed her cud. When she finally began rearing up with him, it
was time to bring them into the mating pen to pitch some serious woo.
That was going on now. The two of them were facing each other on
their hind legs, doing a little neck-weaving, a little foreleg pawing. It could
still be another hour before they were ready, a condition signaled by the
emergence of one of the bull's two hemi-penes.
Nobody ever told me why a reptile needs two penises. Come to think of
it, I never asked. There are limits to curiosity.
"So how long were you involved with Callie?"
"What's that?" Brenda had drawn me out of my reverie, as she had a
habit of doing.
"She said thirty years. That's a long time. You must have been real
serious about her."
All right, so I'm dense. But I finally got it. I looked out at the primal
scene: two Mesozoic monsters, here through the grace of modern genetic
science, and a thin brown woman, likewise.
"She's not my lover. She's my mother. Why don't you go down there
with her? She'll see you don't get hurt, and I'm sure she'll be happy to tell

you more than you ever wanted to know about brontosaurs. I'm going to
take a break."
I noticed as we climbed down the gate on opposite sides that Brenda
looked happier than I'd seen her all day.
#
I assume the mating went off without any trouble. It usually does when
Callie's in charge. I imagine the mating that produced me was equally wellplanned and carried out. Sex was never a big deal to Callie. Having me was
her nod in the direction of duty. But I have no siblings, despite powerful
societal pressure toward large families at the time of my birth. Once was
apparently enough.
Paradoxically, I know I didn't spend any time in a Petri dish, though it
would have made the whole process much easier for her if she'd availed
herself of any of the medical advances that could, today, make procreation,
gestation, and parturition about as personally involving as a wrong number
on the telephone. Callie had conceived me the old-fashioned way: a
random spermatozoan hitting the jackpot at the right time of the month. She
had carried me to full term, and had borne me in pain, just like God
promised Eve. And she had hated every minute of it. How do I know that?
She told me, and anyone else who would listen. She told me an average of
three times a day throughout my childhood.
It wasn't so much the pain that had bothered her. For a woman who
could shoulder a reproductive organ almost as big as she was and guide it
into a cloaca of a filthiness that had to be seen to be disbelieved, while
standing knee-deep in dinosaur droppings, Callie had an amazing streak of
prissiness. She had hated the bloodiness of childbirth, the smells and
sensations of it.
#
Callie's office was cool. That's what I'd had in mind when I went up
there, simply to cool off. But it wasn't working. All that had happened was
that the sweat on my body had turned clammy. I was breathing hard, and
my hands weren't steady. I felt on the edge of an anxiety attack, and I didn't
know why. On top of all that, my neck was hurting again.
And why hadn't I mentioned the purpose of our visit? I'd told myself it
was because she was too busy, but there had been plenty of time while the
three of us stood on the gate. Instead, I'd let her prattle on about the good
old days. It would have been a perfect opportunity to brace her about taking

the job as the Earth-born member of our little team of time-travelers. After
holding forth about the generational gap she would have looked silly turning
us down. And I knew Callie. She would love the job, would never admit
loving it, and would only accept it if she could be tricked into making it look
as if she had come up with the idea herself, as a favor to me and Brenda.
I got up and moved to the windows. That didn't help, so I walked to the
opposite wall. No improvement. After I'd done that three or four times I
realized I was pacing. I rubbed the back of my neck, drifted over to the
windows again, and looked out and down.
Callie's office windows overlook the barn interior from just beneath the
roof. There's a stairway leading to a verandah "outside"—actually, within
the small disneyland that is her ranch. I was looking out over the breeding
pens I had just left. Callie was there, pointing something out to Brenda, who
stood beside her watching the spectacle of two mating brontosaurs.
Standing just behind them was someone who looked familiar. I squinted,
but it didn't help, so I grabbed the pair of binoculars on a hook beside the
window.
I focused in on the tall, red-headed figure of Andrew MacDonald.

CHAPTER SIX

I remembered leaving Callie's ranch. I recalled wandering for a while,
taking endless downscalators until there were no more; I had reached the
bottom level. That struck me as entirely too metaphorical, so I took an
infinite number of upscalators and found my way to the Blind Pig. I don't

recall what I was thinking all those hours, but in retrospect, it couldn't have
been pretty.
You might say the next thing I recall is waking up, or coming to, but
that wouldn't be strictly accurate. It wouldn't convey the nature of the
experience. It felt more like I reconstructed myself from far-flung bits—no,
that implies some effort on my part. The bits reconstructed themselves, and
I became self-aware in quantum stages. There was no dividing line, but
eventually I knew I was in a back room of the Pig. This was considerable
progress, and here my own will took over and I looked around to learn more
about my surroundings. I was facing downward, so that's where I first
turned my attention. What I saw there was a woman's face.
"We'll never solve the problem of the head shot until an entirely new
technology comes along," she said. I had no idea what this meant. Her hair
was spread out on a pillow. There were outspread hands on each side of her
face. There was something odd about her eyes, but I couldn't put my finger
on it. I suppose I was in a literal frame of mind, because having thought
that, I touched one of her eyeballs with the tip of my finger. It didn't seem to
bother her much. She blinked, and I took my finger away.
There was an important discovery: when I touched her eye, one of the
hands had moved. Putting these data together, I concluded that the hands
bracketing her face were my hands. I wiggled a finger, testing this
hypothesis. One of the fingers down there wiggled. Not the one I had
intended, but how much exactitude could I expect? I smiled, proud of
myself.
"You can encase the brain in metal," she said. "Put a blood bag on the
anti-camera side of the head, fire a bullet from the camera's pee-oh-vee.
And ka-chow! The bullet goes whanging off the metal cover, ka-blooey, the
blood bag explodes, and if you're lucky it looks like the bullet went through
the head and spread tomato sauce all over the wall in back of the guy."
I felt large.
Had I taken large pills? I couldn't remember, but I must have.
Normally I don't, as they aren't really much of a thrill, unless you get your
kicks by imagining yourself to be the size of an interplanetary liner. But you
can mix them with other drugs and get interesting effects. I must have done
that.
"You can make it look even more real by putting teeny tiny charges in
back of the eyeballs. When the bullet hits, the charges go off, and the

eyeballs are blown out toward the camera, see? Along with a nice blood
haze, which is a plus in masking whatever violations of realism are going on
behind it."
Something was rubbing against my ears. I turned my head about as
quickly as they rotate the big scope out in Copernicus, and saw a bare foot.
At first I thought it was my foot, but I knew from reports flown in by carrier
pigeon that my own feet were about three kilometers behind me, at the ends
of my legs, which were stretched out straight. I turned my head the other
way, saw another foot. Hers, I concluded. The first was probably hers, too.
"But that damn steel case. Crimony! I can't tell you what a—you
should pardon the expression—headache that thing can be. Especially when
nine out of ten directors will insist the head shot has to be in slomo. You
give the chump a false forehead full of maxfactor #3 to guarantee a juicy
wound, you annodize the braincase in black so—you hope—it'll look like a
hole in the head when the skin's ripped away, and what happens? The damn
bullet rips through everything, and there it is in the dailies. A bright, shiny
spot of metal right down there at the bottom of the hole. The director chews
you out, and it's Re-take City."
Was I aboard a ship? That might account for the rocking motion. But I
remembered I was in the Blind Pig, and unless the bar had been cut from its
steel catacomb and embarked bodily, it seemed unlikely we were at sea. I
decided I still needed more data. Feeling adventurous, I looked down
between myself and the woman's body.
For a moment the view made no sense at all. I could see my own legs,
and my feet, as if through a reversed telescope. Then I couldn't see them
any more. Then I could again. Where were her legs? I couldn't see them.
Oh, yes, since her feet were tickling my ears, her legs must be those things
against my chest. So she was on the floor, on her back. And that explained
the other activity I saw. I stopped my up and down motion.
"I don't want to do this," I told her.
She kept talking about the difficulties of a head shot. I realized that she
was at least as detached from our coupling as I was. I stood up and looked
around the room. She never missed a syllable. There were a pair of pants
on the floor; they were a million sizes too small for me, but they were
probably mine. I held them, lifted each leg with gargantuan deliberation,
and presto! The pants did fit. I stumbled through a curtain and into the
main room of the Pig.

It was maybe twenty steps to the bar. In that distance I shrank
alarmingly. It was not an unpleasant sensation, though at one point I had to
hold the back of a barstool to keep my balance. Pleased with myself, I
gingerly climbed onto a leather stool.
"Bartender," I said, "I'll have another of the same."
The fellow behind the bar was known as Deep Throat, for a famous
clandestine news source. He probably had another name, but no one knew
it, and we all thought it was fitting it should be that way. He nodded and
was moving away, but someone sat on the stool next to mine and reached
over to grab his arm.
"Hold the heavy stuff this time, okay?" she said. I saw that it was
Cricket. She smiled at me, and I smiled back. I shrugged, then nodded to
Deep Throat's enquiring look. His customers' state of sobriety is not his
concern. If you can sit at the bar—and pay—he'll serve you.
"How you doing, Hildy?" Cricket asked.
"Never better," I said, and watched my drink being prepared. Cricket
shut up for the time being. I knew there were more questions to come.
What are friends for?
The drink arrived, in one of the Pig's hologlasses. It's probably the only
bar in Luna that still uses them. They date back to the mid-twenty-first
century, and they're rather charming. A chip in the thick glass bottom
projects a holo picture just above the surface of the drink. I've seen them
with rolling dolphins, windsurfers, a tiny water polo team complete with the
sound of a cheering crowd, and Captain Ahab harpooning the Great White
Whale. But the most popular glass at the Pig is the nuclear explosion at
Bikini Atoll, in keeping with the way Deep Throat mixes the drinks. I
watched it for a while. It starts with a very bright light, evolves into an
exquisitely detailed orange and black mushroom cloud that expands until it
is six inches high, then blows away. Then it blows up again. The cycle
takes about a minute.
I was watching the tiny battleships in the lagoon when I realized I'd seen
the show about a dozen times already, and that my chin was resting on the
bar. To enhance the view, I suppose. I sat up straight, a little embarrassed.
I glanced at Cricket, but she was making a great show of producing little
moist rings with the bottom of her glass. I wiped my brow, and swiveled on
my stool to look at the rest of the room.
"The usual motley crew," Cricket said.

"The motliest," I agreed. "In fact, the word 'motley' might have been
coined simply to describe this scene."
"Maybe we should retire the word. Give it a place of honor in the
etymological hall of fame, like Olympic champions' jerseys."
"Put it right next to motherhood, love, happiness . . . words like that."
"On that note, I'll buy you another drink."
I hadn't finished the first, but who was counting?
There have always been unwritten rules in journalism, even at the level
on which I practice it. Often it is only the fear of a libel suit that stays us
from printing a particularly scurrilous story. On Luna the laws are pretty
strict on that subject. If you defame someone, you'd better have sources
willing to testify before the CC. But more often you hold back on printing
something everyone knows for a subtler reason. There is a symbiotic
relationship between us and the people we cover. Some would say parasitic,
but they don't understand how hungry for publicity a politician or celebrity
can be. If we stick to the rules concerning "off the record" statements,
things told us on "deep background," and so forth, everybody benefits. I get
sources who know I won't betray them, and the subject of my stories gets the
public exposure he craves.
Don't look for the Blind Pig Bar And Grill in your phone memory.
Don't expect to find it by wandering the halls of your neighborhood mall. If
you should somehow discover its location, don't expect to be let in unless
you know a regular who can vouch for you. All I'll say about it is that it's
within walking distance of three major movie production studios, and is
reached through a door with a totally misleading sign on it.
The Blind Pig is the place where journalists and movie people can mix
without watching their mouths. Like its political counterpart over by City
Hall, the Huey P. Long Memorial Gerrymandering Society, you can let your
hair down without fear of reading your words in the padloids the next
morning—at least, not for attribution. It's the place where gossip, slander,
rumor, and
character assassination are given free rein, where the biggest stars can
mix with the lowliest stagehands and the slimiest reporters and not have to
watch their tongues. I once saw a grip punch a ten-million-per-picture
celebrity in the nose, right there in the Pig. The two fought it out until they
were exhausted, went back to the set, and behaved as if nothing had
happened. That same punch, thrown in the studio, would have landed the

grip on the pavement in microseconds. But if the star had exercised his clout
for something that happened in the Pig, and Deep Throat heard about it, the
star would not have been welcome again. There's not many places people
like that can go and socialize without being bothered. Deep Throat seldom
has to banish anyone.
A reporter once broke confidence with a producer, printed a story told to
him in the Pig. He never returned, and he's not a reporter anymore. It's hard
to cover the entertainment beat without access to the Pig.
Places like the Pig have existed since Edison invented Hollywood. The
ambiance is dependent on what is shooting that day. Just then there were
three popular genres, two rising and one on its way out, and all three were
represented around the room. There were warriors from Samurai Japan,
taking a break from The Shogun Attacks, currently lensing at
Sentry/Sensational Studios. A contingent of people in old-fashioned
spacesuits were employed at North Lunar Filmwerks, where I'd heard Return
Of The Alphans was behind schedule and over budget and facing an
uncertain reception, as the box office for Asteroid Miner/Space Creature
films had turned soft in recent months. And a bunch in bandannas, cowboy
hats and dirty jeans had to be extras from The Gunslinger V. Westerns were
in the middle of their fourth period of filmic popularity, two of them coming
in my own lifetime. TG,V, as it was known to the trade, had been doing
location work not far from my cabin in West Texas.
In addition, there were the usual scattering of costumes from other eras,
and quite a number of surgically altered gnomes, fairies, trolls, and so forth,
working in low-budget fantasy and children's shorts. There was a group of
five centaurs from a long-running sci-fi series that should have been axed a
dozen Roman numerals ago.
"Why don't you just move the brain?" I heard Cricket say. "Put it
somewhere else, like the stomach?"
"Oh, brother. Sure, why not? It's been done, of course, but it's not
worth the trouble. Nerve tissue is the hardest to manipulate, and the brain?
Forget it. There's twelve pairs of cranial nerves you've got to extend through
the neck and down to the abdomen, for one thing. Then you have to re-train
the gagman—a couple of days, usually—so the time lag doesn't show. And
you don't think that matters? Audiences these days, they've seen it all,
they're sophisticated. They want realism. We can make a fake brain easy
enough and stuff it into the gagman's skull in place of the one we re-located,
but audiences will spot the fact that the real brain's not where it's supposed to

be."
I turned on my stool and saw my new friend was sitting on the other side
of Cricket, still holding forth about her head shots.
"Why not just use manikins?" Cricket asked, showing she hadn't spent
much time on the entertainment beat. "Wouldn't they be cheaper than real
actors?"
"Sure. A hell of a lot cheaper. Maybe you've never heard of the Job
Security Act, or unions."
"Oh."
"Damn right. Until a stunt performer dies, we can't replace him with a
machine. It's the law. And they die, all right—even with your brain in a
steel case, it's a risky profession—but we don't lose more than two or three a
year. And there's thousands of them. Plus, they get better at surviving the
longer they work, so there's a law of diminishing returns. I can't win." She
swiveled, leaned her elbows on the bar, looked out at the tables and sneered.
"Look at them. You can always spot gagmen. Look for the ones with
the vacant faces, like they're wondering where they are. They pick up a
piece of shrapnel in the head; we cut away a little brain tissue and replace it
with virgin cortex, and they forget a little. Start getting a little vague about
things. Go home and can't remember the names of the kids. Back to work
the next day, giving me more headaches. Some of 'em have very little left of
their original brains, and they'd have to look at their personnel file to tell you
where they went to school.
"And centaurs? I could build you a robot centaur in two days, you
couldn't tell it from the real thing. But don't tell the Exotics Guild. No, I get
to sign 'em to a five-year contract, surgically convert 'em at great cost to the
FX budget, then put 'em through three months of kinesthetic rehab until they
can walk without falling on their faces. And what do I get? A stumblebum
who can't remember his lines or where the camera is, who can't walk through
a scene muttering, for chrissake, without five rehearsals. And at the end of
five years, I get to pay to convert 'em back." She reached around and got her
drink, which was tall and had little tadpole-like creatures swimming in it.
She took a long pull on it, licked her lips. "I tell you, it's a wonder we get
any pictures made at all."
"Nice to see a woman happy in her work," I said. She looked over at
me.

"Hildy," Cricket said, "have you met Princess Saxe-Coburg? She's chief
of special effects at NLM."
"We've met."
The Princess frowned at me, then recognition dawned. She got off her
stool and came toward me, a little unsteady. She put her nose inches from
mine.
"Sure. You pulled out on me a few minutes ago. Not a nice thing to do
to a lady."
At that range, I could see what was odd about her eyes. She was
wearing a pair of antique projection contacts, small round flat-TV screens
that floated over the cornea. I could make out the ring of solar cells that
powered them, and the flyspeck chip that held the memory.
They'd been introduced just before the Invasion under a variety of trade
names, but the one that stuck was Bedroom Eyes. After all, though they
could reflect quite a variety of moods, if you were close enough to see the
little pictures the mood you were looking for was probably sexual arousal.
The more modest models would show a turned-back bed, a romantic scene
from an old movie, or even, god help us, waves crashing on a beach. Others
made no pretensions, getting right to the erection or spread thighs. Of
course, they could reflect other moods, as well, but people were seldom
close enough to make them out.
I'd never seen projection contacts worn by someone quite as stoned as
the Princess was. What they were projecting was an interesting illusion: it
was as if I were looking through two holes into a hollow head. Remnants of
an exploded brain were collapsed at the bottom. Cracks in the skull let in
light. And swinging from stray synapses like vines in a jungle were a
menagerie of cartoon characters, from Mickey Mouse to Baba Yaga.
The image disturbed me. I wondered why anyone would want to do that
to their brain. From wondering why she would want to, I quickly got to why
I would want to, and that was leading me quickly to a place I didn't want to
go. So I turned away from her and saw Andrew MacDonald sitting at the
other end of the bar like a carrot-topped Hibernian albatross.
"Did you know she's the Princess of Wales?" Cricket was saying. "She's
first in line to the throne of England."
"And Scotland, and Wales," said the Princess. "Hell, and Ireland, and
Canada and India. I might as well re-claim the whole Empire while I'm at it.

If my mother ever dies, it'll all belong to me. Of course, there's the little
matter of the Invaders."
"Up the British," Cricket said, and they clinked their glasses together.
"I met the King once," I said. I drained my drink and slammed it down
on the bar. Deep Throat caused it to vanish, and began concocting another.
"Did you really?"
"He was a friend of my mother. In fact, he's a possible candidate to be
my father. Callie has never told me and never will, but they were friendly
together at about the right time. So, if you apply modern laws of bastardy, I
might have a claim that supersedes yours." I glanced at MacDonald again.
Albatross? Hell, the man was more than a bird of evil omen, more than a
stormy petrel or a croaking raven. He was Cassandra. He was a tropical
depression, bad breath, a black cat across my path. Everywhere I turned,
there he was, a dog humping my leg. He was a ladder in the stocking of my
life. He was snake eyes.
I hated him. I felt like punching him in the nose.
"Watch what you say," the Princess cautioned. "Remember what
happened to Mary, Queen of Scots."
I punched her in the nose.
She walked backward a few rubber-legged steps, then sat down on the
floor. In the ensuing silence, Cricket whispered in my ear.
"I think she was kidding," she said.
For a few moments the whole place was quiet. Everyone was watching
us expectantly; they love a good brawl at the Blind Pig. I looked at my
clenched fist, and the Princess touched her bloody nose with her hand, then
looked at her palm. We both looked up at the same time and our eyes met.
And she came off the floor and launched herself at me and started breaking
all the bones in my body that she could reach.
My hitting her had nothing to do with anything she had said or done; at
that moment in my life I would have hit anyone standing next to me. But I'd
have been a lot better off hitting Cricket. In the Princess of Wales, I'd
picked the wrong opponent. She was taller than me and out-massed me.
There was probably a ten-centimeter difference in reach between us, and I
was on the short end of it. But most importantly, she had spent the last forty
years staging cinematic fights, and she knew every trick in the book, and a
lot that never got into the book.

I'm tempted to say I got in two or three good punches. Cricket says I
did, but it might have been just to raise my spirits. The truth is I can't
remember much from the time her horrid white teeth first filled my vision to
the time I ripped a meter-long gash in the carpet with my face.
To get to the carpet I'd first had to smash through a table full of drinks.
I used my face for that, too. Before the table I had been flying, rather
cleverly, I thought, and the first real fun I'd had in many long minutes, but
how I came to be flying was a point I was never too clear on. It seems safe
to say that the Princess hurled me in some manner, holding on to some part
of my anatomy and then releasing it; Cricket said it was my ankle, which
would account for the room whirling around so quickly just before I flew.
Before that I had vague memories of the bar mirror shattering, people
scattering, blood spattering. Then I crashed through the table.
I rolled over and spit out carpeting. Horses were milling nervously all
around me. Actually it was the centaur extras, whose table I'd just ruined. I
resolved to buy them all a round of drinks. Before I could do that, though,
there was the Princess again, lifting me by the shoulder and drawing back a
bloody fist.
Then someone took hold of her arm from behind, and the punch never
landed. She stood up and turned to face her challenger. I let my head rest
against the ruins of a chair and watched as she tried to punch Andrew
MacDonald.
There was really no point in it. It took her a long time to realize it, as her
blood was up and she wasn't thinking straight. So she kept throwing
punches, and they kept just missing, or hitting him harmlessly on the elbows
or glancing off his shoulders. She tried kicking, and the kicks were always
just a little off their target.
He never threw a punch. He didn't have to. After a time, she was
standing there breathing hard. He wasn't even sweating. She straightened
and held up her hands, palms outward.
I must have dozed off for a moment. Eventually I became aware of the
Princess, Cricket, and MacDonald, three indistinct round faces hanging
above me like a pawnbroker's sign.
"Can you move your legs?" MacDonald asked.
"Of course I can move my legs." What a silly question. I'd been
moving my legs for a hundred years.

"Then move them."
I did, and MacDonald frowned deeper.
"His back's probably broken," said Wales.
"Must have happened when he landed on the railing."
"Can you feel anything?"
"Unfortunately, yes." By that time most of the drugs were wearing off,
and everything from the waist up was hurting very badly. Deep Throat
arrived and lifted my head. He had a painkiller in his hand, a little plastic
cube with a wire which he plugged into the socket at the base of my skull.
He flicked the switch, and I felt a lot better. I looked down and watched as
they removed the splintered chair leg which had pierced my hip.
Since that wasn't a particularly diverting sight, I looked around the
room. Already cleaning robots were picking up broken glassware and
replacing shattered tables; Deep Throat is no stranger to brawls, and he
always keeps a supply of furniture. In another few minutes there would be
no sign that I had almost destroyed the place five minutes ago. Well, I had
almost destroyed the place, in the sense that it was my hurtling body that had
done most of the damage.
I felt myself being lifted. MacDonald and Wales had made a hammock
with their arms. It was like riding in a sedan chair.
"Where are we going?"
"You're not in any immediate danger," MacDonald said. "Your back is
broken, and that should be fixed soon, so we're taking you across the
corridor to the NLF Studios. They have a good repair shop there."
The Princess got us past the gate guard. We passed about a dozen sound
stage doors, and I was brought into the infirmary.
Which was jammed like Mainhardt's Department Store on Christmas
Eve. It seemed NLF was doing a big scene from some war epic, and most of
the available beds were taken by maimed extras patiently waiting their turn,
counting up the triple-time salary they drew for injured down-time.
The room had been dressed as a field hospital for the picture, apparently
doing double duty when not actually treating cinematic casualties. I pegged
it as twentieth century—a vintage season for wars—maybe World War Two,
or the Vietnam conflict, but it could easily have been the Boer War. We
were under a canvas roof and the place was cluttered with hanging IV bottle

props.
MacDonald returned from a conference with one of the technicians and
stood looking down at me.
"He says it'll be about half an hour. I could have you taken to your own
practitioner if you want to; it might be quicker."
"Don't bother. I'm in no hurry. When they patch me up, I'll probably
just get up and do something foolish again."
He didn't say anything. There was something about his demeanor that
bothered me—as if I needed anything else about him to bother me.
"Look," I said. "Don't ask me to explain why I did it. I don't even know
myself."
Still he said nothing.
"Either spit it out, or take your long face and park it somewhere else."
He shrugged.
"I just have a problem with a man attacking a woman, that's all."
"What?" I was sure I had misunderstood him. He wasn't making any
sense. But when he didn't repeat his astonishing statement, I had to assume
I'd heard him correctly.
"What does that have to do with anything?" I asked.
"Nothing, of course. But when I was young, it was something you
simply didn't do. I know it no longer makes sense, but it still bothers me to
see it."
"I'll be sure to tell the Mean Bitch you feel that way. If they've put her
back together after your last bout, that is."
He looked embarrassed.
"You know, that was a problem for me, early in my career. I wouldn't
fight female opponents. I was getting a bad reputation and missing a lot of
important match-ups because of it. When some competitors started getting
sex changes simply so they could have a go at me, I realized how ridiculous
I was being. But to this day I have to psych myself something terrible to get
into the ring with someone who's currently female."
"That's why you never hit . . . does the Princess have a first name?"
"I don't know. But you're wrong. I wanted to stop her, but I didn't want

to hurt her. Frankly, you had it coming."
I looked away, feeling terrible. He was right.
"She's feeling bad about it, though. She said she just couldn't seem to
stop, once she got going."
"I'll send her the repair bill. That should cheer her up."
Cricket arrived from somewhere. She had a lighted cigarette which she
placed in my mouth, grinning.
"Got it from the prop department," she said. "They always used to give
these to wounded soldiers. I can't imagine why."
I puffed on it. It wasn't tobacco, thank god.
"Cheer up," Cricket said. "You tore up her fists pretty good."
"I'm clever that way; I pounded them to hamburger with my chin."
I suddenly felt an alarming urge to cry. Holding it back, I asked both of
them to leave me alone for a while. They did, and I lay there smoking,
studying the canvas ceiling. There were no answers written there.
Why had the taste of life turned so bitter for me in the last weeks?
#
I had sort of drifted away. When I came back, Brenda was bending over
me. Considering her height, she had a long way to bend.
"How'd you find me?" I asked her.
"I'm a reporter, remember? It's my business to find things out."
I thought of several cutting replies, but something about the look on her
face made me hold them back. Puppy love. I had vague memories of how
badly that could hurt, when it wasn't returned.
And to give her her due, she was improving. Maybe she would be a
reporter, some day.
"You needn't have bothered. It's not like I'm badly hurt. The head
injuries were minimal."
"I'm not surprised. It would take a lot to hurt your head."
"The brain wasn't injured at . . ." I stopped, realizing she had just taken
a jab at me. It had been pretty feeble, it hardly qualified as a joke —she
might never master that skill—but it was something. I grinned at her.

"I was going to stop by Texas and bring that doctor . . . what was it you
called him?"
"Sawbones. Pillroller. Quack. Caulker. Nepenthe. Leech.
Lazarmonger."
Her smile grew a little glassy; I could see her filing the terms away for
later research.
I was smiling, but the truth is, even with current medical practices, being
paralyzed from the waist down is a frightening thing. We have an entirely
different attitude toward our bodies than most humans down the ages, we
don't fear injury and we can turn off pain and we generally treat flesh and
bone as just items to be fixed, but when things are badly wrong something in
the most primitive level of our brain stands up on its hind legs and howls at
the Earth. I was having a galloping anxiety attack that the painkiller plugged
into my medulla wasn't dealing with at all. I have no idea if Brenda realized
this, but her presence at my bedside was strangely comforting. I was glad
she was there. I took her hand.
"Thanks for coming," I said. She squeezed my hand, then looked away.
#
Eventually the planned casualties stopped streaming in, and a team of
medicos assembled around me. They plugged me in to a dozen machines,
studied the results, huddled, and murmured, just as if what they thought
really mattered, as if the medical computer was not entirely in control of my
diagnosis and treatment.
They came to a decision, which was to turn me onto my stomach. I
surmised they had concluded it would be easier to reach my broken spine
that way. I'd better not ever hear medicos called overpaid blood-monkeys
again.
They began to carve. I couldn't feel it, but I could hear some really
disgusting sounds. You know those wet-muck special-effect sounds they
use in the movies when someone's being disemboweled? They could have
recorded them right over my broken back. At one point something thumped
to the floor. I peered over the edge of the bed: it looked like a raw soup
bone. It was hard to believe it had once belonged to me.
They pow-wowed again, cut some more, brought in more machines.
They made sacrifices to the gods of Aesculapius, Mithradates, Lethe, and
Pfizer. They studied the entrails of a goat. They tore off their clothes,

joined hands, and danced in a healing circle around my prone carcass.
Actually, I wished they had done any of those things. It would have
been a lot more interesting than what they did do, which was mostly stand
around and watch the automatic machines mend me.
All there was to look at was an antique machine against the wall, a few
feet from my face. It had a glass screen and a lot of knobs on it. Blue lines
were crawling across the screen, blipping into encouraging peaks now and
then.
"Can I get you anything?" the machine asked. "Flowers? Candy?
Toys?"
"A new head might do the trick." It was the CC talking, of course. It
can throw its voice pretty much where it pleases, since it was talking directly
to the hearing center of my brain. "How much will this cost me?"
"There's no final cost-estimate yet. But Wales has already requested the
bill be sent to her."
"Maybe what I meant was—"
"How badly are you hurt? How shall I put it. There are three bones in
the middle ear, called the Malleus, the Incus, and the Stapes. You'll be
happy to hear that not one of these six bones was broken."
"So I'll still be able to play the piano."
"Just as badly as ever. In addition, several minor organs emerged
unscathed. Almost half a square meter of epidermis can be salvaged."
"Tell me. If I'd come to this place . . . I mean, a hospital like this one is
pretending to be—"
"I know what you mean."
"—with only primitive surgical techniques . . . would I have survived?"
"It's unlikely. Your heart is intact, your brain is not badly damaged, but
the rest of your injuries are comparable to stepping on a land mine. You'd
never walk again, and you'd be in great pain. You would come to wish you
had not survived."
"How can you tell that?"
The CC said nothing, and I was left to ponder. That usually doesn't do
much good, where the CC is concerned.
We all deal with the CC a thousand times a day, but almost all of that is

with one of its sub-programs, on a completely impersonal level. But apart
from the routine transactions of living, it also generates a distinct personality
for every citizen of Luna, and is always there ready to offer advice, counsel,
or a shoulder to cry on. When I was young I spoke to the CC extensively.
He is every child's ideal imaginary playmate. But as we grow older and
make more real, less tractable and entirely more willful and frustrating
relationships, contacts with the CC tend to fall off. With adolescence and
the discovery that, in spite of their shortcomings, other people have a lot
more to offer than the CC ever will, we cut our ties even further until the CC
is just a very intelligent, unobtrusive servant, there to ease us through the
practical difficulties of life.
But the CC had now intruded, twice. I found myself wondering, as I
seldom had in the past, what was on its mind.
"I guess I've been pretty foolish," I ventured.
"Perhaps I should call Walter, tell him to tear up the front page."
"All right. So it isn't news. So I've had things on my mind."
"I was hoping you'd like to talk about that."
"Maybe we ought to talk about what you said before."
"Concerning your hypothetical suffering had you incurred these injuries
in, say, 1950?"
"Concerning your statement that I might prefer being dead."
"It was merely an hypothesis. I observe how little anyone today is
equipped to tolerate pain, having never experienced an appreciable amount
of it. I note that even the people on Old Earth, who were no strangers to it,
often preferred death to pain. I conclude that many people today would not
hold life so dear as to endure constant, unrelenting agony."
"So it was just a general observation."
"Naturally."
I didn't believe that, but there was no point in saying so. The CC would
get to the point in its own way, in its own time. I watched the crawling lines
on the machine and waited.
"I notice you're not taking notes concerning this experience. In fact,
you've taken very few notes lately about anything."
"Watching me, are you?"

"When I've nothing better to do."
"As you certainly know, I'm not taking notes because my handwriter is
broken. I haven't had it repaired because the only guy who still works on
them is so swamped that he said he might get around to mine this coming
August. Unless he leaves the business to start a career in buggy-whip
repair."
"There actually is a woman who does that," the CC said. "In
Pennsylvania."
"No kidding? Nice to see such a vital skill won't vanish completely."
"We try to foster any skill, no matter how impractical or useless."
"I'm sure our grandchildren will thank us for it."
"What are you using to write your stories?"
"Two methods, actually. You get this soft clay brick, see, and you use a
pointed stick to impress little triangles in it in different combinations. Then
you put it on the oven to bake, and in four or five hours there you are. The
original hard copy. I've been trying to think of a name for the process."
"How about cuneiform?"
"You mean it's been done? Oh, well. When I get tired of that, I get out
the old hammer and chisel and engrave my deathless prose on rocks. It
saves me carrying those ridiculous paper sheets into Walter's office; I just
lob them across the newsroom and through his window."
"I don't suppose you'd consider Direct Interface again."
Was that what this was all about?
"Tried it," I said. "Didn't like it."
"That was over thirty years ago," the CC pointed out. "There have been
some advances since then."
"Look," I said, feeling irritable and impatient. "You've got something
on your mind. I wish you'd just come out with it instead of weaseling
around like this."
It said nothing for a moment. That moment stretched into a while, and
threatened to become a spell.
"You want me to direct interface for some reason," I suggested.
"I think it might be helpful."

"For you or me?"
"Both of us, possibly. There can be a certain therapeutic value in what I
intend to show you."
"You think I need that?"
"Judge for yourself. How happy have you been lately?"
"Not very."
"You could try this, then. It can't hurt, and it might help."
So what was I doing at the moment so important that I couldn't take a
few minutes off to chin with the CC?
"All right," I said. "I'll interface with you, though I think you really
ought to buy me dinner and some flowers first."
"I'll be gentle," the CC promised.
"What do I have to do? You need to plug me in somewhere?"
"Not for years now. I can use my regular connections into your brain.
All you need to do is relax a little. Stare into the oscilloscope screen; that
could be helpful."
I did, watching the blue lines peak and trough, peak and trough. The
screen started to expand, as if I were moving into it. Soon all I could see
was one crawling line, which slowed, stopped, became a single bright dot.
The dot got brighter. It grew and grew. I felt the heat of it on my face, it
was blazing down from a blue tropical sky. There was a moment of vertigo
as the world seemed to spin around me—my body staying firmly in place—
until I was lying not on my stomach but on my back, and not on the snowy
white sheets of the repair shop at North Lunar Filmwerks but on cool wet
beach sand, hearing not the soft mutterings of the medicos but the calls of
seagulls and the nearby hiss and roar of surf. A wave spent its last energy
tickling my feet and washing around my hips. It sucked a little sand out
from under me. I lifted my head and saw an endless blue ocean trimmed
with white breakers. I got to my feet and turned around, and saw white
sandy beach. Beyond it were palm trees, jungle rising away from me to a
rocky volcanic peak spouting steam. The realism of the place was
astonishing. I knelt and scooped up a handful of sand. No two grains
looked alike. No matter how close I brought the sand grains to my eyes, the
illusion never broke down and the endless detail extended to deeper and
deeper realms. Some sort of fractal magic, I supposed. I walked down the
beach for a bit, sometimes turning to watch the cunning way water flowed

into my footprints, erasing the edges, swirling, bubbling. I breathed deeply
of the saline air. I like this place already. I wondered why the CC had
brought me here. I decided it would tell me in its own time, so I walked up
the beach and sat under a palm tree to wait for the CC to present itself. I
waited for several hours, watching the surf, having to move twice as the sun
crept across the sky. I noticed that my skin had reddened in my brief time in
the sunlight. I think I drifted off to sleep from time to time, but when you're
alone it's hard to be sure. In any event, the CC didn't show. Eventually I got
thirsty. I walked down the beach for several kilometers before discovering
the outlet of a small stream of fresh water. I noticed the beach kept curving
off to the right; probably an island. In time it got dark—very quickly, and
one part of my mind concluded this simulacrum that really existed only as a
set of equations in the data banks of the CC was intended to be somewhere
in the Earthly tropics, near the equator. Not that the information did me any
good. It didn't get cold, but I soon found that when you haven't any clothes
or bedding, sleep can be a sandy, chilly, thoroughly uncomfortable project. I
woke up again and again to note the stars had moved only a little. Each time
I would shout for CC to show itself, and each time only the surf answered
back. Then I awoke with the sun already high above the horizon. My left
side had the beginnings of a painful radiation burn. My right side was
chilled. My hair was full of sand. Little crabs scuttled away as I sat up, and
I was appalled to realize I'd been thinking about catching and eating one. I
was that hungry. But there was something of interest down by the water. In
the night, a large, steel-banded wooden trunk had washed ashore, along with
a lot of splintered wood and some tattered pieces of canvas. I concluded
there had been a shipwreck. Perhaps that was the justification for my
presence here in the first place. I dragged the chest across the sand to a
place where it would be in no danger of washing back to sea, thought about
it, and salvaged all the wood and canvas, as well. I smashed the lock on the
trunk and upon opening it, found it was waterproof and contained a wide
variety of things useful to the computer castaway: books, tools, bolts of
cloth, packages of staple foods like sugar and flour, even some bottles of a
good Scotch whiskey. The tools were better than the things I had been using
in Texas. At a guess, they might have been made with the technology of the
late nineteenth century. The books were mostly of the how-to variety—and
there was the man himself, Robinson Crusoe, by DeFoe. All the books were
bound in leather; none had a copyright date later than 1880. I used the
machete to lop the ends off a cocoanut and munched thoughtfully at the
delicious white meat while paging through books that told me how to tan
hides, where to obtain salt, how to treat wounds (I didn't like the sound of

that one very much), and other vigorous pioneer skills. If I wanted to make
boots, I'd be able to do it. If I wanted to build an outrigger canoe and seek
my fortune on the blue Pacific (I was assuming this was the south seas), the
information was at my fingertips. If I wanted to chip flint arrowheads,
construct an earthen dam, make gunpowder, fricassee a monkey, or battle
savages, the books would show me how, complete with cunning
lithographed illustrations. If I wanted to stroll the Clarkestrasse in King
City, or even Easter parade down Fifth Avenue in Little Old New York, I
was shit out of luck. There seemed little point in lamenting this fact, and the
CC wasn't returning my calls, so I set to work. I explored the area for a
likely spot to use as a campsite. That night I slept under a canvas awning,
wrapped loosely in a length of flannel from the chest. It was a good thing,
too. It rained off and on most of the night. I felt oddly at peace, lying in the
moonlit darkness (there was a charming notion: Luna looked tiny and dim
compared to a full Earth) listening to the rain falling on the canvas. Perhaps
the simple pleasures are the best. For the next several weeks I worked very
hard. (I didn't seem bothered by the gravity, which was six times what I had
endured for a century. Even the fact that things fell much faster and harder
than I'd been used to all my life never bothered me. My reflexes had been
adjusted by the Almighty Landlord of this semi-conducting realm.) I spent
part of each day working on a shelter. The rest of the time I foraged. I
found good sources of bananas and breadfruit to add to my all-cocoanut diet.
I found mangos and guavas, many varieties of edible roots, tubers, leaves,
seeds. There were spices available to one equipped with the right book to
use in their identification. The little scuttling crabs proved easy enough to
catch, and were delicious boiled. I wove a net from vines and soon added
several varieties of fish to my bouillabaisse. I dug for clams. When the
shelter was completed I cleared a sunny spot for a vegetable garden and
planted some of the seeds I'd found in the trunk. I set snares, which
promptly trapped inedible small rodents, fearsome-looking reptiles, and an
unidentified bird I came to call a wild turkey. I made a bow and arrow, and
a spear, and managed to miss every animal I aimed at. Somewhere in there,
after about a month, I started my calendar: notches on a tree. I estimated
the time before that. Infrequently I wondered when the CC was going to
check up on me, or if I was in fact stranded here for the rest of my life. In
the spirit of exploration, one day I prepared a backpack and a straw hat
(most of me was burned dark brown by then, but the noonday sun was still
nothing to trifle with) and set out along the beach to determine the size of
my cage. In two weeks I circum-ambulated what did indeed prove to be an
island. Along the way I saw the remains of a ship washed up on a rocky part

of the shore, a week-old beached whale, and many other wondrous things.
But there had been no sign of human habitation. It seemed I was not to have
my Friday to discuss philosophy with. Not too upset by this discovery, I set
about repairing the depredations wild animals had worked on my shelter and
garden. After another few weeks I determined to scale the volcano that sat
in the center of the island, which I had named Mount Endew, for reasons
that must have seemed excellent at the time. I mean, a Jules Verne hero
would have climbed it, am I right? This proved to be a lot harder than
walking on the beach, and involved much swinging of the machete at
thatches of tropical vines, wading of swamps infested with flying insects and
leeches, and barking of shins on rocky outcroppings. But one day I came to
stand on the highest point in my domain and saw what I could not have seen
from sea level: that my island was shaped something like a boot. (It took
some imagination, I'll admit. One could just as well have seen the letter Y,
or a champagne class, or a squashed pair of copulating snakes. But Callie
would have been pleased at the boot, so I named the island Scarpa.) When I
returned to my camp I decided my traveling days were at an end. I had seen
other places I might have explored from my volcanic vantage point, but
there seemed no reason to do anything about them. I had spied no curls of
smoke, no roads, no airports or stone monuments or casinos or Italian
restaurants. Scarpa Island ran to swamps, rivers, jungles, and bogs. I'd had
quite enough of all of those; you couldn't get a decent drink in any of them.
I decided to devote my life to making life as easy and as comfortable as
possible, at least until the CC showed up. I felt no urge to write, either
journalism or my long-delayed novel, which seemed in memory at least as
awful as I had always feared it was. I felt very little urge for sex. My only
real drive seemed to be hunger, and it was easy enough to satisfy that. I
discovered two things about myself. First, I could get totally involved in and
wonderfully satisfied by the simplest of activities. Few of us today know the
pleasure of working in the soil with our own hands, of nurturing, harvesting,
and eating our own crops. I myself would have rejected the notion not long
before. But nothing tastes quite like a tomato you have just picked from
your own garden. Even rarer is the satisfaction of the hunt. I got rather
better with my bow and arrow (I never got good), and could lie in wait for
hours beside a watering hole, every sense tuned to the cautious approach of
one of the island's wild pigs. There was even satisfaction in pursuing a
wounded creature; the pigs could be dangerous when cornered, enraged by a
poorly-aimed arrow in the hams. I hesitate to say it in these peaceable times,
but even the killing thrust of the knife was something to take pride and
pleasure in. The second thing I learned was that, if there was nothing that

badly needed doing, I was capable of lying all day in my hammock tied
between two palm trees, watching the waves crash onto the reef, sipping
pineapple juice and home-distilled rum from a hollowed cocoanut shell. At
such times you could take your soul out into the fresh air, hang it out on the
line—so to speak—and examine it for tears and thin spots. I found quite a
few. I mended a couple, set the rest aside to talk over with the CC. Which I
even began to doubt was going to come at all. It got harder and harder to
remember a time before the island, a time when I had lived in a strange place
called Luna, where the air was metered and gravity was weak and
troglodytes hid under rocks, frightened of the vacuum and the sunlight.
There were times when I'd have given anything just for somebody to talk to.
Other times I had cravings for this or that item of food that Scarpa was
unable to provide me. If Satan had come along with a brontoburger, he
could have had my freshly-patched soul in trade cheap, and hold the onions.
But most of the time I didn't want people around. Most of the time I was
content with a wild turkey sizzling on the spit and a slice of mango for
dessert. The only real crab in my codpiece were the dreams that started to
plague my sleep about six months into my sojourn. At first I had them
infrequently and was able to shrug them off easily enough in the morning.
But soon I was having them every week, then every other day. Finally I was
being awakened every night, sometimes more than once. There were three
of them. Details varied, and many things about them were indistinct, but
each always ended in a horribly vivid scene, more real than reality—
assuming that word had any meaning for me anymore, dreaming my dreams
within a dream. In the first, blood was pouring from deep gashes in both my
wrists. I tried to stop the flow. It was no use. In the second, I was
consumed in flames. The fire didn't hurt, but in some ways this was the
most frightening of the three. In the last, I was falling. I fell for a long time,
looking up into the face of Andrew MacDonald. He was trying to tell me
something, and I strained to understand him, but before I could make any
sense of it I was always pulled up short—to wake up, bathed in sweat, lying
in my hammock. In the manner of dreams, I always had the sense there had
been much more to it that I could no longer remember, but there was that
last image right there in the front of my mind, obscuring everything else,
occupying my mind for most of my early morning hours. Then one day I
noticed by my rude calendar that I had been on the island for one year. I
suddenly knew the CC would appear to me that day. I had a lot of things to
talk to it about. I was seized by excitement and spent most of the day
tidying up, preparing for my first visitor. I looked on my works with
satisfaction; I'd done a pretty decent job of creating something out of the

wilderness. The CC would be proud of me. I climbed to the top of my
treehouse, where I had built a look-out tower (having an odd thought on the
way up: how and when had I built it, and why?), and sure enough, a boat
was approaching the island. I ran down the path to the beach. The day was
as close to dead calm as those waters ever got. Waves eased toward the
shore to slump onto the sand as if exhausted by their long trip from the
orient. A flock of gulls was sitting on the water, briefly disturbed by the
passage of the boat I had seen. It was made of wood. It looked like the kind
of boat whalers used to use, or the launch from a larger ship. Sitting in the
boat, back toward me, rowing at a strong steady pace, was an apparition. It
took me a moment to realize the strange shape of his head was actually a
rather unusual hat. It made a bell curve above his head. I watched him row
ashore. When he hit the beach he almost toppled from his seat, then stowed
the oars and stood, turning around to face me. It was an old gentleman in
the full uniform of an Admiral of the British Navy. He had a bull chest,
long, spindly legs, a craggy face and a shaggy head of white hair. He drew
himself up to his full height, looked at me, and said:
"Well? Are you going to help me beach this thing?"
And at that moment everything changed. I still am unable to fully
describe just how it changed. The beach was the same. The sunlight
streamed down just as it had before. The waves never missed a beat. My
heart continued to meter out the seconds of my life. But I knew something
fundamental and important was no longer as it had been before.
There are hundreds of words describing paranormal phenomena. I've
examined and considered most of them, and none fits what happened when
the Admiral spoke. There are many words for odd states of mind, for
moods, for emotions and things seen and not-seen, things glimpsed, things
incompletely understood or remembered, for degrees of memory. Things
that go bump in the night. None of them were adequate. We're going to
have to come up with some new words—which was precisely the CC's point
in letting me experience this.
I went into the water up to my knees and helped the old man pull the
boat onto the shore. It was quite heavy; we didn't get it far. He produced a
rope and tied the boat to a palm tree.
"I could use a drink," he said. "The whole point of this was so I could
have a drink with you. Like a human being."
I nodded, not trusting myself to speak yet. He followed me up the path
to my Robinson Family tree house, stood admiring it for a moment, and then

followed me up the stairs and onto the lower veranda. He paused to admire
the workmanship of my wheel-and-pulley waterworks, which used the
power of the nearby stream to provide me with drinking and washing water
high up in the tree. I showed him to my best rattan chair and went to the
sideboard, where I poured us both glasses of the very last of my best
whiskey. I paused to wind up the Victrola and put on one of my three
scratchy cylinders: The Blue Danube. Then I handed him his drink, took
mine, and sat down facing him.
"To indolence," he said, raising his glass.
"I'm too lazy to drink to that. To industry." We drank, and he looked
around again. I must have glowed with pride. It was quite a place, though I
say it myself. A lot of work and ingenuity had gone into it, from the densewoven mats on the floor, to the slate fireplace, to the tallow candles in
sconces arrayed around the walls. Stairs led off in two directions, to the
bedroom, and the crow's nest. My desk was open and cluttered with the
pages of the novel I'd recently resumed. I was bursting to tell him of the
difficulties I'd had producing usable paper and ink. Try it sometime, when
you've got a few spare months.
"It must have taken a lot of industry to produce all this," he said.
"A year's worth. As you know."
"Actually, three days short. You missed a few days, early on."
"Ah."
"Could happen to anybody."
"I don't suppose a few days more or less will matter. Back in the real
world, I mean."
"Ah. Yes. I mean, no, it shouldn't."
"Odd, how I never worried about things back there. Whether I still have
a job, for instance."
"Is it? Oh, yes, I suppose it is."
"I suppose you told Walter what was going on?"
"Well."
"I mean, you wouldn't just pull the whole rug out from under me, would
you? You knew I'd have to be going back to my old life, once we were done
. . . once we'd . . . well, done whatever the hell it is we've been doing here."

"Oh, no, of course not. I mean, of course you'll be going back."
"One thing I'm curious about. Where has my real body been all this
time?"
"Harrumph." Well, what he said was something like that. He glanced at
me, looked away, harrumphed again. I felt the first little scamperings of
doubt. It occurred to me that I had been taking a lot of things for granted.
One of them was that the CC had his reasons for subjecting me to this
tropical vacation, and that the reasons were ultimately beneficial to me. It
had seemed logical to think this at the time, since I in fact was benefiting
from it. Oh, sure, there were times when I had complained loudly to the
crabs and the turkeys, bemoaned hardships, lusted after this or that. But it
had been a healing time. Still, a year was a long time. What had been going
on in the real world in my absence?
"This is very difficult for me," the Admiral said. He removed his huge,
ridiculous hat and set it on the table beside him, then took a lace
handkerchief from his sleeve and mopped his forehead. He was balding
almost to the crown; his pink scalp looked as bright and polished as
tourmaline.
"Since I don't know what's bothering you, I can't really make it any
easier for you."
Still he didn't say anything. The silence was broken only by the neverending sounds of the island jungle and the splash of my water wheel.
"We could play twenty queries. 'Something's bothering you, Admiral.
Is it bigger than a logic circuit?'"
He sighed, and drained his whiskey. He looked up at me.
"You're still on the operating table at the studio."
If there was supposed to be a punch line, I couldn't see it coming. The
idea that what should have been a one or two-hour repair job should have
taken the better part of a year wasn't even worth considering. There had to
be more.
"Would you like another drink?"
He shook his head. "From the time you remember appearing on the
beach to the time I spoke my first words to you, seven ten-thousandths of a
second elapsed."
"That's ridiculous." Even as I said it, I realized the CC was not prone to

making ridiculous statements.
"I'm sure it must sound that way. I'd like to hear your reasons for
thinking otherwise."
I thought it over, and nodded. "All right. The human brain isn't like a
computer. It can't accept that much information that fast. I lived that year.
Every day of it. One of the things I recall most vividly is how long so many
of the days were, either because I was working hard or because I didn't have
anything to do. Life is like that. I don't know how you think, what your
perceptions of reality are like, but I know when a year's gone by. I've lived
for a hundred of them. A hundred and one, now." I sank back in my chair.
I hadn't realized I was getting so exercised about the matter.
He was nodding. "This will get a little complicated. Bear with me, I'll
have to lay some groundwork.
"First, you're right, your brain is organized in a different way than mine
is. In my brain, 'memory' is just stored data, things that have been recorded
and placed in the appropriate locations within the matrix of charge/nocharge devices I use for the purpose. The human brain is neither so logically
constructed nor organized. Your brain contains redundancies I neither have
nor need. Data is stored in it by repetition or emphasis, and retrieved by
associations, emotional linkages, sensory input, and other means that are still
not completely understood, even by me.
"At least, that used to be the case. But today, there are very few humans
whose brains have not been augmented in greater or smaller ways.
Basically, only those with religious scruples or other irrational reasons resist
the implantation of a wide variety of devices that owe their origin much
more to the binary computer than to the protoplasmic neuron. Some of these
devices are hybrids. Some are parallel processors. Some lean more toward
the biologic and are simply grown within and beside the existing neural
network, but using the laws of electric or optical transmission with their
correspondingly much higher speeds of propagation, rather than the slower
biochemical regime that governs your natural brain. Others are made
outside the body and implanted shortly after birth. All of them are
essentially interfaces, between the human brain and my brain. Without
them, modern medicine would be impossible. The benefits are so
overwhelming that the drawbacks are seldom thought of, much less
discussed."
He paused, lifting an eyebrow. I was chewing over quite a few thoughts
concerning drawbacks at that moment, but I decided not to speak. I was too

curious as to just where he was going with this. He nodded, and continued.
"As with so many other scientific advances, the machines in your body
were designed for one purpose, but turn out to have other, unforeseen
applications as well. Some of them are quite sinister. I assure you, you have
not experienced any of those."
"It seems sinister enough, if what you say is true."
"Oh, it's true. And it was done for a good reason, which I'll get to in my
own time."
"It seems that's something I now have an infinite supply of."
"You could, you could. Where was I? Oh, yes. These devices, most of
them originally designed and installed to monitor and control basic bodily
functions at the cellular level, or to augment learning and memory, among
other things, can be used to achieve some effects that were never envisioned
by the designers."
"And those designers are . . .?"
"Well, me, in large part."
"I just wanted a reality check. I do know a little about how you work,
and just how important you've become to civilization. I wanted to see what
sort of fool you took me for."
"Not that sort, at any rate. You're right. Most technology long ago
reached realms where new designs would be impossible without a great deal
of involvement by me, or a being a lot like me. Often the original impetus
for a new technology comes from a human dreamer—I have not usurped
that human function yet, though more and more of such advances as we see
in our surroundings are coming from me. But you've caused me to stray
again from the main point. And . . . do you have any more of that whiskey?"
I stared at him. The charade that a "man" was actually "sitting" in a
"chair" in my "treehouse" drinking my "whiskey" was getting a bit too much
for me. Or should it have been "me?" No matter what other hocus-pocus
the CC might have worked with my mind, I was completely aware that
everything I was experiencing at that moment was being fed directly into my
brain through that black magic known as Direct Interface. Which was
turning out to be even blacker than I, a notorious resister to D.I., could ever
have guessed. But for some reason of his own, the CC had decided to talk to
me in this way, after a lifetime of being a disembodied voice.
Come to think of it, I could already see one effect of this new face of the

CC. I was now thinking of the CC as "him," where before I'd always used
the neuter third person singular pronoun.
So I got up and re-filled his glass from a bottle nearly half-full. And
hadn't it been nearly empty the last time I'd poured?
"Quite right," the Admiral said. "I can re-fill that bottle as often as I
wish."
"Are you reading my mind?"
"Not as such. I'm reading your body language. The way you hesitated
when you lifted the bottle, the expression on your face as you thought it over
. . . Direct Interface, the nature of the un-reality we're inhabiting. Your 'real'
body did none of these things, of course. But interfacing with your mind, I
read the signals your brain sent to your body—which doesn't happen to be
hooked into the circuit at the moment. Do you see?"
"I think so. Does this have anything to do with why you've chosen to
communicate with me like this? In that body, I mean."
"Very good. You've only tried Direct Interface twice in your life, both
of them quite a long time ago, in terms of the technology. You weren't
impressed, and I don't blame you. It was much more primitive in those days.
But I communicate with most people visually now, as well as audially. It is
more economical; more can be said with fewer words. People tend to forget
just how much human communication is accomplished with no words at all."
"So you're here in that preposterous body to give me visual cues."
"Is it that bad? I wanted to wear the hat." He picked it up and looked at
it admiringly. "It's not strictly contemporary, if you must know. This world
is about at the level of 1880, 1890. The uniform is late eighteenth century.
Captain Bligh wore a hat a lot like this. It's called a cocked hat, specifically,
a bicorne."
"Which is a lot more than I ever needed to know about eighteenth
century British naval headgear."
"Sorry. The hat really has nothing to do with anything. But I'm curious.
Has my body language conveyed anything to you?"
I thought it over, and he was right. I had gleaned more nuances from
talking to him this way than I would have in the past, listening to his voice.
"You're nervous about something," I said. "I think maybe you're
worried . . . about how I'll react to what you've done to me. What an

astonishing thought."
"Perhaps, but accurate."
"I'm completely in your power. Why should anything worry you?"
He squirmed again, and took another sip of his drink.
"We'll get into that later. Right now, let's get back to my story."
"It's a story now, is it?"
He ignored me, and plowed ahead.
"What you have just experienced is a fairly recent capability of mine.
It's not advertised, and I hope you don't plan to do a story on it in the Nipple.
So far I've used it mostly on the insane. It's very effective on catatonics, for
instance. Someone sits there all day, unmoving, not speaking, lost in a
private world. I insert several years' worth of memories in a fraction of a
second. The subject then remembers wakening from a bad dream and going
about a comfortable, routine life for years."
"It sounds risky."
"They can't get any worse. The cure rate has been good. Sometimes
they can be left alone after that. There are subjects who have lived as many
as ten years after treatment, and not reverted. Other times counseling is
needed, to find the things that drove them to catatonia in the first place. A
certain percentage, of course, simply drift back into oblivion in weeks or
months. I'm not trying to tell you I've solved all the mysteries of the human
mind."
"You've solved enough of them to scare the hell out of me."
"Yes. I can understand your feelings. Most of the methods I use would
be far too technical for you to understand, but I think I can explain
something about the technique.
"First, you understand that I know you better than anyone in the
universe. Better than . . ."
I laughed. "Better than my mother? She's not even in the running.
Were you trying to think of another example? Don't bother. It's been a long
time since I was close to anyone. I was never very good at it."
"That's true. It's not that I've made a special study of you—at least, not
until lately. By the nature of my functions, I know everyone in Luna better
than anyone else. I've seen through their eyes, heard through their ears,
monitored their pulse and sweat glands and skin temperature and brain

waves and the churning of their stomachs and the irising of their eyes under
a wide variety of situations and stimuli. I know what enrages them and what
makes them happy. I can predict with reasonable certainty how they will
react in many common situations; more importantly, I know what would be
out of character for them.
"As a result, I can use this knowledge as the basis for something that
could be considered a fictional character. Call this character ParaHildy. I
write a scenario wherein ParaHildy is stranded on a desert island. I write it
in great detail, using all the human senses. I can abbreviate and abridge at
will. An example: you recall picking up a handful of sand and studying it.
It was a vivid image to you, one you would have remembered. If I'm wrong
about this, I'd like to hear about it."
As you might expect, I said nothing. I felt a cold chill. I can't say I
liked listening to this.
"I gave you that memory of sand grains. I constructed the picture with
almost infinite visual detail. I enhanced it with things you weren't even
aware of, to make it more lifelike: the grittiness of the grains, the smell of
the salt water, tiny sounds the grains made in your hand.
"The rest of the time, the sand was not nearly so detailed, because I
never caused ParaHildy to pick up a handful and look at it, and think about
looking at it. Do you see the distinction? When ParaHildy was walking
down the beach, he would notice sand clinging to his feet, in an absent sort
of way. Remember, Hildy, think back, recall yourself walking down the
beach, bring it back as vividly as you can."
I tried. In some way, I already saw most of what he was driving at. In
some way, I already believed that what he was saying was true.
Memory is a funny thing. It can't be as sharp as we'd sometimes like to
believe it is. If it was, it would be like an hallucination. We'd be seeing two
scenes at once. The closest mental pictures of things can get to real things is
in a dream state. Other than that, our memory pictures are always hazy to
one degree or another. There are different sorts of memories, good and bad,
clear and hazy, the almost-remembered, the thing you could never forget.
But memory serves to locate us in space and time. You remember what
happened to you yesterday, the previous year, when you were a child. You
remember quite clearly what you were doing one second ago: it usually
wasn't all that different from what you're doing now. The memories stretch
backward in time, defining the shape of your life: these events happened to
me, and this is what I saw and heard and felt. We move through space

continually comparing what we're seeing now to the maps and cast of
characters in our heads: I've been here before, I remember what's around
that corner, I can see what it looks like. I know this person. That person is a
stranger, his mug shot isn't in my files.
But now is always fundamentally different from the past.
I remembered walking many, many miles along that beach. I could
recall in great detail many scenes, many sounds and smells. But I had only
looked closely at a handful of sand once. That was embedded in my past. I
could get up now, if I wished, go to the beach, and do it again, but that was
now. I had no way of disproving what the CC was telling me. Those
memory pictures from the time the CC was saying never happened were just
as real to me as the hundred years that had gone before it. More real, in
some ways, because they were more recent.
"It seems like a lot of trouble," I said.
"I have a lot of capacity. But it's not quite as much trouble as you might
think. For instance, do you recall what you did forty-six days ago?"
"It seems unlikely. One day is pretty much like another here." I
realized I'd only bolstered his case by saying that.
"Try it. Try to think back. Yesterday, the day before . . . "
I did try. I got back two weeks, with great effort. Then I ran into the
muddle you might expect. Had it been Tuesday or Monday that I weeded
the garden? Or was it Sunday? No, Sunday I knew I had finished off the
last of a smoked ham, so it must have been . . .
It was impossible. Even if there had been more variety in my days, I
doubt I could have gone back more than a few months.
Was there something wrong with me? I didn't think so, and the CC
confirmed it. Sure, there were those with eidetic memory, who could
memorize long lists instantly. There were people who were better than I at
recalling the relatively unimportant details of life. As for my belief that a
recalled scene can never be as alive, as colorful, as sweeping as the present
moment . . . while I will concede that a trained visual artist might see things
in more detail than I, and recollect them better, I still maintain that nothing
can compare with the present moment, because it is where we all live.
"I can't do it," I admitted.
"It's not surprising, since forty-six days ago is one of several dozen days
I never bothered to write. I knew you would never notice it. You think you

lived those days, just as you think you lived all the others. But as time goes
by, the memory of the real and the imagined days grows dimmer, and it is
impossible to distinguish one from the other."
"But I remember . . . I remember thinking things. Deciding things,
making choices. Considering things."
"And why shouldn't you? I wrote that ParaHildy thought those things,
and I know how you think. As long as I stayed in character, you'd never
notice them."
"The funny thing is. . . . There were some things that were not in
character."
"You didn't get angry often enough."
"Exactly! Now that I think back, it's incredible that I'd just sit back and
wait for you for a year! That's not like me."
"Just as standing, walking, and talking is not normal behavior for a
catatonic. But by implanting a memory that he did stand, walk, and talk and
that he thought there was nothing unreasonable about doing those things, the
catatonic accepts that he indeed did react that way. The problem in that case
is that it was out of character, so many of them eventually remember they
were catatonic, and return to that state."
"Were there other things out of character?"
"A few. I'll leave them as an exercise for the student, for the most part.
You'll discover them as you think back over the experience in days to come.
There were some inconsistencies, as well. I'll tell you something about
them, just to further convince you and to show you just how complex this
business really is. For instance, it's a nice place you've got here."
"Thank you. It was a lot of work."
"It's a really nice place."
"Well, I'm proud of it, I . . ." Okay, I finally realized he was getting at
something. And my head was starting to hurt. I'd had a thought, earlier that
day . . . or was it part of the memories the CC alleged he had implanted in
me? I couldn't remember if I'd thought it before or after his arrival, which
just proves how easy it must have been for the CC to put this whole card
trick over on me.
It concerned the look-out tower.
I got up and walked to the stairs leading up to it. I pounded on the rail

with my fist. It was solidly built, as was everything else around me. It had
been a lot of work. It had been, damn it, I remembered building it. And it
had taken a very long time.
Why had I built it? I thought back. I tried to recall my reasons for
building it. I tried to recapture my thoughts as I labored on it. All I could
remember was the same thought I'd had so many times during the past year;
not a thought, really, but a feeling, of how rewarding it was to work with my
hands, of how good it all felt. I could still smell the wood shavings, see
them curl up under my plane, feel the sweat dripping from my brow. So I
remembered building it, and there it was, by golly.
But it didn't add up.
"There's too much stuff, isn't there?" I asked, quietly.
"Hildy, if Robinson Crusoe and his man Friday, and his wife Tuesday
and twin sons Saturday and Laborday had worked around the clock for five
years, they couldn't have done all the things you've done here."
He was right, of course. And how could that be? It only made sense if
it was as the CC claimed. He had written the entire story, dumped it into the
cyber-augmented parts of my brain where, at the speed of light, it was
transferred to the files of my organic brain, shuffled cunningly in with the
rest of my memories, the legitimate ones.
It would work, that was the devilish part. I had a hundred years of
memories in there. They defined who I was, what I thought, what I knew.
But how often did I refer to them? The great bulk of them stayed in dormant
storage most of the time, until I summoned them up. Once the false
memories were in there with the others, they functioned in the same way.
That picture of me holding the handful of sand had been in there only an
hour, but it was ready for me to recall—as having happened a year ago—as
soon as the CC jogged it loose with his words. Along with it had come a
flood of other memories of sand to be checked against this one, all
unconsciously: the pictures matched, so my brain sounded no alarms. The
memory was accepted as real.
I rubbed my temples. The whole thing was giving me a headache like
few I'd ever had.
"If you gave me a few minutes," I said, "I think I could come up with a
couple hundred reasons why this whole technology is the worst idea
anybody ever had."

"I could add several hundred of my own," the Admiral said. "But I do
have the technology. And it will be used. All new technologies are."
"You could forget it. Can't computers do that?"
"Theoretically. Computers can wipe data from memory, and it's like it
never existed. But the nature of my mind is that I will simply discover it
again. And losing it would involve losing so much else precursor
technology that I don't think you'd like the result."
"We're pretty dependent on machines in Luna, aren't we?"
"Indeed. But even if I wanted to forget it—which I don't—I'm not the
only planetary brain in the solar system. There are seven others, from
Mercury to Neptune, and I can't control their decision."
He fell into another of his long silences. I wasn't sure if I bought his
explanation. It was the first thing he'd said that didn't ring true. I accepted
by that time that my head was full of false memories—and I was back in
character, I was goddam angry about it, and about the fact that there was
absolutely nothing to be done. And it made sense that losing the new art
would effect many other things. Luna and the seven other human worlds
were the most technology-dependent societies humans had ever inhabited.
Before, if things collapsed, at least there was air to breathe. Nowhere in the
solar system did humans now live where the air was free. To "forget" how
to implant memories in the human brain the CC would no doubt have to
forget many other things. He would have to limit his abilities and, as he
pointed out, unless he decreased his intelligence deliberately to a point that
might endanger the very humans he was designed to protect, he would rechisel this particular wheel in due time. And it was also true that the CC of
Mars or Triton would certainly discover the techniques on their own, though
the rumor was none of the other planetary computers was so far evolved as
the Lunar CC. As nations which often found themselves in competition, the
Eight Worlds did not encourage a lot of intercourse between their central
cybernets.
So all the reasons he stated sounded reasonable. It was railroad time, so
somebody would build a choo-choo. But what didn't ring true was what the
CC had left out. He liked the new capability. He was as pleased as a child
with a new toy monorail.
"I have one further proof," the Admiral said. "It involves something I
mentioned earlier. Acts that were out of character. This is the biggest one,
and it involves you not noticing something that, if these memories had been

generated by you, you surely would have noticed. You would have spotted
it by now yourself, except I've kept your mind occupied. You haven't had
time to really think back to the operating table, and the time immediately
before that."
"It's not exactly fresh in my mind."
"Of course not. It feels as if it all happened a year ago."
"So what is it? What didn't I notice?"
"That you are female."
"Well, of course I'm—"
Words fail me again. How many degrees of surprise can there be?
Imagine the worst possible one, then square it, and you'll have some notion
of how surprised I was. Not when I looked reflexively down at my body,
which was, as the CC had said and I had known all along, female. No, the
real shock came when I thought back to that day in the Blind Pig. Because
that was the first moment in one year that I had realized I had been male
when I got in the fight. I had been male when I went on the operating table.
And I had been female when I appeared on the beach of Scarpa Island.
And I simply had never noticed it.
I had never in that entire year compared the body I was then inhabiting
with the one I had been wearing for the last thirty years. I had been a girl
before, and I was a girl now, and I never gave it a thought.
Which was completely ridiculous, of course. I mean, you would notice
such a thing. Long before you had to urinate, the difference would manifest
itself to you, there would be this still small voice telling you something was
missing. Perhaps it would not have been the first thing you'd notice as you
lifted you head from the sand, but it'd be high on the list.
It was not just out of character for me. It was out of character for any
human not to notice it. Therefore, my memories of not noticing it were false
memories, bowdlerized tales invented in the supercooled image processor of
the CC.
"You're really enjoying this, aren't you?" I said.
"I assure you, I'm not trying to torture you."
"Just humiliate me?"
"I'm sorry you feel that way. Perhaps when I—"

I started to laugh. I wasn't hysterical, though I thought I could slip into
hysteria easily enough. The Admiral frowned inquisitively at me.
"I just had a thought," I said. "Maybe that idiot at UniBio was right.
Maybe it is obsolete. I mean, how important can something be if you don't
notice it's gone for a whole year?"
"I told you, it wasn't you that didn't—"
"I know, I know. I understand it, as much as I'm ever going to, and I
accept it—not that you should have done it, but that you did it. So I guess
it's time for the big question."
I learned forward and stared at him.
"Why did you do it?"
I was getting a little tired of the CC's newly-acquired body language.
He went through such a ridiculous repertoire of squirms, coughs, facial tics
and half-completed gestures that I almost had to laugh. It was as if he'd
suddenly been overcome by an earlobe-tugging heel-thumping chin-ducking
shoulder-shrugging behind-scratching petit mal seizure. Guilt oozed off him
like a tangible slime. If I hadn't been so angry, the urge to comfort him
would have been almost overwhelming. But I managed to hang on to my
whelm and just stared at him until the mannerisms subsided.
"How about we take a walk?" he wheedled. "Down to the beach."
"Why don't you just take us there? Bring the bottle, too."
He shrugged, and made a gesture. We were on the beach. Our chairs
had come along with us, and the bottle, which he poured from and set in the
sand beside him. He gulped down the contents of his glass. I got up and
walked to the edge of the water, gazing out at the blue sea.
"I brought you here to try to save your life," he said, from behind me.
"The medicos seemed to have that in hand."
"The threat to you is much worse than any barroom brawl."
I went down on one knee and scooped up a handful of wet sand. I held
it close to my face and studied the individual grains. They were as perfect as
I had remembered them, no two alike.
"You've been having bad dreams," he went on.
"I thought it might have something to do with that."
"I didn't write the dreams. I recorded them over the last several months.

They were your dreams. In a manner of speaking."
I tossed the handful of sand aside, brushed my hand against my bare
thigh. I studied the hand. It was slender, smooth and girlish on the back, the
palm work-roughened, the nails irregular. Just as it had been for the last
year. It wasn't the hand I'd used to slug the Princess of Wales.
"You've tried to kill yourself four times."
I didn't turn around. I can't say I was happy to hear him say it. I can't
say I completely believed it. But I'd come to believe unlikelier things in the
last hour.
"The first attempt was by self-immolation."
"Why don't you just say burning?"
"I don't know. Have it your way. That one was pretty horrible, and
unsuccessful. At least, you would have survived it, even before modern
medical science, but in a great deal of pain. Part of the treatment for injuries
like yours is to remove the memory of the incident, with the patient's
permission.
"And I gave it."
There was a long pause.
"No," he said, almost in a whisper.
"That doesn't sound like me. I wouldn't cherish a memory like that."
"No. You probably would have. But I didn't ask you."
Finally I saw what had been making him so nervous. This was in clear
contradiction to his programming, to the instructions he was supposed to
follow, both by law and by what I had understood to be the limitations of his
design.
You learn something new every day.
"I enrolled you," he went on, "without your consent, into a program I've
set up over the last four years. The purpose of the program is to study the
causes of suicide, in the hope of finding ways to prevent it."
"Perhaps I should thank you."
"Not necessarily. It's possible, of course, but the action wasn't
undertaken with your benefit solely in mind. You got along well enough for
a time, showed no self-destructive impulses and few other symptoms other
than a persistent depression—normal enough for you, I might add. Then,

without any warning I could detect, you slashed your wrists in the privacy of
your apartment. You made no attempt to call for help."
"In the imagined privacy, apparently," I said. I thought back, and finally
turned to look at him. He was sitting on the edge of his chair, hands clasped,
elbows on knees. His shoulders were hunched, as if to receive a lash across
the back. "I think I can pinpoint that one. Was it when my handwriter
malfunctioned?"
"You damaged some of its circuitry."
"Go on."
"Attempt number three was shortly afterward. You tried to hang
yourself. Succeeded, actually, but you were observed this time by someone
else. After each of these attempts, I treated you with a simple drug that
removes memories of the last several hours. I gathered my data, returned
you to your life as if nothing had happened, and continued to observe you at
a level considerably above my normal functions. For instance, it is
forbidden for me to look into the private quarters of citizens without
probable cause of a crime being committed. I have violated that command
in your case, and that of some others."
We are a very free society, especially in comparison to most societies of
the past. Government is small and weak. Many of the instrumentalities of
oppression have been gradually given over to machines—to the Central
Computer—not without initial trepidation, and not without elaborate
safeguards. Things remain that way for the most persuasive of reasons: it
works. It has been well over a century since civil libertarians have objected
to much that has been proposed concerning the functions of the CC. Big
Brother is most definitely there, but only when we invite him in, and a
century of living with him has convinced us all that he really does love us,
that he really has only our best interests at heart. It's in his goddam wiring,
praise the lord.
Only it now seemed that it wasn't. A fundamentalist would have hardly
been more surprised than I if he heard, direct from Jesus, that the crucifixion
had been a cheap parlor trick.
"Number four was more easily seen as the classic cry for help. I
decided it was time for different measures."
"Are you talking about the fight in the Blind Pig?" I thought about it,
and almost laughed. Attacking Wales while she was in a drug-induced state
of no inhibitions might not be quite as certain as a rope around the neck, but

it was close.
I finished my drink and threw the empty glass toward the surf. I looked
around me, at this beautiful island where, until a moment ago, I had thought
I had spent such a lovely year. The island was still as beautiful as I
"remembered" it. Taking all things into account, I was happy to have the
memories. There was bitterness, naturally; who likes to be played such a
complete fool? But on the other hand, who can really complain of a year's
vacation on a deserted island paradise? What else did I have to do? The
answer to that was, apparently, suicide attempt number five. And had you
really been enjoying your life, your many and varied friendships, your
deeply fulfilling job and your myriad fascinating pastimes so very much?
Don't kid yourself, Hildy.
Still, even with all that . . .
"All right," I said, spreading my hands helplessly. "I will thank you.
For showing me this, and more important, for saving my life. I can't
imagine why I was so willing to throw it away."
The CC didn't reply. He just kept looking at me. I leaned forward,
resting my elbows on my knees.
"That's the thing, really. I can't imagine. You know me; I get
depressed. I have been since I was . . . oh, forty or fifty. Callie says I was a
moody child. I was probably a discontented fetus, lord love us, kicking out
at every little thing. I complain. I'm unhappy with the lack of purpose of
human life, or with the fact that so far I've been unable to discover a
purpose. I envy the Christians, the Bahais, the Zens and Zoro-astrians and
astrologers and Flackites because they have answers they believe in. Even if
they're the wrong answers, it must be comforting to believe in them. I
mourn the Dead Billions of the Invasion; seeing a good documentary about
it can move me to tears, just like a child. I'm generally pissed off at the
entirely sorry existential state of affairs of the universe, the human condition,
rampant injustice and unpunished crimes and unrewarded goodness, and the
way my mouth feels when I get up in the morning before I brush my teeth.
We're so goddam advanced, you'd think we'd have done something about
that by now, wouldn't you? Get on it; see what you can do. Humanity will
bless you.
"But by and large," and here I paused for effect, employing some of the
body language the CC had been at such pains to demonstrate and which it
would be pointless to describe, since my body was still lying on the
operating table, "by and large, I find life sweet. Not as sweet as it might be.

Not sweet all the time. Not as sweet as this." And I imagined myself
making a sweeping gesture with my arm to include the improbably lush,
conveniently provisioned, stormless, mildew/disease/fungus-free Eden the
CC had created for me. But I didn't make the gesture. It didn't matter; I was
sure the CC got it anyway.
"I'm not happy in my job. I don't have anyone that I love. I find my life
to be frequently boring. But is that any reason to kill myself? I went ninetynine years feeling much the same way, and I didn't cut my throat. And the
things I've just described would probably be true for a large portion of
humanity. I keep living for the same reasons I think so many of us do. I'm
curious about what happens next. What will tomorrow hold? Even if it's
much like yesterday, it's still worth finding out. My pleasures may not be as
many or as joyous as I'd wish them to be in a perfect world, but I accept that,
and it makes the times I do feel happy all the more treasured. Again, just to
be sure you understand me . . . I like life. Not all the time and not
completely, but enough to want to live it. And there's a third reason, too.
I'm afraid to die. I don't want to die. I suspect that nothing comes after life,
and that's too foreign a concept for me to accept. I don't want to experience
it. I don't want to go away, to cease. I'm important to me. Who would there
be to make unkind, snide comments to myself about everything in life if I
wasn't around to tackle the job? Who would appreciate my internal jokes?
"Do you understand what I'm saying? Am I getting through? I don't
want to die, I want to live! You tell me I've tried to kill myself four times. I
have no choice but to believe you . . . hell, I know I believe you. I'm
remembering the attempts, parts of them. But I don't remember why. And
that's what I want you to tell me. Why?"
"You act as if your self-destructive impulses are my fault."
I thought about that.
"Well, why not? If you're going to start acting like a God, maybe you
should shoulder some of God's responsibilities."
"That's silly, and you know it. The answer to your question is simply
that I don't know; it's what I'm trying to find out. You might have asked a
more pertinent question, though."
"You're going to ask it anyway, so go ahead."
"Why should I care?" When I said nothing, he went on. "Though you're
sometimes a lot of laughs, there are people funnier than you. You write a
good story, sometimes, though it's been a while since you did it frequently—

"
"Don't tell me you read that stuff?"
"I can't avoid it, since it's prepared in a part of my memory. You can't
imagine the amount of information I process each second. There is very
little of public discourse that does not pass through me sooner or later. Only
things that happen in private residences are closed off to my eyes and ears."
"And not even those, always."
He looked uncomfortable again, but waved it away.
"I admitted it, didn't I? At any rate, I love you, Hildy, but I have to tell
you I love all Lunarians, more or less equally; it's in my programming. My
purpose in life, if we can speak of such a lofty thing, is to keep all the people
comfortable, safe, and happy."
"And alive?"
"So far as I am permitted. But suicide is a civil right. If you elect to kill
yourself, I'm expressly forbidden to interfere, much as I might miss you."
"But you did. And you're about to tell me the reason."
"Yes. It's simpler than you might imagine, in one way. Over the last
century there has been a slow and steady increase in the suicide rate in Luna.
I'll give you the data later, if you want to study it. It has become the leading
cause of death. That's not surprising, considering how tough it is to die these
days. But the numbers have become alarming, and more than that, the
distribution of suicides, the demographics of them, are even more disturbing.
More and more I'm seeing people like you, who surprise me, because they
don't fit any pattern. They don't make gestures, abnormal complaints, or
seek help of any kind. One day they simply decide life is not worth it.
Some are so determined that they employ means certain to destroy their
brains—the bullet through the temple was the classic method of an earlier
age, but guns are hard to come by now, and these people must be more
creative. You aren't in that class. Though you were in situations where help
could not be expected to arrive, you chose methods where rescue was
theoretically possible. Only the fact that I was watching you—illegally—
saved your life."
"I wonder if I knew that. Subconsciously, maybe."
He looked surprised.
"Why would you say that?"

I shrugged. "CC, thinking it over, I realize that a lot of what you've just
told me ought to horrify and astonish me. Well . . . I'm horrified, but not as
much as I should be. And I'm hardly astonished at all. That makes me think
that, somewhere in the back of my mind, I was always aware of the
possibility that you weren't keeping your promise not to violate private
living spaces."
He paused a long time, frowning down at the sand. It was all show, of
course, part of his body language communication. He could consider any
proposition in nanoseconds. Maybe this one had taken him six or seven
instead of one.
"You may have something there," he said. "I'll have to look into it."
"So you're treating the suicide epidemic as a disease? And you're trying
to find a cure?"
"That was the justification I used to extend my limiting parameters,
which function something like a police force. I used my enabling circuits—
think of them as tricky lawyers—to argue for a limited research program,
using human subjects. Some of the reasoning was specious, I'll grant you,
but the threat is real: extrapolate the suicide rate into the future and, in a
hundred thousand years, the human race on Luna could be extinct."
"That's my idea of a crisis situation, all right."
He glared at me. "All right. So I could have watched the situation
another several centuries before making my move. I would have, too, and
you'd have been recycling through the ecosystems right now, possibly
fertilizing a cactus in your beloved Texas, except for another factor.
Something a lot more frightening in its implications."
"Extinction is pretty frightening. What could be worse?"
"Quicker extinction. I have to explain one more thing to you, and then
you'll have the problem in its entirety. I look forward to your thoughts on
the matter.
"I told you how parts of me extend into all but a few of the human
bodies and brains in Luna. How those parts were put there for only the best
of reasons, and how those parts—and other parts of me, elsewhere—evolved
into the capabilities and techniques I've just demonstrated to you. It would
be very difficult, probably impossible, for me to go back to the way things
were before and still remain the Central Computer as you know me."
"As we all know and love you," I said.

"As you know me and take me for granted. And though I'm even more
aware than you are of how these new capabilities can be abused, I think I've
done a pretty fair job in limiting myself in their use. I've used them for
good, as it were, rather than for evil."
"I'll accept that, until I know more."
"That's all I ask. Now, you and all but a handful of computer specialists
think of me as this disembodied voice. If you think further, you imagine a
hulking machine sitting somewhere, in some dark cavern most likely. If you
really put your mind to it, you realize that I am much more than that, that
every small temperature regulator, every security camera, every air fan and
water scrubber and slideway and tube car . . . that every machine in Luna is
in a sense a part of my body. That you live within me.
"What you hardly ever realize is that I live within you. My circuitry
extends into your bodies, and is linked to my mainframe so that no matter
where you go except some parts of the surface, I'm in contact with you. I
have evolved techniques to greatly extend my capacity by using parts of
your brains as . . . think of them as sub-routines. I can run programs using
both the metal and the organic circuitry of all the human brains in Luna,
without you even being aware it's being done. I do this all the time; I've
been doing it for a long time. If I were to stop doing it, I would no longer be
able to guarantee the health and safety of Lunarians, which is my prime
responsibility.
"And something has happened. I don't know the cause of it; that's why
you've been elected guinea pig, so I can try to discover the root causes of
despair, of depression—of suicide. I have to find out, Hildy, because I use
your brains as part of my own, and an increasing number of those brains are
electing to turn themselves off."
"So you're losing capacity? Is that it?" Even as I said it, I felt a tingling
at the back of my neck that told me it was a lot worse than that. The CC
immediately confirmed it.
"The birth rate is sufficient to replace the losses. It's even rising
slightly. That's not the problem. Maybe it's as simple as a virus of some
sort. Maybe I'll isolate it soon, counter-program, and have done with it.
Then you can do with yourself what you will.
"But something is leaking over from the realm of human despair, Hildy.
"The truth is, I'm getting depressed as hell."

CHAPTER SEVEN

Callie's foreman told me my mother was in a negotiating session with
the representative of the Dinosaur Soviet of the Chordates Union, Local 15.
I got directions, grabbed a lamp, and set off into the nighttime ranchland. I
had to talk to someone about my recent experiences. After careful
reflection, I had decided that, for all her shortcomings as a mother, Callie
was the person I knew most likely to offer some good advice. It had been a
century since anything had surprised Callie very much, and she could be
trusted to keep her own counsel.
And maybe, down deep, I just needed to talk it over with mommie.
It had been forty-eight hours since my return to what I was hopefully
regarding as reality. I'd spent them in seclusion at my shack in West Texas.

I got more work done on the cabin than during the previous four or five
months, and the work was of a much higher quality. It seemed the skills I
"remembered" learning on Scarpa Island were the real thing. And why
shouldn't they be? The CC had been seeking verisimilitude, and he'd done a
good job of it. If I chose to become a hermit in my favorite disneyland, I
could thrive there.
The return to real life was cleverly done.
The Admiral had taken his leave after dropping his bombshell, refusing
to answer any of my increasingly disturbed questions. He'd boarded his boat
without another word and rowed it over the horizon. And for a while, that
was it. The wind continued to blow, and the waves kept curling onto the
beach. I drank whiskey without getting drunk from a bottle that never
emptied, and thought about what he had said.
The first time I noticed a change was when the waves stopped. They
just froze in place, in mid-break, as it were. I walked out on the water,
which was warm and hard as concrete, and examined a wave. I don't think I
could have broken off a chip of foam with a hammer and chisel.
What happened over the next few minutes was an evolution. Things
happened behind my back, never in my sight. When I returned to my place
on the beach the machine with the oscilloscope screen was standing beside
my chair. It was wildly anachronistic, totally out of place. The sun shone
down on it and, while I watched, a seagull came and perched on it. The bird
flew away when I approached. The machine was mounted on casters, which
had sunk into the soft sand. I stared at the moving dot on the screen and
nothing happened. When I straightened and turned around I saw a row of
chairs about twenty meters down the beach, and sitting in them were
wounded extras from the movie infirmary, waiting their turns on the table.
The trouble was, there were no tables to be seen. It didn't seem to bother
them.
Once I understood the trick, I started slowly turning in a circle. New
things came into view with each turn until I was back in the infirmary
surrounded by objects and people, including Brenda and Wales, who were
looking at me with some concern.
"Are you all right?" Brenda asked. "The medico said you might behave
oddly for a few minutes."
"Was I turning in circles?"
"No, you were just standing there, looking a million miles away."

"I was interfacing," I said, and she nodded, as if that explained it all.
And I suppose it did, to her. Though she'd never been to Scarpa Island or
any place as completely real as that, she understood interfacing a lot better
than I did, having done it all her life. I decided not to ask her if she felt the
sand floor her feet seemed to be planted in; I knew it was unlikely. I
doubted she saw the seagulls that circled near the ceiling, either.
I felt a terrible urge to get out of there. Shaking off Wales' offer of
apologies and a drink, I headed for the studio gate. The sand didn't end until
I was back in the public corridors, where I finally stepped up onto good old
familiar floor tiles, soft and resilient under my bare feet. I was male again,
and this time noticed it right away. When I turned around, the sand that
should have been behind me was gone.
But on the way to Texas I saw many tropical plants growing from the
concrete floors, and I rode in a tube car festooned with vines and crawling
with land crabs. Usually you have to ingest a great deal of a very powerful
chemical to see scenes like that, I reflected, watching the crabs scuttle
around my feet. It wasn't something I was eager to do again soon.
And it took a full day for the new cocoanut palm I found shading my
half-built cabin to vanish in the night.
#
The lantern I carried didn't cast a lot of light. A bright light in the
darkness could upset the stock, so Callie provided her hands with these
antique devices which burned a smoky oil refined from reptilian fat. It was
enough to keep me from stumbling over tree roots, but not to see very far
ahead. And of course if you looked at the light, your night vision was
destroyed. I told myself not to look, then the cantankerous thing would
sputter and I'd glance at it, and stop in my tracks, blinded. So when I
encountered the first unusual tree trunk I didn't realize what it was, at first. I
touched it and felt the warmth, and knew I'd bumped into a brontosaur's hind
leg. I backed hastily away. The beasts are clumsy and inclined to stampede
if startled. And if you've ever been unpleasantly surprised by a package
from a passing pigeon in the city park, you don't want to find out what can
happen to you in the area of a brontosaur's hind leg, believe me. I speak
from bitter experience.
I picked my way through a forest of similar trunks until I spotted a small
campfire in a hollow. Three figures were seated around the fire, two side by
side, and another—Callie—across from them. I could dimly see the hulking
shadows of a dozen brontosaurs, darker shapes against the night, placidly

chewing their cuds and farting like foghorns. I approached the fire slowly,
not wanting to startle anybody, and still managed to surprise Callie, who
looked up in alarm, then patted the ground beside her. She held her finger to
her lips, then resumed her study of her adversaries, painted orange by the
dancing flames between us.
I've never decided if David Earth looked spookier in a setting like this,
or in the full light of day—for it was him, the Spokesmammal himself,
sitting in lotus position, a walking, talking inducement for the purchase of
hay fever remedies. Callie was actually allergic to the man, or to his
biosphere, and though a cure would have been simple and cheap she
cherished her malady, she treasured it, she happily endured every sneeze and
sniffle as one more reason to detest him. She'd hated him since before I was
born, and viewed his five-yearly appearances the same way people must
have felt about dental extractions before anesthetics.
He nodded to me, and I nodded back. That seemed conversation enough
for both of us. Callie and I didn't agree on a lot of things, but we shared the
same opinion of David Earth and all the Earthists.
He was a large man, almost as tall as Brenda and much heftier. His hair
was long, green, and unkept for a very good reason: it wasn't hair, but a
bioengineered species of grass bred to be parasitic on human skin. I don't
know the details of its cultivation. I'd have had more interest in the mating
habits of toads. It involved a thickening of the scalp, and soil was
involved—when he scratched his head, dirt showered down. But I don't
know how the soil was attached, whether in pockets or layered on the skin,
and I don't know anything about the blood-to-root system, and I'd just as
soon not, thank you. I remember as a child wondering if, when he got up in
the morning, he had to work compost into his agri-tonsorial splendor.
He had two huge breasts—almost all Earthists, male and female, sported
them—and more plants grew on their upper slopes. Many of these bore tiny
flowers or fruits. I wondered if he had to practice contour plowing to
prevent erosion on those fertile hillsides. He saw me looking at them,
plucked an apple no bigger than a grape from the tangled mass, and popped
it in his mouth.
What can one say about the rest of him? His back and arms and legs
were covered with hair. Not human hair, but actual pelts, resembling in
various patches jaguar, tiger, bison, zebra, and polar bear, among others, in a
crazy patchwork. The genetic re-structuring required to support all that must
have been a cut-and-paste collage beyond imagining. It was ironic, I

thought, that the roots of the Earthists were in the anti-fur activists, but of
course no animals had been harmed to produce his pelt. Just little bits of
their genes snipped out and shoehorned into his. He had claws like a bear on
his fingertips, and instead of feet he walked around on the hooves of a
moose, like some large economy-size faun. All Earthists had animal
attributes, it was their badge and ensign. But their founder had gone further
than any of his followers. Which, one suspects, is what makes followers and
leaders.
But, incredible as it may seem having gone through the catalog of his
offenses to the eye, it must be said that the first thing one noticed about
David Earth upon having the misfortune to encounter him was his smell.
I'm sure he bathed. Perhaps the right way of putting it was that he
watered himself regularly. David Earth during a drought would have been a
walking fire hazard. But he used no soap (animal by-product) or any other
cleaning preparation (chemical pollution of the David-sphere). All of which
would simply have resulted in a smell of sour sweat, which I don't care for
but can tolerate. No, it was his passengers that lifted his signature aroma
from the merely objectionable to the realm of the unimaginable.
Large animals with fur harbor fleas, that's axiomatic. Fleas were only
the beginning of David Earth's "welcome guests," as he'd once described
them to me. I'd countered with another term, parasites, and he'd merely
smiled benevolently. All his smiles were benevolent; he was that kind of
guy, the sort whose kindly face you'd like to rip off and feed to his welcome
guests. David was the kind of guy who had all the moral answers, and never
hesitated to point out the error of your ways. Lovingly, of course. He loved
all nature's creatures, did David, even one as low on the evolutionary ladder
as youself.
What sort of guests did David spread his filthy welcome mat for? Well,
what sort of vermin live in grasslands? I'd never seen a prairie dog peeking
from his coiffure, but I wouldn't have been surprised. He was home to a
scamper of mice, a shriek of shrews, a twittering of finches, and a circus of
fleas. A trained biologist could easily have counted a dozen species of
insects without even getting close. All these creatures were born, reared,
courted, mated, nested, ate, defecated, urinated, laid their eggs, fought their
battles, stalked their prey, dreamed their dreams and, as must we all,
eventually died in the various biomes that were David. Sometimes the
carcasses fell out; sometimes they didn't. All more fertile soil for the next
generation.

All Earthists stink; it goes with the territory. They are perennial
defendants in civil court for violation of the body odor laws, hauled in when
some long-suffering citizen on a crowded elevator finally decides he's had
enough. David Earth was the only man I knew of in Luna who was
permanently banished from the public corridors. He made his way from
ranch to disneyland to hydroponic farm by way of the air, water, and service
ducts.
"My membership is alarmed if that is your best offer," said David's
companion, a much smaller, much less prepossessing fellow whose only
animal attributes I could see were a modest pair of pronghorn antlers and a
lion's tail. "One hundred murders is nothing but wanton slaughter, and we
totally reject it. But after careful consultation, we're prepared to offer
eighty. With the greatest reluctance."
"Eighty harvested," Callie leaned on the word, as she always did.
"Eighty is simply ridiculous. I'll go broke with a quota of eighty. Come on,
let's go up to my office right now, I'll show you the books, there's an order of
seventy carcasses from McDonald's alone."
"That's your problem; you should never have signed the contract until
these negotiations were concluded."
"Don't sign the contract, I lose the customer. What do you want to do,
ruin me? Ninety-nine, that's my absolutely no-fooling final offer; take it or
leave it. I don't think I can turn a profit even with a hundred, it'll be touch
and go. But to get this over with . . . I'll tell you what. Ninety-eight. That's
twelve less than what you gave Reilly, just down the road, not three days
ago, and his herd's smaller than mine."
"We're not here to discuss Reilly, we're talking about your contract, and
your herd. And your herd is not a happy herd, I've heard nothing but
grievances from them. I simply can't allow one more murder than . . ." He
glanced at David, who shook his head barely enough to disturb a single
amber wave of grain. "Eighty," pronghorn-head concluded.
Callie seethed silently for a while. There was no hope of talking to her
just yet, not until the unionists repaired for consultations with their clients,
so I moved back from the fire a little. Something about the bargaining
process had struck me as relevant to my situation.
"CC," I whispered. "Are you there?"
"Where else would I be?" the CC murmured softly in my ear. "And you
only need to sub-vocalize; I'll pick up your words easily enough."

"How would I know where you'd be? When I called for you after you
rowed away from me, you didn't answer. I thought you might be sulking."
"I didn't think it would be profitable for either of us to discuss what I'd
just told you until you'd had time to think it over."
"I have, and I've got a few questions."
"I'll do my best to answer them."
"These union reps. Are they really speaking for the dinosaurs?"
There was a medium-sized pause. I guess the question did seem
irrelevant to the issue at hand. But the CC withheld comment on that.
"You grew up on this ranch. I'd have thought you would know the
answer to that question."
"No, that's just it. I've never really thought about it. You know Callie's
feelings about animal rights. She told me the Earthists were nothing but a
bunch of mystics who had enough political clout to get their crazy ideas put
into law. She said she had never believed they actually communed with the
animals. I believed her, and I haven't thought about it for seventy, eighty
years. But after what I've just been through, I wonder if she's right."
"She's mostly wrong," the CC said. "That animals feel things is easily
demonstrable, even down at the level of protozoans. That they have what
you would recognize as thoughts is more debatable. But since I am a party
to these negotiations—an indispensable party, I might add—I can tell you
that, yes, these creatures are capable of expressing desires and responding to
propositions, so long as they are expressed in terms they understand."
"How?"
"Well . . . the contract that will eventually be hammered out here is
entirely a human instrument. These beasts will never be aware of its
existence. Since their 'language' is confined to a few dozen trumpeted calls,
it is quite beyond their capacity. But the provisions of the contract will be
arrived at by a give-and-take process not unlike human collective
bargaining. Callie has injected all her stock with a solution of water and
some trillions of self-replicating nano-engineered biotropic mechanisms
that—"
"Nanobots."
"Yes, that's the popular term."
"You have something against popular terms?"

"Only their imprecision. The term 'nanobot' means a very small selfpropelled programmed machine, and that includes many other varieties of
intracellular devices than the ones currently under discussion. The ones in
your bloodstream and within your body cells are quite different—"
"Okay, I see what you mean. But it's the same principle, right? These
little robots, smaller than red blood cells . . ."
"Some are much smaller than that. They are drawn to specific sites
within an organism and then they go to work. Some carry raw materials,
some carry blueprints, some are the actual construction workers. Working at
molecular speeds, they build various larger machines—and by larger, you
understand, I still mean microscopic, in most cases—in the interstices
between the body cells, or within the cell walls themselves."
"Which are used for . . ."
"I think I see where you're going with this. They perform many
functions. Some are housekeeping chores that your own body is either not
good at, or has lost the capacity to do. Others are monitoring devices that
alert a larger, outside system that something is going wrong. In Callie's
herd, that is a Mark III Husbander, a fairly basic computer, not significantly
altered in design for well over a century."
"Which is a part of you, naturally."
"All computers in Luna except abaci and your fingers are a part of me.
And in a pinch, I could use your fingers."
"As you've just shown me."
"Yes. The machine . . . or I, if you prefer, listens constantly through a
network of receivers placed around the ranch, just as I listen constantly for
your calls to me, no matter where you are in Luna. This is all on what you
might think of as my subconscious level. I'm never aware of the functioning
of your body unless I'm alerted by an alarm, or if you call me on-line."
"So the network of machines that's in my body, there's one like it in each
of Callie's brontosaurs."
"Related to it, yes. The neural structures are orders of magnitude less
evolved than the ones in your brain, just as your organic brain is superior in
operation to that of the dinosaur. I don't run any parasitic programs in the
dinosaur brain, if that's what you mean."
I didn't think it was what I meant, but I wasn't completely sure, since I
wasn't completely sure why I'd asked about this in the first place. But I

didn't tell the CC that. He went on.
"It is as close to mental telepathy as we're likely to get. The union
representatives are tuned into me, and I'm tuned into the dinosaurs. The
negotiator poses a question: 'How do you fellows feel about 120 of your
number being harvested/murdered this year?' I put the question in terms of
predators. A picture of an approaching tyrannosaur. I get a fear response:
'Sorry, we'd rather not, thank you.' I relay it to the unionist, who tells Callie
the figure is not acceptable. The unionist proposes another number, in
tonight's case, sixty. Callie can't accept that. She'd go broke, there would be
no one to feed the stock. I convey this idea to the dinosaurs with feelings of
hunger, thirst, sickness. They don't like this either. Callie proposes 110
creatures taken. I show them a smaller tyrannosaur approaching, with some
of the herd escaping. They don't respond quite so strongly with the fear and
flight reflex, which I translate as 'Well, for the good of the herd, we might
see our way clear to losing seventy so the rest can grow fat.' I put the
proposal to Callie, who claims the Earthists are bleeding her white, and so
on."
"Sounds totally useless to me," I said, with only half my mind on what
the CC had been saying. I was seeing a vision of myself living within the
planet-girdling machine that the CC had become, and of him living within
my body as well. The funny thing was that nothing I'd learned since arriving
at Scarpa Island had been exactly new to me. There were new, unheralded
capabilities, but looking at them, I could see they were inherent in the
technology. I'd had the facts, but not enough of them. I'd spent almost no
time thinking about them, any more than I thought about breathing, and even
less time considering the implications, most of which I didn't like. I realized
the CC was talking again.
"I don't see why you should say that. Except that I know your moral
stand on the whole issue of animal husbandry, and you have a right to that."
"No, that whole issue aside, I could have told you how this all would
come out, given only the opening bid. David proposed sixty, right?"
"After the opening statement about murdering any of these creatures at
all, and his formal demand that all—"
"'—creatures should live a life free from the predation of man, the most
voracious and merciless predator of all,' yeah, I've heard the speech, and
David and Callie both know it's just a formality, like singing the planetary
anthem. When they got down to cases, he said sixty. Man, he must really
be angry about something, sixty is ridiculous. Anyway, when she heard

sixty, Callie bid 120 because she knew she had to slaughter ninety this year
to make a reasonable profit, and when David heard that he knew they'd
eventually settle on ninety. So tell me this: why bother to consult the
dinosaurs? Who cares what they think?"
The CC was silent, and I laughed.
"Tell the truth. You make up the images of meat-eaters and the feelings
of starvation. I presume that when the fear of one balances out the fear of
the other, when these poor dumb beasts are equally frightened by lousy
alternatives—in your judgement, let's remember . . . well, then we have a
contract, right? So where would you conjecture that point will be found?"
"Ninety carcasses," the CC said.
"I rest my case."
"You have a point. But I actually do transmit the feelings of the animals
to the human representatives. They do feel the fear, and can judge as well as
I when a balance is reached."
"Say what you will. Me, I'm convinced the jerk with the horns could
have as easily stayed in bed, signed a contract for ninety kills, and saved a
lot of effort. Then prong-head could look for useful work. Maybe as a
gardener in David's hair-do."
There was a long silence from the CC. When he spoke again it was in a
different tone of voice from his usual lecturing mode.
"The man with the horns," he said, quietly, "is actually mentally
defective in a way I've been powerless to treat. He cannot read or write, and
is not really suited for many jobs. And Hildy, we all need something to do
in this world. Life can seem pointless without gratifying work."
That shut me up for a while. I knew only too well how pointless life
could seem.
"And he really does love animals," the CC added. "He hurts when he
thinks of one dying. I shouldn't be telling you any of this, as I'm prohibited
from commenting on the qualities, good or bad, of human citizens. But in
view of our recent relationship, I thought . . ." He let it trail off, unfinished.
Enough of that.
"What about death?" I asked him. "You mentioned hunger and the
image of a predator. I'd think you'd get a stronger reaction if you planted the
idea of their actual deaths in their minds."

"Much more of a reaction than you'd want. Predators and hunger imply
death, but inspire less fear than the actual event. These negotiations are
quite touchy; I've tried many times to talk Callie into holding them indoors.
But she says that if 'salad-head' isn't afraid to pow-wow in the middle of the
herd, she isn't either. No, the death-image is the nuclear weapon of
predator/prey relations. It's usually a prelude to either an attempt at unionbusting, or a boycott."
"Or something even more serious."
"So I infer. Of course, I have no proof."
I wondered about that. Maybe the CC was leveling with me when he
said he only spied into private spaces in circumstances as unusual as my
own. Or into minds, for that matter. I certainly no longer doubted that he
could easily become aware of illegal activities such as sabotage or headbusting by hired goon squads—the time-honored last resorts of labor and
management, and even more in vogue these days among radical groups like
the Earthists who, after all, couldn't call on their "membership" to go on
strike. What would a brontosaur do? Stop eating? The CC could certainly
look into the places where the bombs were assembled, or could become
aware, if he chose to do so, of the intent of the bomb-thrower through
readings from his ubiquitous intercellular machines. Every year there were
calls to permit him precisely those powers, by the law-and-order types.
After all, the CC is a benevolent watchdog, isn't he? Who has he ever hurt,
except those who deserved it? We could reduce crime to zero overnight if
we'd only take the chains off the CC.
I'd even leaned that way myself, in spite of the civil libertarian
objections. After my sojourn on Scarpa Island, I found myself heartily on
the other side of the question. I suppose I was simply illustrating that old
definition of a liberal: a conservative that just got arrested. A conservative,
of course, is a liberal who just got mugged.
"You are cynical about this process," the CC was saying, "because
you've only seen it from the commercial side, and between humans and
creatures with a very basic brain structure. It is much more interesting when
the negotiations are conducted between higher mammals. There have been
some interesting developments in Kenya, where lion/antelope arbitration has
been going on for five decades now. The lions, in particular, have become
quite adept at it. By now they know how to chose the most skilled
representative, a sort of shop steward, using the same instincts that drive
them to dominance battles. I really believe they've grasped the concept that

there must be lean hunting times, that if all the antelope were killed they
would get nothing but commercially prepared chow—which they like well
enough, but is no substitute for the hunt. There is one grizzled old veteran
without any teeth who, year after year, gives the antelope as hard a time at
the bargaining fire as he ever did on the savannah in his youth. He's a sort of
Samuel Gompers of the—"
I was spared any more details of this leonine Lenin's exploits by David
Earth, who finally bestirred himself. He got to his feet, and pronghead stood
hastily, destroying the polite myth that he had anything to do with the
proceedings. David seldom attended contract talks with individual ranchers
anymore, he was too occupied with appearances promoting his Earthist
philosophy to the voters. On television, of course; there would be no
quicker way to disperse a political rally than to have David walk into it.
"I think we really have a problem," he said, in his Jovian voice. "The
innocent creatures we represent have too long chafed under your yoke.
Their grievances are many and . . . well, grievous."
If David had a weakness, that was it. He wasn't the world's greatest
speaker. I think he grew worse every year, as language became more of a
philosophical burden to him. One of the planks of his platform—when the
millennium was achieved—was the abolition of language. He wanted us all
to sing like the birdies sing.
"To name only one," he boomed on, "you are one of only three
murderers of dinosaurs who—"
"Ranchers," Callie said.
"—who persist in using the brontosaur's natural enemy as a means of
instilling terror into—"
"Herding," Callie gritted. "And no t-saur of mine has ever so much as
put a scratch on a stinking b-saur."
"If you persist in interrupting me, we'll never get anywhere," David said,
with a loving smile.
"No one will stand there are call me a murderer on my own land. There
are courts of libel, and you're about to get dragged into one."
They regarded each other across the fire, knowing that ninety-nine
percent of threats and accusations made here were simply wind, tossed out to
gain an advantage or disconcert an opponent—and hating each other so
thoroughly that I never knew when one would put a threat into action.

Callie's face reflected her opinions. David merely smiled, as if to say he
loved Callie dearly, but I knew him better than that. He hated her so much
that he inflicted himself on her every five years, and I can think of little
more cruel than that.
"We must seek closer communion with our friends," David said,
abruptly, and turned and walked away from the fire, leaving his minion to
trail along ignominiously behind him.
Callie sighed when he vanished into the darkness. She stood up,
stretched, boxed the air, getting the kinks out. Bargaining is tough on the
whole mind and body, but the best thing to bring to the table is a tough
bottom. Callie rubbed hers, and leaned over the cooler she had brought with
her. She tossed me a can of beer, got one for herself, and sat on the cooler.
"It's good to see you," she said. "We didn't get a chance to talk the last
time you were here." She frowned, remembering. "Come to think of it, you
took off without any warning. We got to my office, you were gone. What
happened?"
"A lot of things, Callie. That's what I came here for, to . . . to talk them
over with you, if I could. See if you could offer me some advice."
She looked at me suspiciously. Well, she was in a suspicious frame of
mind, I understand that, dealing with the intransigent union. But it went
deeper. We had never managed to talk very well. It was a depressing
thought to realize, once again, that when I had something important to share
with someone, she was the best that sprang to mind. I thought about getting
up and leaving right then. I know I hesitated, because Callie did what she
had so often done when I'd tried to talk to her as a child: she changed the
subject.
"That Brenda, she's a much nicer child than you give her credit for. We
had a long talk after we found out you'd left. Do you have any idea how
much she looks up to you?"
"Some idea. Callie, I—"
"She's putting herself through a history course that would stagger you,
all so she can keep up when you talk about 'ancient history.' I think it's
hopeless. Some things you have to live through to really understand. I
know about the twenty-first century because I was there. The twentieth
century, or the nineteenth can't ever seem as real to me, though I've read a
great deal about them."

"Sometimes I don't think last month seems real to Brenda."
"That's where you're wrong. She knows her recent history a lot better
than you'd think, and I'm talking about things that happened fifty, a hundred
years before she was born. We sat around and talked . . . well, mostly I told
her stories, I guess. She seemed fascinated." She smiled at the memory. It
didn't surprise me that Brenda had found favor with Callie. There are few
qualities my mother values more in a human being than a willing ear.
"I don't have much contact with young people. Like I was telling her,
we move in different social circles. I can't stand their music and they think
I'm a walking fossil. But after a few hours she started opening up to me. It
was almost like having . . . well, a daughter."
She glanced at me, then took a long drink of beer. She realized she had
gone too far.
Normally, a remark like that would have been the start of the seventy
zillionth repeat of our most popular argument. That night, I was willing to
let it slide. I had much more important things on my mind. When I didn't
rise to it, she must have finally realized how troubled I was, because she
leaned forward with her elbows on her knees and looked at me.
"Tell me about it," she said, and I did.
#
But not all of it.
I told her of my fight in the Blind Pig, and of my conversation with the
CC that led to the pseudo-experiences still so fresh in my mind. I told her
the CC had explained it as a cure for depression, which it was, in a way. But
I found it impossible to come right out and tell her that I'd tried to kill
myself. Is there a more embarrassing admission one can make? Maybe
some people would think nothing of it, would eagerly show off what the
experts called hesitation marks—scars on the wrist, bullet holes in the
ceiling; I'd been doing a little reading on the subject while sequestered in
Texas. If suicide really is a cry for help, it would seem reasonable to be
open and honest in revealing that one had attempted it, in order to get some
sympathy, some advice, some commiseration, maybe just a hug.
Or some pity.
Am I simply too proud? I didn't think so. I searched through my
motives as well as I was able, and couldn't discern any need for pity, which
is what I'd surely get from Callie. Perhaps that meant my attempts had

actually been motivated by depression, by a desire simply to live no longer.
And that was a depressing thought in itself.
I eventually wound down, leaving my story with a rather obvious lack of
resolution. I'm sure Callie spotted it right away, but she said nothing for a
while. I know the whole thing was almost as difficult for her as it was for
me. Intimacy didn't seem to run in the family. I felt better about her than I
had in years, just for having listened to me as long as she had.
She reached behind the cooler and brought out a can of something
which she poured on the fire. It flared up immediately. She looked at me,
and grinned.
"Rendered b-saur fat," she said. "Great for barbecues; gets the fire
blazing real quick. I've used it on the meeting fires for eighty years. One of
these days when he provokes me enough, I'll tell David about it. I'm sure
he'll love me in spite of it. Will you toss some more of those logs on the
fire? Right behind you, there's a pile of them."
I did, and we sat watching them blaze.
"You're not telling me something," she said, at last. "If you don't want
to, that's your business. But you're the one who wanted to talk."
"I know, I know. It's just very hard for me. There have been a lot of
things going on, a lot of new things I've learned."
"I didn't know about that memory-dump technique," she said. "I
wouldn't have thought the CC could do that without your permission." She
didn't sound alarmed about it. Like practically all Lunarians, she viewed the
CC as a useful and very intelligent slave. She would concede, along with
everyone else, that it was a being devoted to helping her in every possible
way. But that's where she parted company with her fellow citizens, who
also thought of the CC as the least intrusive and most benevolent form of
government ever devised.
The CC hadn't mentioned it, but his means of access to the Double-C
Bar Ranch was limited. This was no accident. Callie had deliberately set up
her electronics such that she could function independent of the CC if the
need should arise. All communication had to come through a single cable to
her Mark III Husbander, which really ran the ranch. The link was further
laundered through a series of gadgets supplied by some of her similarly
paranoid friends, designed to filter out the subversive virus, the time bomb,
and the Chinese Fire Drill—all forms of computer witchery I know nothing
about apart from their names.

It was wildly inefficient. I also suspected it was futile; the CC was in
here, talking to me, wasn't he? Because that was the real reason for all the
barriers, for the electronic drawbridge Callie could theoretically raise and
lower at will, for the photo-etched moat she hoped to fill with cybernetic
crocodiles and the molten glitches she meant to dump into invading
programs. She claimed to be able to isolate her castle with the flick of one
switch. Bang! and the CC would be cut adrift from its moorings to the
larger datanet known as the Central Computer.
Silly, isn't it? Well, I'd always thought so, until the CC took control of
my own mind. Callie had always thought that way, and while she was in the
minority, she wasn't alone. Walter agreed with her, and a few other chronic
malcontents like the Heinleiners.
I was about to go on with my tale of woe, but Callie put her finger to her
lips.
"It'll have to wait a bit," she said. "The Kaiser of the Chordates is
returning."
#
Callie immediately went into a sneezing fit. David's already avuncular
expression became so benign it bordered on the ludicrous. He was enjoying
it, no doubt about it. He seated himself and waited while Callie fumbled
through her purse and found a nasal spray. When she had dosed herself and
blown her nose, he smiled lovingly.
"I'm afraid your offer of ninety-eight murders is—" He held up his hand
as Callie started to retort. "Very well. Ninety-eight creatures killed is
simply unacceptable. After further consultation, and hearing grievances that
have astounded me—and you well know I'm an old hand at this business . .
."
"Ninety-seven," Callie said.
"Sixty," David countered.
Callie seemed to doubt for a moment that she had heard him right. The
word hung in the air between them, with at least as much incendiary
potential as the fire.
"You started at sixty," Callie said, quietly.
"And I've just returned us there."
"What's going on here? This isn't how it's done, and you know it.

There's no love lost between us, to put it mildly, but I've always been able to
do business with you. There are certain accepted practices, certain
understandings that if they don't have the force of law, they certainly enjoy
the stamp of custom. Everyone recognizes that. It's called 'good faith,' and I
don't think you're practicing it here tonight."
"There will be no more business as usual," David intoned. "You asked
what's going on, and I'll tell you. My party has grown steadily in strength
throughout this decade. Tomorrow I'm making a major speech in which I
will outline new quotas which, over a twenty-year period, are intended to
phase out the consumption of animal flesh entirely. It is insane, in this day
and age, to continue a primitive, unhealthy practice which demeans us all.
Killing and eating our fellow creatures is nothing but cannibalism. We can
no longer allow it, and call ourselves civilized."
I was impressed. He hadn't stumbled over a single word, which must
have meant he'd written and memorized it. We were getting a preview of
tomorrow's big show.
"Shut up," Callie said.
"Countless scientific studies have proved that the eating of meat—"
"Shut up," Callie said again, not raising her voice, but putting something
else into it that was a lot more powerful than shouting. "You are on my
land, and you will shut up, or I will personally boot your raggedy old ass all
the way to the airlock and cycle you through it."
"You have no right to—"
Callie threw her beer in his face. She just tossed it right through the fire,
then threw the empty can over her shoulder into the darkness. For a moment
his face froze into an expression as blank as I've ever seen on a human; it
made my skin crawl. Then he relaxed back into his usual attitude, that of the
wise old sage bemused by the squabbles of an imperfect world, looking
down on it with god-like love.
A mouse peeked out of the weeds of his beard to see what all the
commotion was about. It sampled one of the beer droplets, found it good,
and began imbibing at a rate it might regret in the morning.
"I've squatted out here beside this damn fire for over thirty hours,"
Callie said. "I'm not complaining about that; it's a cost of doing business,
and I'm used to it. But I am a busy woman. If you'd told me about this
when we sat down, if you'd had the courtesy to do that, I could have kicked

sand into the fire and told you I'd see you in court. Because that's where
we're going, and I'll have an injunction slapped on you before that beer can
dry. The Labor Relations Board will have something to say, too." She
spread her hands in an eloquent Italianate gesture. "I guess we have nothing
further to talk about."
"It's wrong," David said. "It's also unhealthy, and . . ."
While he was groping for a word to describe a horror so huge, Callie
jumped back in.
"Unhealthy, that's one I never could understand. Brontosaurus meat is
the healthiest single food product ever developed. I ought to know; I helped
build the genes back when both of us were young. It's low in cholesterol,
high in vitamins and minerals . . ." She stopped, and looked curiously at
David.
"What's the use?" she asked herself. "I can't figure it out. I've disliked
you from the first time we met. I think you are plainly crazy, egotistic, and
dishonest. All that 'love' crap. I think you live in a fantasy world where
nobody should ever get hurt. But one thing I've never accused you of, and
that's stupidity. And now you're doing something stupid, as if you really
think you can bring it off. Surely you realize this thing can't work?" She
looked concerned as she stared at him. Almost as if she wished she could
help him.
Nothing could be more certain to light a fire under David, but I honestly
don't think Callie meant to provoke him. By her lights he really was
planning to commit political suicide if he intended to keep Lunarians from
their bronto meat, not to mention all other forms of flesh. And she never did
understand foolishness in other human beings.
He leaned forward, opened his mouth to begin another prepared tirade,
but he never got the chance. What I think happened, and the tapes back me
up on this, is some of the fresh logs shifted. One of them fell into a pool of
the brontosaur fat Callie had poured on, a pool that had been burning on the
surface and getting hotter by the minute. The sudden addition of hot coals
caused the fat to pop, like it will in a skillet. There was a shower of sparks
and all four of us were spattered by tiny droplets of boiling, burning grease
that clung like napalm. Since they were mostly quite small, there were just a
few sharp pains on my arms and my face, and I quickly slapped them out.
Callie and the man with the horns were slapping at themselves as well.
David had a somewhat larger problem.

"He's on fire!" prong-head shouted. And it was true. The top of his
grass-covered head was burning merrily. David himself wasn't aware of it
yet, and looked around in confusion, then stared up with a surprised
expression I would always remember, even if it hadn't been shown a
hundred times on the news.
"I need some water," he said, brushing at the flames and hastily drawing
his hand back. He seemed calm enough.
"Here, wait a minute," Callie shouted, and turned toward the beverage
cooler. I think she meant to douse him with more beer, and I thought in
passing how ironic it was that her throwing the first beer may have saved
him having to buy a new face because it had soaked the grass of his beard.
"Mario, get him on the ground, try and smother it."
I didn't comment on her use of my old name. It didn't seem the proper
time for it. I started around the fire, reached for David, and he shoved me
away. It was purely a panic reaction. I think it had started to hurt by then.
"Water! Where is the water?"
"I saw a stream over that way," said prong-head. David looked wildly
around. He had become a sinking ship: I saw three voles, a garter snake,
and a pair of finches burst from their hiding places, and the fleeing insects
were too numerous to count. Some flew directly into the campfire. David
behaved no better. He started running in the direction his assistant had
pointed, which Mister Fireman could have told him was exactly the wrong
thing to do. Either he hadn't paid attention in kindergarten or he'd lost all
rational thought. Seeing how brightly he lit up the night, I figured it was the
latter.
"No! David, come back!" Callie had turned from the cooler, having
ripped the top from a can of beer. "There's no water that way!" She threw
the can after him, but it fell short. David was setting Olympic records in his
sprint for the stream that wasn't there. "Mario! Catch him!"
I didn't think I could, but I had to try. He'd be easy to follow, unless he
burned to the ground. I took off, pounding the dirt with my feet, thanking
the generations of brontosaurs who had packed it so hard. David had run
into a grove of cycadoids and I was just getting to the edge of them when I
heard Callie shout again.
"Come back! Hurry, Mario, come back!" I slowed almost to a stop, and
became aware of a disturbing sensation. The ground was shaking. I looked
back at the campfire. Callie was standing looking out into the darkness.

She'd turned on a powerful hand torch and was sweeping it back and forth.
The beam caught a brontosaur in full charge. It stopped, blinded and
confused, and then picked a direction at random and rumbled away.
An eighty-ton shadow thundered by, not three meters to my right. I
started moving back to the campfire, scanning the darkness, aware I
wouldn't get much warning. Halfway there, another behemoth thundered
into the council site. It actually stepped in the fire, which wasn't to its liking
at all. It squealed, wheeled, and took off more or less toward me. I watched
it coming, figured it would keep moving that way unless stopped by a major
mountain chain, and dodged to my left. The beast kept going and was
swallowed by the night.
I knew enough about b-saurs to know not to expect rational behavior
from them. They were already upset by the negotiations. Images of t-saurs
and feelings of starvation must have addled their tiny brains considerably. It
would have taken a lot less stimulus than a burning, screaming David Earth
to stampede them. He must have hit them like a stick of dynamite. And
when b-saurs panic, what little sense they possess deserts them completely.
They start off in random directions. There seems to be an instinct that tends
to draw them into a thundering group, eventually headed in the same
direction, but they don't see well at night, and thus couldn't easily find each
other. The result was seventy or eighty walking mountains going off in all
directions. Very little could stand in their way.
Certainly not me. I hurried to Callie's side. She was talking into a
pocket communicator, calling for hovercraft as she stabbed the powerful
light beam this way and that. Usually it was enough to turn the beasts.
When it was not, we stepped very lively indeed.
Before long she picked out a medium-sized cow headed more or less in
our direction, and turned the beam away from it. She slapped a saur-hook
into my hand, and we watched it approach.
Where's the safest place to be in a dinosaur stampede? On a dinosaur's
back. Actually, the best place would have been on one of the hovercraft,
whose lights we could see approaching, but you take what you can get. We
waited for the hind legs to get past us, dug our hooks into the cow's tail, and
swung ourselves up. A dinosaur doesn't precisely like being hooked, but her
perceptions of pain that far back on her body are dim and diffused, and this
one had other things on her tiny mind. We scrambled up the tail until we
could get a grip on the fleshy folds of the back. Don't try this at home, by
the way. Callie was an old hand at it, and though I hadn't hooked a saur in

seventy years, the skills were still there. I only wobbled for a moment, and
Callie was there to steady me.
So we rode, and waited. In due time the bronto wore herself out,
rumbled to a stop, and started cropping leaves from the top of a cycad,
probably wondering by now what all the fuss had been about, if she
remembered it at all. We climbed down, were met by a hover, and got into
that.
#
Callie had the "sun" turned on to aid the search. We found prong-head
fairly quickly. He was kneeling in a muddy spot, shaking uncontrollably.
He had survived with nothing but luck to aid him. I wondered if he ever
loved animals quite so much, or in quite the same way, after that night.
Say what you will about Callie, her worries for the lad were genuine,
and her relief at finding him alive and unhurt was apparent even to him, in
his distracted condition. For that matter, though David Earth might call her
a cold-blooded killer, she hadn't wished death even on him. She simply
measured human life and animal life on different scales, something David
could never do.
"Let's get him out of here and find David," she said, and grabbed the
young man by his arm. "He's going to need a lot of medical attention, if he
made it." Prong-head resisted, pulling away from her grasp, remaining on
his knees. He pointed down into the mud. I looked, and then looked away.
"David has returned to the food-chain," he said, and fainted.

CHAPTER EIGHT

The next several days were fairly hectic for me. I was kept so busy I
had little time to think or worry about the CC or entertain thoughts of
suicide. The whole idea seemed completely alien.
Since I work for a print medium I tend not to think in terms of pictures.
My stories are meant to be written, transmitted to a subscriber-rented
scrambler-equipped newspad, where they will be screened and read by that
part of the population that still reads. Walter employs others to shorten,
simplify, and read aloud his reporters' stories for the illit channel of the
newspad. There are of course all-visual news services, and now there is
direct interface, but so far at least, D.I. is not something most people do for
relaxation and entertainment. Reading is still the preferred method of
information input for a large minority of Lunarians. It is slower than D.I.,
but much quicker and in much greater depth than pure television news.
But the News Nipple is an electronic medium, and many of the stories
we run come with film clips. Thus did the newspaper manage to find a
government-subsidized, yearly more perilous niche for itself in the era of
television. Pundits keep predicting the death of the newspad, and year by
year it struggles on, maintained mostly by people who don't want too much
change in their lives.
I tend to forget about the holocam in my left eye. Its contents are
dumped at the same time I enter my story into the Nipple's editorial
computer, and a picture editor usually fast-forwards through it and picks a

still shot or a few seconds of moving images to back up my words. I
remember when it was first installed I worried that those editors would be
seeing things that I'd prefer to be private; after all, the thing operates all the
time, and has a six-hour memory. But the CC had assured me there was a
discrimination program in the main computer that erased all the irrelevant
pictures before a human ever saw them. (Now it occurred to me to wonder
about that. It had never bothered me that the CC might see the full tapes, but
I'd never thought of him as a snoop before.)
The holocam is a partly mechanical, partly biologic device about the
size of a fingernail clipping that is implanted inside the eye, way over to one
side, out of the way of your peripheral vision. A semi-silvered mirror is
hung in the middle of the eye, somewhere near the focal point, and reflects
part of the light entering the eye over to the holocam. When you first have
one put in you notice a slight diminution of light sensitivity in that eye, but
the brain is such that it quickly adjusts and in a few days you never notice it
again. It causes my pupil to look red, and it glows faintly in the dark.
It had been operating when David Earth caught fire, naturally. I didn't
even think of it during subsequent events, not until David's body had been
removed and taken to wherever Earthists are disposed of. Then I realized I
had what might be the biggest story of my career. And a scoop, as well.
Real death captured by a camera is always guaranteed to make the front
feed of the newspad. The death of a celebrity would provide fodder for
Walter's second-string feature writers for months to come; anything to have
an excuse to run once more that glorious, horrible image of David's head
wreathed in fire, and the even more horrifying results of being crushed
beneath a stampeding brontosaur.
News footage is exclusive to the paper that filmed it for a period of
twenty-four hours. After that, there is a similar period when it may be
leased for minutes or hours, or sold outright. After forty-eight hours it all
becomes public domain.
A major metropolitan newspaper is geared to exploit these two critical
periods to the utmost. For the first day, when we could exploit my film
exclusively, we made the death of Earth seem like the biggest story since the
marriage of Silvio and Marina twenty-five years ago, or their divorce one
year later, or the Invasion of the Planet Earth, take your pick. Those are
commonly thought to be the three biggest news stories of all time, the only
real difference in their magnitude being that two of them were well-covered,
and one was not. This story was nowhere near that big, of course, but you'd

never have known it to read our breathless prose and listen to our frantic
commentators.
I was the center of much of this coverage. There was no question of
sleeping. Since I'm not an on-screen personality—which means I'm an
indifferent speaker, and the camera does not love me—I spent most of the
time sitting across from our star anchor and answering his questions. Most
of this was fed out live, and often took as much as fifteen minutes at the top
of each hour. For the next fifteen minutes we showed the reports sent back
by the cadres of camerapeople who descended on Callie's ranch and shot
everything from pictures of the killer dinosaur's bloody foot, to the corpses
of the three b-saurs killed in the stampede, to the still-vivid imprint of
David's body in the mud, to interviews with every ranch hand who'd ever
worked for Callie, even though none of them had seen anything but the dead
body.
I thought Walter was going to explode when he learned that Callie
refused to be interviewed under any circumstances or for any amount of
money. He sent me to the ranch to cajole her. I went, knowing it would do
no good. He threatened to have her arrested; in his rage, he seemed to
believe that refusing to cooperate with the media—and with him in
particular—was illegal. For her part, Callie made several nasty calls
demanding that we stop using her image, and someone had to read her the
relevant parts of the law that said she couldn't do anything about it. She rang
me up and called me a Judas, among other things. I don't know what she
expected me to do with the biggest story of my life; sit on it, I guess. I
called her a few things back, just as harsh. I think she was concerned about
her possible liability in the incident, but the main reason was her loathing for
the popular press—something I couldn't entirely disagree with her on. I
have wondered, from time to time, if that's why I got into this business.
Nasty thought, that.
Anyway, I decided it would be pointless to seek her advice on the parts
of my story I hadn't gotten around to telling her, for at least a year or so.
Make that five years.
The next day was spent farming the story out to competing rags and
vids, but on our terms. The price was high, but willingly paid. They knew
that next time they were as likely to be on the selling end, and would gouge
appropriately. As was standard practice, I was always included as part of the
deal, so I could mention the Nipple as often and as blatantly as possible
while on live feeds. So I talked myself into a sore throat sitting beside

endless commentators, columnists, and similar sorts, while the by now dated
footage ran yet another time.
The only person who got as much exposure as I did during those two
days was Eartha Lowe. A movement as radical as the Earthists will spawn
splinter groups like a sow whelps piglets. It's a law of nature. Eartha was
the leader of the largest one, also called the Earthists, purely to give
headaches to poor newspapermen, I'm convinced. Some of us distinguished
them as Earthist(David) and Earthist(Lowe), others tried the abomination of
Eartha-ists. Most of us simply called them the Earthists and the Other
Earthists, something guaranteed to provoke a wailing woodnote wild from
Eartha, because there was no need to explain who the "Others" were.
David had died politically intestate. There was no heir apparent in his
organization. Increasingly, people were not planning for their own deaths,
because they simply didn't expect to die. Perhaps that explains the mordant
fascination with violent images in popular entertainment and the clamor for
more details about real deaths when they occur. We haven't achieved
immortality yet. Maybe we never will. People are reassured to see death as
something that happens to somebody else, and not often at that.
Eartha Lowe was standing on every soapbox that would support her notinconsiderable weight, welcoming the strays back into the fold. In her
version, it was David who had split away. Who cared that he had taken
ninety percent of the flock with him? We were told that Eartha had always
loved David (no surprise; they had both professed to love every living
creature, though David had loved Eartha more on the level of, say, a
nematode or a virus, not so much as the family dog) and Eartha had returned
his affection in spades. I couldn't follow all the doctrinal differences. The
big one seemed to be Eartha's contention that any proper Earthist should be
in the female image, to be a mirror of Mother Earth. Or something like that.
All in all, it was the goldarndest, Barnum-and-Baileyest, rib-stickinest,
rough-and-tumblest infernal foofaraw of a media circus anybody had seen
since grandpaw chased the possum down the road and lost his store teeth,
and I was heartily sorry to have been a part of it.
When the two-day purgatory was over, I collapsed into my bed for
twelve hours. When I woke up, I gave some thought once more to getting
out of the business. Was it a root cause of my self-destructive tendencies?
One would have to think that hating what I did might contribute to feelings
of worthlessness, and thus to thoughts of ending it all. I tabled the matter for
the moment. I have to admit that though I may feel disdain for the things we

do and the manner in which we do them, there is a heady thrill to the news
business when things are really happening. Not that exciting things happen
all that often, even in my line of work. Most news is of the not-muchhappened-today variety, tricked up in various sexy lies. But when it does
happen, it's exhilarating. And there's an even guiltier pleasure in being
where things are happening, in being the first to know something. About the
only other line of work where you can get as close to the center of things is
politics, and even I draw the line at that. I have some standards left.
Talking to Callie had been a bust, advice-wise if not career-wise. But in
searching for sources of dissatisfaction one thing had grown increasingly
clear to me. I was wearing my body like a badly fitted pair of trousers, the
kind that bind you in the crotch. A year as a female, ersatz though the
experience had been, had shown me it was time for a Change. Past time,
probably by several years.
Could that have been the fountain of my discontent? Could it have been
a contributing factor? Doubtful, and possibly. Even if it had nothing to do
with it, it wouldn't hurt to go ahead and get it done, so I could be
comfortable again. Hell, it was no big deal.
#
When the terribly, terribly fashionable decide the old genitals are getting
to be rather a bore, don't you know, they phone the chauffeur and have the
old bones driven down to Change Alley.
Normally, when it came time for a Change, I would hie me to some
small neighborhood operation. They are all board-certified, after all, one
just as able as another to do the necessary nipping and tucking. A
confluence of circumstances this time decided me to visit the street where
the elite meet. One was that my pockets were bulging with the shekels
Walter had showered on me in the form of bonuses for the Burning Earth
story. The other was that I knew Darling Bobbie when he was just Robert
Darling of Crazy Bob's Budget Barbering and Tattoo Parlor, back when he
did sex changes as a sideline to bring in more money. He'd had a little shop
on the Leystrasse, a determinedly working-class commercial corridor with a
third of the shopfronts boarded up and plastered with handbills, running
through one of the less fashionable neighborhoods of King City. He'd been
sandwiched between a bordello and a taco stand, and his sign had read
"Finast Gender Alteration On The Leystrasse—E-Z Credit Terms." None of
which was news to anyone: his was the only Change shop in the area, and
you couldn't offer so expensive a service around there without being

prepared to finance. Not that he did a lot of it. Laborers can't afford
frequent sex changes and, as a group, are not that inclined to question
Mother Nature's toss of the dice, much less flit back and forth from one sex
to the other. He did much better with the tattooing, which was cheap and
appealed to his clientele. He told me he had regulars who had their entire
bodies done every few weeks.
That had been over twenty-five years ago, when I had my last previous
sex change. In that time, Crazy Bob had come up in the world. He had
invented some body frill or other—I can't even recall what it was now, these
things come and go so quickly they make mayflies seem elderly—that was
"discovered" by slumming socialites. He was elevated overnight into the
new guru of secondary sexual attributes. Fashion writers now attended his
openings and wrote knowingly about the new season's whimsy. Body
styling would probably never be as big or influential as the rag trade, but a
few practitioners to the hi-thrust set had carved themselves a niche in the
world of fashion.
And Crazy Bob had spent the last ten years trying to make people forget
about the little cock shop next door to the Jalapen~o Heaven.
Change Alley is a ridiculous name for the place, but it does branch off
of the five-kilometer gulch of glitz known as Hadleyplatz. For fifty years
the Platz, as everyone knew it, had been the inheritor of such places as
Saville Row, Fifth Avenue, Kimberly Road, and Chimki Prospekt. It was
the place to go if you were looking for solid gold toenail clippers, not so
great for annual white sales. They didn't offer credit on the Platz, E-Z or
otherwise. If the door didn't have your gencode in its memory banks along
with an up-to-the-millisecond analysis of your pocketbook, it simply didn't
open for you. There were no painted signs to be seen, and almost no
holosigns. Advertising on the Platz ran to small logos in the bottom corners
of plate glass windows, or brilliantly-buffed gold plaques mounted at eye
level.
The Alley branched away from the main promenade at a sharp angle and
dead-ended about a hundred meters later in a cluster of exclusive restaurants.
Along the way were a handful of small storefronts operated by the handful
of very tasteful hucksters who could persuade their clientele to part with ten
times the going rate for a body make-over so they could have "Body By Soand-so" engraved on the nail of their pinky finger.
There were holosigns in the Alley shops, showing each designer's ideas
of what the fashionable man or woman was being these days. The

tastemongers back on the main drag liked to say the Alley was off the Platz,
but not of the Platz. Still, it was all a far cry from the tattoo templates filling
the windows of the Budget Barber.
I wondered if I ought to go in. I wondered if I could go in. Bob and I
had been drinking buddies for a while, but we'd lost contact after his move.
I pressed my hand to the identiplate, felt the tiny pressure as a probe scraped
away a minuscule amount of dead skin. The machine seemed to hesitate;
perhaps I'd be sent around to the tradesmen's entrance. Then it swung open.
There should have been a flourish of trumpets, I thought, but that would
have been too demonstrative for the Alley.
"Hildy! Enchanting, enchanting old boy. So good to see you." He had
come out of some concealed back room and covered the distance to me in
three long strides. He pumped my hand enthusiastically, looking me up and
down and adopting a dubious air. "Good heavens, am I responsible for that?
You came just in time, my friend. Not a moment too soon. But don't worry,
I can fix it, cousin Bobbie will take care of everything. Just put yourself in
my hands."
I suddenly wondered if I wanted to be in his hands. I thought he was
laying it on a trifle thick, but it had been a while since I'd seen him, and I'm
sure he had appearances to maintain. The gushing, the mincing, all were
nods toward tradition, something practiced by many in his line of work, just
as lawyers tried to develop a sober facade suitable for the weighty matters
they dealt in. Back before Changing, the fashion world had been dominated
by homosexual men. Sexuality being as complicated as it is, with hundreds
of identified orientations—not to mention ULTRA-Tingle—it was
impossible to know much about anyone else's preferences without talking it
over and spelling it out. Bob, or perhaps I should say Darling, was heterooriented, male born and male leaning, which meant that, left to his own
choice, would be male most of the time with occasional excursions into a
female body, and no matter his current sex would prefer the company of the
opposite.
But his profession almost demanded that he Change four or five times a
year, just as the rag merchants had better wear their own designs. Today he
was male, and didn't look any different from when I had know him. At least
he didn't at first. When I looked more closely, I saw there were a thousand
subtle alterations, none of them radical enough so his friends wouldn't
recognize him on the street.
"You don't have to take the blame," I told him, as he took my elbow and

guided me toward something he called a "Counseling Suite." "Maybe you
don't remember, but I brought in all the specs myself. You never had a
chance to practice your craft."
"I remember it quite well, dear boy, and perhaps it was the will of Allah.
I was still learning my art,—please heed the stress on the word, Hildy—and
I probably would have made a botch of it. But I do recall being quite cross."
"No, Darling, in those days you didn't get cross, you got pissed-off."
He made a weird sort of smirk, acknowledging the jibe but not letting
the tinkerbell mask slip a millimeter. I glanced around the suite, and had to
stifle a laugh. This was girl heaven. The walls were mirrors, creating a
crowd of Hildys and Bobbies. Most everything else was pink, and had lace
on it. The lace had lace on it. It was fabulously overdone, but I liked it. I
was in the mood for this sort of thing. I sank gratefully into a pink and white
lacy settee and felt the anxiety wash away from me. This had been a good
idea after all.
A female assistant or whatever entered with a silver bucket of
champagne on ice, set it up near me, poured some into a tall glass. It was a
measure of my alienation from my current somatotype that I watched these
operations with complete disinterest. A week before . . . well, before Scarpa
Island, however that interval should be measured, I would have been
attracted to the woman. Just at the moment I was effectively neuter. Robert
didn't interest me either. Actually, he probably wouldn't interest me after the
change, simply because he was not my "type," a word simply dripping with
meaning in the age of gender selection.
Like my host, I am hetero oriented. Which is not to say I have never
engaged in sex with a partner of my current sex; hasn't everybody? Can
anyone remain truly heteroist when they have been both male and female? I
suppose anything's possible, but I've never encountered it. What I find is
that sex for me is always better when there is a man and a woman involved.
Twice in my life I have met people I wanted to become more deeply
attached to when both of us were of the same sex. In both cases, one of us
Changed.
I don't know how to explain it. I don't believe anyone can really explain
reasons behind their sexual preferences, unless they're based on prejudice:
i.e., this or that practice is unnatural, against God's law, perverted,
disgusting, and so forth. There's still some of that around, a bit of it in Bob's
old neighborhood, in fact, where he twice had windows smashed and once
had truly repulsive Christian slogans painted over his sign. But sexual

preference seems to be something that happens to you, not something you
elect. The fact is, when I'm a boy I'm intensely interested in girls, and have
little or no interest in other boys, and vice versa when I'm a girl. I have
friends who are precisely the opposite, who are homo-oriented in both sexes.
So be it. I know people who cover the whole spectrum between these two
positions, from the dedicated males and females, homo and hetero, to the
pan-sexuals who only require you to be warm and would be willing to
overlook it if you weren't, to the dysfunctionals who aren't happy in either
sex, to the true neuters, who identify with neither sex, have all external and
internal attributes removed and are quite glad to be shut of the whole
confusing, inconvenient, superfluous, messy business.
As to type, neither Robert or Darling was mine. When female, I'm not
as much concerned with physical beauty in a partner as when I'm male,
though it's only a matter of degree, since when beauty can be purchased at
will it becomes a rather common and quite unremarkable quality. Rob/Bob's
lanky Ichabod Cranish physique and long narrow physysiognomy didn't set
my girlish heart to beating, but that wouldn't put me off if the personality
traits compensated. They didn't. He was fine as a buddy, but as a lover he
would be entirely too needy. He had insecurities science has not yet found a
name for.
"Did we remember to bring our little specs with us, Hildy?" he asked. I
had, and handed them to him. He leafed through the pages quickly, sniffed,
but not in a judgmental way, just as if to say he couldn't be bothered with the
technicalities. He handed the genetic specifications to his aide, and clapped
his hands. "Now, let's flutter out of those charming togs, can't create
without a bare bodkin, chop, chop." I stripped and he took the clothing,
looking as though he wished for sterilized forceps. "Where did you find
these things. Why, it's been years . . . we'll of course have them cleaned and
folded."
"I found them in my closet, and you can donate them to the poor."
"Hildy, I don't think there is anyone that poor."
"Then throw them away."
"Oh, thank you." He handed the clothing to the woman, who left the
room with them. "That was a truly humanitarian gesture, old friend, an act
that shows a great deal of caring for the fashion environment."
"If you're grateful," I said, "then you could stop spreading the pixie dust.
We're alone now. This is me, Darling."

He looked around conspiratorially. All I saw were thousands upon
thousands of Hildy's and a like number of whoever he was. He sat in a chair
facing me and relaxed a little.
"How about you call me Bobbie? It's not quite so pretentious as
Darling, and not so dreadful and reminiscent as Robert. And to tell you the
truth, Hildy, I'm finding it harder every day to drop the pose. I'm beginning
to wonder if it is a pose. I haven't got pissed off in years, but I get cross
practically all the time. And there's a big difference, as you reminded me."
"We all pose, Bobbie. Maybe the old pose wasn't the proper one for
you."
"I'm still hetero, if you were wondering."
"I wasn't, but I'd be astonished if you weren't. Polarity switches are
pretty rare, according to what I've read."
"They happen. There's precious little I don't see in this business. So
how have you been? Still writing trash?"
Before I could answer he started off on the first of a series of tangents.
He thanked me effusively for the good coverage he'd always had from the
Nipple. He must have been aware that I didn't work on the fashion page, but
maybe he thought I'd put in a good word for him. Seeing as how he was
about to design a new body for me, I saw no reason to disillusion him.
There were many more things discussed, many glasses of champagne
put away, some aromatic and mildly intoxicating smokes inhaled. It all kept
coming back to Topic A: when were "they" going to discover he was a
fraud?
I was conversant with that feeling myself. It's common to people who
are good at something they have no particular love for. In fact, it's common
among all but the most self-assured—say, Callie, for instance. Robbie had a
bad case of it, and I could hardly blame him. Not that I thought him an utter
charlatan. I don't have much of an eye for such things, but from what I
gathered he actually was quite talented. But in the world he inhabited, talent
often had very little to do with anything. Taste is fickle. In the world of
design, you're only as good as your last season. The back alleys and
taprooms of Bedrock are strewn with the still-breathing corpses of people
who used to be somebody. Some of them had shops right here in the Alley.
After a while I began to be a little alarmed. I knew Robbie, and I knew
he would always be this way, frightened that the success he'd never really

adjusted to because he'd never understood where it came from would be
snatched away from him. That's just the way he was. But from the amount
of time he seemed willing to spend with me, he was either in deep trouble or
I should feel extremely flattered. I'd counted on having ten or fifteen
minutes with The Master while he penciled in the broad strokes, then turned
me over to aides to do the actual design work. Didn't he have more
important clients waiting somewhere?
"Saw you on telly," he said, after winding down from his increasingly
tiresome lament. "With that dreadful . . . what's her name? I forget. More
on that incredibly boring David Earth story. I'm afraid I switched off. I
don't care if I never hear his name again."
"I felt that way three hours into the first day. But you were fascinated
for at least twenty-four hours, you couldn't get enough news about it."
"Sorry to disappoint you. It was boring."
"I doubt it. Think back to when you first read about it. You were dying
to hear more. It was boring later, after you'd seen the film three or four
times."
He frowned, then nodded. "You're right. My eyes were glued to the
newspad. How did you know?"
"It's true of almost everybody. You in particular. If everyone's talking
about something, you can't afford not to have an opinion, a snide comment, a
worldly sigh . . . something. To not have heard of it would be unthinkable."
"We're in the same business, aren't we?"
"We're cousins, anyway. Maybe the difference is, in my business we
can afford to run something into the ground. We use up news. By the time
we're through with it, there is nothing quite so boring as what fascinated you
twenty-four hours ago. Then we move on to the next sensation."
"Whereas I must always watch for that magic moment a few seconds
before something becomes as pass as your taste in clothing."
"Exactly."
He sighed. "It's wearing me down, Hildy."
"I don't envy you—except for the money."
"Which I am investing most sensibly. No hi-thrust vacations to the
Uranian moons for me. No summer homes on Mercury. Strictly blue chips.
I'm not going to ever have to scrape for my air money. What I wonder is,

will the hunger for lost acclaim emaciate my soul?" He raised an eyebrow
and gave me a jaundiced look. "I assume those specs you gave Kiki outline
a plan as stodgy as what you're currently walking around in?"
"Why would you assume that? Would I come here if I wanted
something I could get in any local barber shop? I want Body By Bobbie."
"But I thought . . ."
"That was female to male. The reverse is a whore of a different color."
#
I decided to make a note to myself. Send flowers to the fashion editor
of the Nipple. There was no other way to account for the royal treatment
Bobbie lavished on me during the next four hours. Oh, sure, my money was
as good as anyone else's, and I didn't want to think too hard about the bill for
all this. But neither friendship nor idleness could explain Bobbie's behavior.
I concluded he was looking for a good review.
Can you call something a quirk when you share it was a large minority
of your fellow citizens? I'm not sure, but perhaps it is. I've never
understood the roots of this peculiarity, any more than I understand why I
don't care to go to bed with men when I am a man. But the fact is, as a man
I am fairly indifferent to how I look and dress. Clean and neat, sure, and
ugly is something I can certainly do without. But fashions don't concern me.
My wardrobe consists of the sort of thing Bobbie threw away when I
arrived, or worse. I usually put on shorts, a comfortable shirt, soft shoes, a
purse: standard men's wear, suitable for all but formal occasions. I don't
pay much attention to colors or cut. I ignore make-up completely and use
only the blandest of scents. When I'm feeling festive I might put on a
colorful skirt, more of a sarong, really, and never fret about the hemline.
But most of what I wear wouldn't have raised eyebrows if I had gone back in
time and walked the streets in the years before sex changing.
The fact is, I feel that while a woman can wear just about anything,
there are whole categories of clothing a man looks silly in.
Case in point: the body-length, form-fitting gown, the kind that reaches
down to the ankles, maybe with a slit up one side to the knee. Put it on a
man's body and the penis will produce a flaw in the smooth line unless it is
strapped down tight—and the whole point of wearing something like that, to
my mind, is to feel slinky, not bound up. That particular garment was
designed to show the lines of a woman's body, curves instead of angles.
Another is the plunging neckline, both the sort that conceal and the kind that

push up and display the breasts. A man can certainly get away with a deep
neckline, but the purpose and the engineering of it are different.
Before you start your letter to the editor, I know these are not laws of
nature. There's no reason a man can't have feminine legs, for instance, or
breasts, if he wants them. Then he'd look good in those clothes, to my eye,
but precisely because he had feminine attributes. I am much more of a
traditionalist when it comes to somatotypes. If I have the breasts and the
hips and the legs, I want the whole package. I'm not a mixer. I feel there are
boy things and girl things. The basic differences in body types are easy to
define. The differences in clothing types is tougher, and the line moves, but
can be summarized by saying that women's clothing is more apt to
emphasize and define secondary sexual characteristics, and to be more
colorful and varied.
And I can name a thousand exceptions through history, from the court of
Louis the Sun King to the chador of Islamic women. I realize that western
women didn't wear pants until the twentieth century, and men didn't wear
skirts—Scotland and the South Seas notwithstanding—until the twenty-first.
I know about peacocks and parrots and mandrill baboons. When you start
talking about sex and the way you think it should be, you're bound to get into
trouble. There are very few statements you can make about sex that won't
have an exception somewhere.
I guess this is something of a hobby-horse with me. It's in reaction to
the militant unisexers who believe all gender-identified clothing should be
eliminated, that we should all pick our clothing randomly, and sneer at you
publicly when you dress too feminine or masculine. Or even worse, the
uniformists, those people who want us all to wear formal job-identified
clothing at all times, or a standardized outfit—wait a minute, I've got one
right here, just let me show you, you'll love it!—usually some drearily
practical People's Jumpsuit with a high neck and lots of pockets, comes in
three bilious colors. Those people would have us all running about looking
like some dreadful twentieth century "futuristic" film, when they thought the
people of 1960 or 2000 would all want to dress alike, with meter-wide
shelves on their shoulders or plastic bubbles over their heads or togas or the
ubiquitous jumpsuit with no visible zipper, and leave you wondering how
did those people make water. These folks would be amusing if they didn't
introduce legislation every year aimed at making everyone behave like them.
Or lingerie! What about lingerie? Transvestism didn't die with sex
changing—very little did, because human sexuality is concerned with what

gives us a thrill, not what makes sense—and some people with male bodies
still prefer to dress up in garter belts and padded bras and short transparent
nightgowns. If they enjoy it that's fine with me. But I've always felt it looks
awful, simply because it clashes. You may say the only thing it clashes with
are my cultural preconceptions, and I'd agree with you. So what else is
fashion? Bobbie could tell you that tinkering with a cultural icon is
something you do at your own peril, with a few stiff drinks, a brave smile,
and a premonition of disaster, because nine times out of ten it just doesn't
sell.
Which simply means that as many as half my fellow citizens feel as I do
about gender dressing, and if that many feel that way, how bad can it be?
I rest my case.
#
So I spent a pleasant time fulfilling a gender-based stereotype:
shopping. I enjoyed the hell out of it.
When you get the full treatment from Bobbie, no bodily detail is too
small. The big, gaudy, obvious things were quickly disposed of. Breasts?
What are people wearing this year, Bobbie? As small as that? Well, let's
not get ridiculous, dear, I'd like to feel a little bounce, all right? Legs? Sort
of . . . you know . . . long. Long enough to reach the ground. No knobs on
the knees, if you please. Trim ankles. Arms? Well, what can you say about
arms? Work your magic, Bobbie. I like a size five shoe and all my best
dresses are nines—and thirty years out of date, enough time for some of
them to be stylish again—so work around that. Besides, I feel comfortable
in a body that size, and height reductions cost out at nearly two thousand per
centimeter.
Some people spend most of their time on the face. Not me. I've always
preferred to make any facial changes gradually, one feature at a time, so
people can recognize me. I settled on my basic face fifty years ago, and see
no need to change it for current fashion, beyond a little frill here and there. I
told Bobbie not to change the underlying bone structure at all; I feel it's
suitable for a male or a female countenance. He suggested a slight fullness
to the lips and showed me a new nose I liked, and I went flat-out trendy with
the ears, letting him give me his latest design. But when I showed up for
work after the Change, everyone would know it was Hildy.
I thought I was through . . . but what about the toes? Bare feet are quite
practical in Luna, and had come back into vogue, so people will be looking

at your toes. The current rage was to eliminate them entirely as an
evolutionary atavism; Bobbie spent some time trying to sell me on Sockfeet,
which look just like they sound. I guess I'm just a toe person. Or if you
listen to Bobbie, a Cro-Magnon. I spent half an hour on the toes, and almost
as much time on the fingers and hands. There's nothing I hate like sweaty
hands.
I put considerable thought into the contemplation of navels. With the
nipples and the vulva, the navel is the only punctuation between the chin and
the toenails, the only places for the eye to pause in the smooth sweep of the
female form I was designing. I did not neglect it. Speaking of the vulva, I
once again proved myself a hopeless reactionary. Lately, otherwise
conservative women had been indulging the most outrageous flights of fancy
when it came to labial architecture, to the point that it was sometimes
difficult to be sure what sex you were looking at without a second glance. I
preferred more modest, compact arrangements. With me, it is mostly not for
public display anyway. I usually wear something below the waist, some sort
of skirt or pants, and I didn't want to frighten off a lover when I dropped
them.
"You won't frighten anyone with that, Hildy," Bobbie said, looking
sourly at the simulation of the genitals I'd just spent so much time
elaborating. "I'd say your main problem here is boredom."
"It was good enough for Eve."
"I must have missed her last showing. Can't imagine why. I'm sure it
will prove quite useful in the circles you move in, but are you sure I couldn't
interest you in—"
"I'm the one that has to use it, and that's what I want. Have a heart,
Bobbie. I'm an old-fashioned girl. And didn't I give you a free hand with
the skin tones, and the nipples, and the ears and the shoulderblades and the
collarbones and the ass and those two fetching little dimples in the small of
the back?" I turned at the waist and looked at the full-body simulation that
had replaced one of the mirrors, and chewed on a knuckle. "Maybe we
should take another look at those dimples . . ."
He talked me out of changing that, and into a slight alteration of the
backs of the hands, and he bitched at me some more and threw up his hands
in disgust at every opportunity, but I could tell he was basically pleased.
And so was I. I moved around, watching the female I was about to become
duplicate all my movements, and it was good. It was the seventh hour: time
to rest.

And then a strange thing happened to me. I was taken to the prep room,
where the technicians built their mystical elixirs, and I began to suffer a
panic attack. I watched the thousand and one brews dripping from the
synthesizers into the mixing retorts, cloudy with potential, and my heart
started beating wildly and I began to hyperventilate. I also got angry.
I knew what I was afraid of, and anyone would be angry.
Unless you've chosen the most radical of body make-overs, very little of
modern sex changing involves actual surgery. In my case, about all the
cutting that was planned was the removal and storage of the male genitalia,
and their replacement with a vagina, cervix, uterus, and set of fallopian tubes
and ovaries which were even then being messengered over from the organ
bank, where they'd reposed since my last Change. There would be a certain
amount of body sculpting, but not much. Most of the myriad alterations I
was about to undergo would be done by the potions being mixed in the prep
room. Those brews contained two elements: a saline solution, and
uncounted trillions of nanobots.
Some of these cunning little machines were standard, made from
templates used in all male-to-female sex changes. Some were customized,
cobbled together from parts stolen from microbes and viruses or from
manufactured components, assembled by Bobbie and assigned a specific and
often minute task, copyrighted, and given snippets of my own genetic code
much like a bloodhound is given an old shoe to establish the scent. All of
them were too small to be seen by the human eye. Some were barely visible
in a good microscope. Many were smaller than that.
They were assembled by other nanobots at chemical-reaction speeds,
and produced in groups seldom smaller than one million units. Injected into
the bloodstream, they responded to the conditions they found there,
gravitated to their assigned working sites using the same processes whereby
hormones and enzymes found their way through the corpus, identified the
right spots by using jig-saw-like pieces of these same bodily regulators as
both maps and grapplers, attached themselves, and began to boogie. The
smaller ones penetrated the individual cell walls and entered the DNA itself,
reading the amino acids like rosary beads, making carefully planned cuts and
splices. The larger ones, the kind with actual motors and manipulators and
transistors, screws, scrapers, memories, arms—what used to be called
microbots when they were first made with the same technologies that
produced primitive integrated circuit chips—these congregated at specified
sites and performed grosser tasks. The microbots would each be handed a

piece of my genetic code and another piece synthesized by Bobbie, which
functioned like eccentric cams in making the tiny machines do their
particular job. Some would go to my nose, for instance, and start carving
away here, building up there, using my own body and supplementary
nutrients carried in by cargo microbots. Waste material was picked up in the
same way and ferried out of the body. In this way one could gain or lose
weight very quickly. I myself planned to emerge from the Change fifteen
kilos lighter.
The nanobots labored diligently to make the terrain fit the map. When it
did, when my nose was the shape Bobbie had intended, they detached
themselves and were flushed away, de-programmed, and bottled to await the
next customer.
Nothing new or frightening about that. It was the same principle used in
the over-the-counter pills you can buy to change the color of your eyes or
the kinkiness of your hair while you sleep. The only difference was the
nanobots in the pills were too cheap to salvage; when they'd done their work
they simply turned themselves off in your kidneys and you pissed them
away. Most of the technology was at least one hundred years old, some
more ancient than that. The hazards were almost nil, very well-known, and
completely in control.
Except I now found I had developed a fear of nanobots. Considering
what the CC had told me about them, I didn't think it was entirely
unfounded.
The other thing that frightened me was even worse. I was afraid to go to
sleep.
Not so much sleep in the normal sense. I had slept well enough the
night before; better than normal, in fact, considering my exhaustion from the
two-day celebrity binge. But the epic infestation of nanobots I was about to
experience wreaks havoc on the body and the mind. It's not something you
want to be awake for.
Bobbie noticed something was wrong as he took me to the suspension
tank. It was all I could do to hold still while the techs shoved the various
hoses and cables into the freshly-incised stigmata in my arms and legs and
belly. When I was invited to step into the coffin-sized vat of cool blue fluid,
I almost lost my composure. I stood there gripping the sides of the vat,
knuckles white, with one foot in and the other not wanting to leave the floor.
"Something the matter?" Bobbie asked, quietly. I saw some of his

helpers were trying not to stare at me.
"Nothing you could do anything about."
"You want to tell me about it? Let me get these people out of the
room."
Did I want to tell him? In a way, I was aching to. I'd never gotten to
tell Callie, and the urge to spill it to somebody was almost overwhelming.
But this was not the place and certainly not the time, and Bobbie was
most definitely not the person. He would simply find a way to incorporate it
into the continuing Gothic novel that was The Life Of Robert Darling, with
himself the imperiled heroine. I simply had to get through this myself and
talk it over with someone later.
And suddenly I knew who that someone would be. So get it over with,
Hildy, grit your teeth and step into the tub and let the soothing fluids lull you
into a sleep no more dangerous than you've had every night for 36 1/2
thousand nights.
The water closed over my face. I gulped it into my lungs—always a bit
unpleasant until all the air is gone—and looked up into the wavering face of
my re-creator, unsure when and where I would wake up again.

CHAPTER NINE

I found Fox deep in the bowels of the Oregon disneyland. He was
engrossed in a blueprint projected on a big horizontal table at the foot of a
machine the size of an interplanetary liner, which I later learned was the
starter motor for a battery of machines that produced north winds in Oregon.
Machines merely elephantine in size swarmed around the partiallyassembled behemoth, some with human operators, some working on their
own, and there was the usual crowd of blue-uniformed laborers leaning on
shovels and perfecting their spitting techniques.
He glanced up as I came closer, looked me up and down, and returned to
his work. I'd seen a flicker of interest in his eyes, but no recognition. Then
he looked up again, looked harder, and suddenly smiled.
"Hildy? Is that you?"
I stopped and twirled around for him, flashing a few dozen of Crazy
Bob's Best Patented Incisors and two of the greatest legs the Master ever
designed as my skirt swirled out like a Dresden figurine. He tossed a light
pen on the screen and came toward me, took my hand and squeezed it. Then
he realized what he was doing, laughed, and hugged me tightly.
"It's been too long," he said. "I saw you on the 'pad the other day." He
gestured at me in a way that said he hadn't expected what he was seeing
now. I shrugged; the body spoke for itself.
"Reading the Nipple now? I don't believe it."
"You didn't have to read the Nipple to catch your act. Every time I
changed the channel, there you were, boring everybody to death."
I made no comment. He had surely been as interested at first as Bobbie
and everybody else in Luna, but why bother to explain that to him? And
knowing Fox, he wouldn't admit he could be as easily seduced by a
sensational story as the rest of his fellow citizens.
"Frankly, I'm glad the idiot's gone. You have no idea the kind of
problems David Earth and his merry band cause in my line of work."
"It's Saturday," I said, "but your service said you'd be down here."
"Hell, it's almost Sunday. It's the typical start-up problems. Look, I'll
be through here in a few minutes. Why don't you stick around, we can go
out for dinner, or breakfast, or something."

"The something sounds interesting."
"Great. If you're thirsty one of these layabouts can scare up a beer for
you; give 'em something to do equal to their talents." He turned away and
hurried back to his work.
The brief sensation caused by my arrival died away; by that I mean the
several dozen men and handful of women who had transferred their gazes
from the far distance to my legs now returned to the contemplation of
infinity.
A sidewalk supervisor unused to the ways of the construction game
might have wondered how anything got done with so many philosophers and
so few people with dirty hands in evidence. The answer was simply that Fox
and three or four other engineers did all the work that didn't involve lifting
and carrying, and the machines did the rest. Though hundreds of cubic miles
of stone and soil would be moved and shaped before Oregon was complete,
not a spoonful of it would be shifted by the Hod-carriers Union members,
though they were so numerous one could almost believe they could
accomplish it in a few weeks. No, the shovels they carried were highly
polished, ceremonial badges of profession, as un-sullied by dirt as the day
they were made. Their chief function was safety. If one of the deep thinkers
fell asleep standing up, the shovel handle could be slotted into an inverted
pocket on the worker's union suit and sometimes prevented that worthy from
falling over. Fox claimed it was the chief cause of on-the-job accidents.
Perhaps I exaggerate. The job guarantee is a civil right basic to our
society, and it is a sad fact that a great many Lunarians are suited only for
the kind of job machines took over long ago. No matter how much we
tinker with genes and eliminate the actually defective, I think we'll always
have the slow, the unimaginative, the disinterested, the hopeless. What
should we do with them? What we've decided is that everyone who wants to
will be given a job and some sort of badge of profession to testify to it, and
put to some sort of work four hours a day. If you don't want to work, that's
fine, too. No one starves, and air has been free since before I was born.
It didn't used to be that way. Right after the Invasion if you didn't pay
your air tax, you could be shown to the airlock without your suit. I like the
new way better.
But I'll confess it seems terribly inefficient. I'm ignorant when it comes
to economics, but when I bother to wonder about such things it seems there
must be a less wasteful way. Then I wonder what these people would do to
fill their already—from my viewpoint—empty lives, and I resolve to stop

wondering. What's the big problem with it, anyway? I suspect there were
people standing around leaning on shovels when the contract for the first
pyramid was signed.
Does it sound terribly intolerant for me to say I don't understand how
they do it? Perhaps they'd think the same of me, working in a "creative"
capacity for an organization I loathe, at a profession with dubious—at best—
claims to integrity. Maybe these laborers would think me a whore. Maybe I
am a literary whore. But in my defense I can say that journalism, if I may be
permitted to use the term, has not been my only job. I have done other
things, and at that moment felt strongly that I would be moving on from the
Nipple fairly soon.
Most of the men and women around me as I waited for Fox had never
held another job. They were not suited for anything else. Most were illits,
and the opportunities for meaningful work for such people are few. If they
had artistic talent they'd be using it.
How did they make it through the day? Were these the people who
were contributing to the alarming rise in suicide the CC reported? Did they
get up some morning, pick up the shovel, think the hell with it, and blow
their brains out? I resolved to ask the CC, when I started speaking to him
again.
It just seemed so bleak to me. I studied one man, a foreman according
to one of the many badges pinned to his denims, a Century Man with the
gaudy lapel pin proclaiming he had spent one hundred years leaning on that
shovel. He was standing near Fox, looking in the general direction of the
blueprint table with an expression I'd last seen on an animal that was
chewing its cud. Did he have hopes and dreams and fears, or had he used
them all up? We've prolonged life to the point that we don't have a clear
idea of when it might end, but have failed to provide anything new and
interesting to do with that vast vista of years.
Fox put his hand on my shoulder and I realized, with a shock and a
perverse sense of reassurance that I must have looked like a cud-chewer
myself as I thought my deep, penetrating thoughts. That foreman was
probably a fine fellow to sit around and bullshit with. I'll bet he was a
terrific joke-teller and could throw one hell of a game of darts. Did we all
have to be, to use the traditional expression, rocket scientists? I know a
rocket scientist, and a slimier curmudgeon you would not care to meet.
"You're looking good," Fox said.

"Thanks. You all done here for now?"
"Until Monday. I hate to be one of those people married to the job, but
if somebody doesn't worry about it this place won't live up to its potential."
"Still the same Fox." I put my arm around his waist as we walked
toward his trailer, parked in a jumble of idle machines. He put his hand on
my shoulder, but I could tell his thoughts were still back in the blueprints.
"I guess so. But this is going to be the best disney yet, Hildy. Mount
Hood is finished; all we need is some snow. It's only one-quarter scale, but
it fools the eye from almost any angle. The Columbia's full and almost up to
speed. The gorge is going to be magnificent. We're going to have a real
salmon run. I've got Douglas Firs twenty meters high. Even when you
force-grow 'em, those babies take some time. Deer, grizzlies . . . it'll be
great."
"How long till completion?" We were passing some bear pens. The
inmates looked out at us with lazy predators' eyes.
"Five years, if it all goes well. Probably seven, realistically." He held
the door to the trailer and followed me inside. It was utilitarian, overflowing
with papers. About the only personal touch I saw was an antique slide rule
mounted over the gas fireplace. "You want to order something in? There's a
good Japanese place that will deliver here. I had to train them; this place is
tough to find. Or we could go out if there's something else you'd rather
have."
I knew exactly what I wanted, and we wouldn't have to order out for it.
I put my arms around him and kissed him in a way that almost made up for
the forty years we'd been out of each others' beds. When I drew back for a
breath, he was smiling down at me.
"Is this dress a particular favorite?" he asked. He had his hand in the
neckline, bunching the fabric.
"Would it do me any good to say yes?"
He slowly shook his head, and ripped it off.
#
Lovers of fashion should be relieved to note two things: the dress was
thirty years old and not one of those that was stylish again, though I had
picked it because it flattered the new me. Bobbie would have gagged to see
it, but Fox was more direct. And second, I had known Fox would destroy it,
though not as a fashion policeman—male or female, Fox was dense about

such things. The main thing one needed to know about Fox was that—male
or female—he liked to dominate. He liked sex to be rough and urgent and
just this side of brutal, and that was exactly what I was in the mood for. As
he gave me one of the most thorough rogerings of my life I thanked what
gods there be that I had found him during a male period of his life.
Fox was the one I had thought of as I stood nervously on the brink of
Change, and it made perfect sense that I did. He and I . . . actually, for a
time it had been she and I, then he and I . . . we had been lovers for ten
years. I don't know just why we broke up, or maybe I've forgotten, but we
came out of the parting good friends. Perhaps we simply grew apart, as they
say, though that's always sounded like a facile explanation. How much
growing do you still have to do when one of you is sixty and the other is
fifty-five? But it had been a comfortable time in my life.
The need to see him had been so urgent I had changed my plan to do a
little shopping on the Platz, thereby doing my bank balance a big favor. I
had rushed home, dressed in the scoop-necked, knee-length satiny black
dress with the ballerina skirt that currently lay tattered, wrinkled, and getting
very sweaty beneath my naked back, changed my hair color to match the
clothes, sprayed make-up on my eyes and mouth and polish on my nails,
doused myself with Fox's favorite scent, and was back out the door in three
minutes flat. I had taxied to Oregon, worked my feminine magic on the poor
boy and within fifteen minutes had my knees in the air and my hands
gripping his bare behind, barking like a dog and trying to force him through
my body and into the floor beneath us.
Do you see why ULTRA-Tingle is already in financial trouble?
Fox usually had that effect on me. Not always quite so intense, it's true.
I was experiencing something politely called hormone shock, or Change
mania, but more often known as going cunt crazy. One shouldn't expect to
undergo such radical alterations to one's body without a certain upset to the
psyche. With me it's always a heightening of sexual hunger. Some people
simply get irresponsible. I've got a friend who has to instruct his bank to
shut off his line of credit for five days after a Change, or he'd spend every
shilling he had.
What I was spending you can't put in a bank, and there's no sense in
saving it anyway.
#
Afterwards, he ordered a mountain of sushi and tempura and when it

was delivered, fired up the trailer and took us through a long dark air duct
and into Oregon.
Like all disneylands, it was a huge hemispherical bubble, more or less
flat on the bottom, the curved roof painted blue. The first ones had been
only a kilometer or two across, but as the engineers figured out better ways
to support them, the newer ones were growing with no outer limit in sight.
Oregon was one of the biggest, along with two others currently under
construction: Kansas and Borneo. Fox tried his best not to bore me with
statistics; I simply forget them a few minutes after hearing them. Suffice it
to say the place was very big.
The floor was mostly rock and dirt shaped into hills and two mountains.
The one he'd called Mount Hood was tall and sharply pointed. The other
was truncated and looked unfinished.
"That's going to be a volcano," he said. "Or at least a good
approximation of an active volcano. There was an eruption in this area in
historic times."
"You mean lava and fire and smoke?"
"I wish we could. But the power requirements to melt enough rock for a
worthwhile eruption would bust the budget, plus any really good volume of
smoke would hurt the trees and wildlife. What it's going to do is vent steam
three or four times a day and shoot sparks at night. Should be real pretty.
The project manager's trying to convince the money people to fund a yearly
ash plume—nothing catastrophic, it actually benefits the trees. And I'm
pretty sure we'll be able to mount a modest lava flow every ten or twenty
years."
"I wish I could see it better. It's pretty dim in here." The only real light
sources were at the scattered tree farms, dots of bright green in the blasted
landscape.
"Let me get the sun turned on." He picked up a mike and talked to the
power section, and a few minutes later the "sun" flickered and then blazed
directly overhead.
"All this will be covered in virgin forest; green as far as the eye can see.
Not at all like your shack in Texas. This is a wet, cool climate, lots of snow
in higher elevations. Mostly conifers. We're even putting in a grove of
sequoias down in the south part, though we're fudging a bit on that,
geographically speaking."

"Green'd be a lot better than this," I said.
"You'll never be a true West Texan, Hildy," he told me, and smiled.
He set us down on the Columbia River, at the mouth of the gorge where
it was wider and slower, on a broad, flat sandbar of an island which was the
center of what he called an ecological test-bed. The beach was wide and
hard-packed, full of frozen ripples. Across the river were the advertised pine
trees, but near us there was only estuarine vegetation, the sort of plants that
didn't mind being flooded periodically. It ran to tall skinny grasses and low,
hardy bushes, few taller than my head. There were some really huge logs
half buried in the sand, bleached gray-white and rubbed smooth and round
by sun, wind, and water. I realized they were artificial, put there to impress
the occasional visitors, who were always brought here.
We spread out a blanket on the sand and sat there gorging ourselves on
the food. He stuck mostly to the shrimpoid tempura while I concentrated on
the maguro, uni, hamachi, toro, tako and paper-thin slices of fugu. I dredged
each piece in enough of that wonderful green horseradish to make my nose
run and my ears turn bright red. Then we made love again, slow and tender
for the first hour, unusual for Fox, only getting intense near the end. We
stretched out in the sun and never quite fell asleep, just lolling like satiated
reptiles. At least I hadn't thought I was asleep until Fox woke me by
flipping me over onto my stomach and entering me without any warning.
(No, not that way. Fox likes to initiate it and he likes it rough, but he's not
into giving pain and I'm not into receiving it.) Anyway, these things even
out. When Fox was a girl she usually forced herself down on me before she
was quite ready. Maybe he thought all girls liked it that way. I didn't
enlighten him, because I didn't mind it that much and the love-making that
followed was always Olympic quality.
And afterwards . . .
There's always an afterwards. Perhaps that's why my ten years with Fox
was the longest relationship I ever had. After the sex, most of them want to
talk to you, and I always had trouble finding people I wanted to talk to as
well as have sex with. Fox was the exception. So afterwards . . .
I put the remains of my clothing back on. The dress was severely
ripped; I couldn't get it to stay over my left breast, and there were gaping
holes here and there. It suited my mood. We walked along the river's edge
in water that never covered our feet. I was playing the castaway game. This
time I could pretend to be a rich socialite in the tatters of her fancy gown,
desperately seeking good native help. I trailed my toes in the water as I

walked.
This place was timeless and unreal in a way Scarpa Island never was.
The sun still hung there at high noon. I picked up a handful of sand and
peered at it, and it was just as detailed as the imaginary sand of my year-long
mental environment. It smelled different. It was riverine sand, not white
coral, and the water was fresh instead of salty, with a different set of
microscopic lifeforms in it. The water was warmer than the Pacific waters.
Hell, it was quite hot in Oregon, into the lower forties. Something to do
with the construction. We had both dripped sweat all day. I had licked it off
his body and found it quite tasty. Not so much the sweat as the body I licked
it from.
The setting could not have been more perfect if I'd picked it myself.
Say, Fox, this place reminds me of an odd little adventure I had one day
about a week ago, between 15:30.0002 P.M. and around, oh, let's say
15:30.0009. And isn't it amazing how times flies when you're having fun.
So I said something a little less puzzling than that, and gradually told
him the story. Right up to the punch line, at which point I gagged on it.
Fox wasn't as reticent as Callie.
"I've heard of the technique, of course," he said. "I ought to be surprised
you hadn't, but I guess you still shy away from technology, just like you
used to."
"It's not very relevant to my job. Or my life."
"That's what you thought. It must seem more relevant now."
"Granted. It's never jumped up and bit me before."
"That's what I can't figure. What you describe is a radical treatment for
mental problems. I can't imagine the CC using it on you without your
consent unless you had something seriously wrong with you."
He let that hang, and once more I gagged. Give Fox points for candor;
he didn't let a little thing like my obvious humiliation stand in his way.
"So what is your problem?" he asked, artless as a three-year-old.
"What's the penalty for littering in here?" I said.
"Go ahead. This whole area will be re-landscaped before the public gets
to track things in with their muddy feet."
I took off the ruined dress and balled it up as well as I could. I hurled it
out toward the water. It ballooned, fell into the gentle current. We watched

it float for a short distance, soak up water, and hang up on the bottom. Fox
had said you could walk a hundred meters out from the island and not be in
much deeper than your knees. After that it got deep quickly. We had come
to the point where the island ended at the upstream end. We stood on the
last little bit of sand and watched the current nudge the dress an inch at a
time. I drew a ragged breath and felt a tear run down my cheek.
"If I'd known you felt that way about the dress, I'd never have torn it."
When I glanced at him he took the tear on the tip of his finger and licked the
finger with his tongue. I smiled weakly. I walked out into the water,
heading upstream, and could hear him following behind me.
Some of it was the hormonal shock, I'm sure. I don't cry much, and no
more when I'm female than when male. The change probably released it,
and it felt right; it was time to cry. It was time to admit how frightened I was
by the whole thing.
I sat down in the warm water. It didn't cover my legs. I started working
my hands into the sand on each side of me.
"It seems that I keep trying to kill myself," I said.
He was standing beside me. I looked up at him, wiped away another
tear. God, he looked good. I wanted to move to him, make him ready again
with my mouth, recline on this watery bed and have him move inside me
with the slow, gentle rhythms of the river. Was that a life-affirming urge, or
a death wish, metaphorically speaking? Was I in the river of life, or was I
fantasizing about becoming part of the detritus that all rivers sweep eternally
to the sea? There was no sea at the end of this river, just a deeper, saltier
growing biome for the salmon that would soon teem here, struggling
upstream to die. The sky the sun would wester and die in was a painted
backdrop. Did the figures of speech of Old Earth still pertain here?
It had to be an image of life. I wasn't tired of livin', and I was very
skeered of dyin'. He just keeps rolling, don't he? Isn't that what life's all
about?
Be that as it may, Fox was not the man for gentle river rhythms, not
twice in one day. He'd get carried away and in my present mood I would
snap at him. So I kissed his leg and resumed my excavation work in the
sand.
He sat down behind me and put his legs on each side of me and started
massaging my shoulders. I don't think I ever loved him more than at that
moment. It was exactly what I needed. I hung my head, went boneless as an

eel, let him dig his strong fingers into every knot and twitch.
"Can I say . . . I don't want to hurt you, how should I say it? I should
have been surprised to hear that. I mean, it's awful, it's unexpected, it's not
something you want to hear from a dear friend, and I want to say 'No, Hildy,
it can't be true!' You know? But I was surprised to find that . . . I wasn't
surprised. What an awful thing to say."
"No, go ahead and say it," I murmured. His hands were working on my
head now. Much more pressure and my skull would crack, and more power
to him. Maybe some of the demons would fly away through the fissures.
"In some ways, Hildy, you've always been the unhappiest person I
know."
I let that sink in without protest, just as I was sinking very slowly into
the sand beneath me. I was a light brown sack of sand he was shaping with
his fingers. I found nothing wrong with this sensation.
"I think it's your job," he said.
"Do you really?"
"It must have occurred to you. Tell me you love your work, and I'll shut
up."
There was no sense saying anything to that.
"Not going to say anything about how good you are at reporting? No
comments about how exciting it is? You are good, you know. Too good, in
my opinion. Ever get anywhere on that novel?"
"Not so's you'd notice."
"What about working for another pad? One a little less interested in
celebrity marriages and violent death."
"I don't think that would help anything; I never had much respect for
journalism as a profession in the first place. At least the Nipple doesn't
pretend to be anything but what it is."
"Pure shit."
"Exactly. I know you're right. I'm not happy in my work. I'm pretty
sure I'm going to be quitting soon. All that stops me is I don't have any idea
what I'd do as an alternative."
"I hear there's openings in the Coolie's Union. They won the contract
for Borneo. The Hod-carriers are still muttering about it."

"Nice to hear they get excited about something. Maybe I should," I said,
half-seriously. "Less wear and tear on the nerves."
"It wouldn't work out. I'll tell you what your problem is, Hildy. You've
always wanted to be . . . useful. You wanted to do something important."
"Make a difference? Change the world? I don't think so."
"I think you gave up on it before I met you. There's always been a
streak of bitterness in you about that; it's one of the reasons we broke up."
"Really? Why didn't you tell me?"
"I'm not sure I knew it at the time."
We were both quiet for a while, tromping down memory lane. I was
pleased to note that, even with this revelation, the memories were mostly
good. He kept massaging me, pushing me forward now to get at my lower
back. I offered no resistance, letting my head fall forward. I could see my
hair trailing in the water. I wonder why people can't purr like cats? If I
could have, I would have been at that moment. Maybe I should take it up
with the CC. He could probably find a way to make it work.
He began to slow down in his work. No one ever wants that sort of
thing to stop, but I knew his hands were tiring. I leaned back against him
and he encircled me with his arms under my breasts. I put my hands on his
knees.
"Can I ask you something?" I said.
"You know you can."
"What makes life worth living for you?"
He didn't give it a flip answer, which I'd half expected. He thought it
over for a while, then sighed and rested his chin on my shoulder.
"I don't know if that's really answerable. There's surface reasons. The
most obvious one is I get a sense of accomplishment from my work."
"I envy you that," I said. "Your work doesn't get erased after a tensecond read."
"There's disappointment there, too. I had sort of wanted to build these
things." His arm swept out to take in the uncompleted vastness of Oregon.
"Turned out my talents lay in other directions. That would be a sense of
accomplishment, to leave something like this behind you."
"Is that the key? Leaving something behind? For 'posterity?'"

"Fifty years ago I might have said yes. And it's certainly a reason. I
think it's the reason for most people who have the wit to ask what life's all
about in the first place. I'm not sure if it's enough reason for me anymore.
Not that I'm unhappy; I do love my work, I'm eager to arrive here every
morning, I work late, I come in on weekends. But as to leaving something
that I created, my work is even more ephemeral than yours."
"You're right," I said in considerable amazement. "I hadn't thought that
was possible."
"See?" he laughed. "You learn something new every day. That's a
reason for living. Maybe a trivial one. But I get satisfaction in the act of
creation. It doesn't have to last. It doesn't have to have meaning."
"Art."
"I've begun to think in those terms. Maybe it's presumptuous, but we
weatherfolks have started to get a following for what we do. Who knows
where it might go? But creating something is pretty important to me." He
hesitated, then plowed ahead. "There's another sort of creation."
I knew exactly what he meant. When all was said and done, that was
the primary reason for our parting. He had had a child shortly afterward—
I'd asked him never to tell me if I was the father. He had thought I should
have one as well, and I had told him flatly it was none of his business.
"I'm sorry. Shouldn't have brought it up," he said.
"No, please. I asked; I have to be ready to hear the answers, even if I
don't agree."
"And you don't?"
"I don't know. I've thought about it. As you must have guessed, I've
been doing a lot of thinking about a lot of things."
"Then you'll have considered the negative reason for wanting to live.
Sometimes I think it's the main one. I'm afraid of death. I don't know what
it is, and I don't want to find out until the last possible moment."
"No heavenly harps to look forward to?"
"You can't be serious. Logically, you have to figure you just stop
existing, just go out like a light. But I defy anyone to really imagine that.
You know I'm not a mystic, but a long life has led me to believe, to my great
bemusement, that I do believe there's something after death. I can't prove
one iota of this feeling, and you can't budge me from it."

"I wouldn't try. On my better days, I feel the same way." I sighed one
of the weariest sighs I can remember sighing. I'd been doing it a lot lately,
each one wearier than the one before. Where would it end? Don't answer.
"So," I said. "We've got job dissatisfaction. Somehow I just don't think
that's enough. There are simpler solutions to the problem. The restless urge
to create. Childlessness." I was ticking them off on my fingers. Probably
not a nice thing to do, since he'd tried his best. But I had hoped for some
new perspective, which was entirely unreasonable but all the more
disappointing when none appeared. "And fear of death. Somehow none of
those really satisfy."
"I shouldn't say it, but I knew they wouldn't. Please, Hildy, get some
professional counseling. There, I said it, I had to say it, but since I've known
you for a long time and don't like to lie to you, I'll also say this: I don't think
it will help you. You've never been one to accept somebody else's answers
or advice. I feel in my gut that you'll have to solve this one on your own."
"Or not solve it. And don't apologize; you're completely right."
The river rolled on, the sun hung there in the painted sky. No time
passed, and took a very long interval to do so. Neither of us felt the pressure
to speak. I'd have been happy to spend the next decade there, as long as I
didn't have to think. But I knew Fox would eventually get antsy. Hell, so
would I.
"Can I ask you one more thing?"
He nibbled my ear.
"No, not that. Well, not yet, anyway." I tilted my head back and looked
at him, inches away from my face. "Are you living with anyone?"
"No."
"Can I move in with you for a while? Say, a week? I'm very frightened
and very lonely, Fox. I'm afraid to be alone."
He didn't say anything.
"I just want to sleep with somebody for a while. I don't want to beg."
"Let me think about it."
"Sure." It should have hurt, but oddly enough, it didn't. I knew I would
have said the same thing. What I didn't know is how I would have decided.
The bald truth was I was asking for his help in saving my life, and we both
knew enough to realize there was little he could do but hug me. So if he did

try to help and I did end up killing myself . . . that's a hell of a load of guilt
to hazard without giving it a little thought. I could tell him there were no
strings, that he needn't blame himself if the worst happened, but I knew he
would and he knew I knew it, so I didn't insult him by telling him that lie
and I didn't up the stakes by begging any more. Instead I nestled more
firmly into his arms and watched the Columbia roll on, roll on.
#
We walked back to the trailer. Somewhere in the journey we noticed
the river was no longer flowing. It became smooth and still, placid as a long
lake. It reflected the trees on the far side as faithfully as any mirror. Fox
said they'd been having trouble with some of the pumps. "Not my
department," he said, thankfully. It could have been pretty, but it gave me a
chilly feeling up and down the spine. It reminded me of the frozen sea back
at Scarpa Island.
Then he got a remote unit from the trailer and said he had something to
show me. He tapped out a few codes and my shadow began to move.
The sun scuttled across the sky like some great silver bird. The shadow
of each tree and bush and blade of grass marked its passage like a thousand
hourglasses. If you want to experience disorientation, give that a try. I
found myself getting dizzy, swayed and set my feet apart, discovered the
whole thing was a lot more interesting when viewed from a sitting position.
In a few minutes the sun went below the western horizon. That was not
what Fox had wanted to show me. Clouds were rising in that direction, thin
wispy ones, cirrus I think, or at least intended to look like cirrus. The
invisible sun painted them various shades of red and blue, hovering
somewhere just out of sight.
"Very pretty," I said.
"That's not it."
There was a distant boom, and a huge smoke ring rose slowly into the
sky, tinged with golden light. Fox was working intently. I heard a faraway
whistling sound, and the smoke ring began to alter in shape. The top was
pressed down, the bottom drawn out. I couldn't figure out what the point of
all this was, and then I saw it. The ring had formed a passable heart-shape.
A valentine. I laughed, and hugged him.
"Fox, you're a romantic fool after all."
He was embarrassed. He hadn't meant it to be taken that way—which I

had known, but he's easy to tease and I could never resist it. So he coughed,
and took refuge in technical explanation.
"I found out I could make a sort of backfire effect in that wind
machine," he said, as we watched the ring writhe into shapelessness. "Then
it's easy to use concentrated jets to mold it, within limits. Come back here
when we open up, and I'll be able to write your name in the sunset."
We showered off the sand and he asked if I'd like to see a scheduled
blast in Kansas. I'd never seen a nuke before, so I said yes. He flew the
trailer to a lock, and we emerged on the surface, where he turned control
over to the autopilot and told me about some of the things he'd been doing in
other disneylands as we looked at the airless beauty falling away beneath us.
Maybe you have to be there to appreciate Fox's weather sculpture. He
rhapsodized about ice storms and blizzards he'd created, and it meant
nothing to me. But he did pique my interest. I told him I'd attend his next
showing. I wondered if he was angling for coverage in the Nipple. Well,
I've got a suspicious mind, and I'd been right about things like that often
enough. I couldn't figure a way to make it interesting to my readership
unless somebody famous attended, or something violent and horrible
happened there.
#
Oregon was a showplace compared to Kansas. I'd like to have had a
piece of the dust concession.
They were still in the process of excavation. The half-dome was nearly
complete, with just some relatively small areas near the north edge to blast
away. Fox said the best vantage point would be near the west edge; if we'd
gone all the way to the south the dust would have obscured the blast too
much to make the trip worthwhile. He landed the trailer near an untidy
cluster of similar modular mobile homes and we joined a group of a few
dozen other firework fans.
This show was strictly "to the trade." Everyone but me was a
construction engineer; this sort of thing was not open to the public. Not that
it was really rare. Kansas had required thousands of blasts like this, and
would need about a hundred more before it was complete. Fox described it
as the best-kept secret in Luna.
"It's not really much of a blast as these things go," he said. "The really
big ones would jolt the structure too much. But when we're starting out, we
use charges about ten times larger than this one."

I noticed the "we." He really did want to build these places instead of
just install and run the weather machines.
"Is it dangerous?"
"That's sort of a relative question. It's not as safe as sleeping in your
bed. But these things are calculated to a fare-thee-well. We haven't had a
blasting accident in thirty years." He went on to tell me more than I'd
wanted to know about the elaborate precautions, things like radar to detect
big chunks of rock that might be heading our way, and lasers to vaporize
them. He had me completely reassured, and then he had to go and spoil it.
"If I say run," he said, seriously, "hop in the trailer, pronto."
"Do I need to protect my eyes?"
"Clear leaded glass will do it. It's the UV that burns. Expect a certain
dazzle effect at first. Hell, Hildy, if it blinds you the company's insurance
will get you some new eyes."
I was perfectly happy with the eyes I had. I began to wonder if it had
been such a good idea, coming here. I resolved to look away for the first
several seconds. Common human lore was heavy with stories of what could
happen to you in a nuclear explosion, dating all the way back to Old Earth,
when they'd used a few of them to fry their fellow beings by the millions.
The traditional countdown began at ten. I put on the safety glasses and
closed my eyes at two. So naturally I opened them when the light shone
through my eyelids. There was a dazzle, as he'd said, but my eyes quickly
recovered. How to describe something that bright? Put all the bright lights
you ever saw into one place, and it wouldn't begin to touch the intensity of
that light. Then there was the ground shock, and the air shock, and finally,
much later, the sound. I mean, I thought I'd been hearing the sound of it, but
that was the shock waves emanating from the ground. The sound in the air
was much more impressive. Then the wind. And the fiery cloud. The
whole thing took several minutes to unfold. When the flames had died away
there was a scattering of applause and a few shouts. I turned to Fox and
grinned at him, and he was grinning, too.
Twenty kilometers away, a thousand people were already dead in what
came to be called the Kansas Collapse.

CHAPTER TEN

None of us were aware of the disaster at the time.
We drank a toast in champagne, a tradition among these engineering
people. Within ten minutes Fox and I were back in the trailer and heading
for an air lock. He said the fastest way back to King City was on the
surface, and that was fine with me. I didn't enjoy driving through the system
of tunnels that honeycombed the rock around a disneyland.
We had no sooner emerged into the sunlight than the trailer was taken
over by the autopilot, which informed us that we would have to enter a
holding pattern or land, since all traffic was being cleared for emergency
vehicles. A few of these streaked silently past us, blue lights flashing.
Neither of us could remember an emergency of this apparent size on the
surface. There were occasional pressure losses in the warrens, of course.
No system is perfect. But loss of life in these accidents was rare. So we
turned on the radio, and what we heard sent me searching through Fox's
belongings in the back of the trailer until I came up with a newspad. It was
the Straight Shit, and in other circumstances I would have teased him
unmercifully about that. But the story that came over the pad was the type
that made any snide remarks die in one's throat.
There had been a major blowout at a surface resort called Nirvana. First
reports indicated some loss of life, and live pictures from security cameras—

all that was available for the first ten minutes we watched—showed bodies
lying motionless by a large swimming pool. The pool was bubbling
violently. At first we thought it was a big jacuzzi, then we realized with a
shock that the water was boiling. Which meant there was no air in there, and
those people were certainly dead. Their postures were odd, too. They all
seemed to be holding on to something, such as a table leg or a heavy
concrete planter with a palm tree.
A story like that evolves in its own fractured way. First reports are
always sketchy, and usually wrong. We heard estimates of twenty dead,
then fifty, then, spoken in awe, two hundred. Then those reports were
denied, but I had counted thirty corpses myself. It was maddening. We're
spoiled by instant coverage, we expect news stories to be cogent, prompt,
and nicely framed by steady cameras. These cameras were steady, all right.
They were immobile, and after a few minutes your mind screamed for them
to pan, just a little bit, so you could see what was just out of sight. But that
didn't happen until about ten minutes after we landed, ten minutes that
seemed like an hour.
At first I think it affected me more than Fox. He was shocked and
horrified, naturally, and so was I, on one level. The other level, the
newshound, was seething with impatience, querying the autopilot three times
a minute when we could get up and out of there so I could go cover the
story. It's not pretty, I know, but any reporter will understand the impulse.
You want to move. You tuck the horror of the images away in some part of
your mind where police and coroners put ugly things, and your pulse pounds
with impatience to get the next detail, and the next, and the next. To be
stuck on the ground fifteen klicks away was torture of the worst kind.
Then a fact was mentioned that made it all too real for Fox. I didn't
catch its importance. I just looked over at him and saw his face had gone
white and his hands were trembling.
"What's the matter?" I said.
"The time," he whispered. "They just mentioned the time of the
blowout."
I listened, and the announcer said it again.
"Was that . . .?"
"Yes. It was within a second of the blast."
I was still so preoccupied with wanting to get to Nirvana that it was a

full minute before I realized what I should be doing. Then I turned on Fox's
phone and called the Nipple, using my second-highest urgency code to
guarantee quick access to Walter. The top code, he had told me, was
reserved for filing on the end of the universe, or an exclusive interview with
Elvis.
"Walter, I've got footage of the cause of the blowout," I said, when his
ugly face appeared on the screen.
"The cause? You were there? I thought everybody—"
"No, I wasn't there. I was in Kansas. I have reason to believe the
disaster was set off by a nuclear explosion I was watching in Kansas."
"It sounds unlikely. Are you sure—"
"Walter, it has to be, or else it's the biggest coincidence since that
straight flush I beat your full house with."
"That was no coincidence."
"Damn right it wasn't, and someday I'll tell you how I did it. Meantime,
you've wasted twenty seconds of valuable newstime. Run it with a
disclaimer if you want to, you know, 'Could this have been the cause of the
tragedy in Nirvana?' "
"Give it to me."
I fumbled around on the dash, and swore under my breath. "Where's the
neurofeed on this damn thing?" I asked Fox. He was looking at me
strangely, but he pulled a wire from a recessed compartment. I fumbled it
into my occipital socket, and said the magic words that caused the crystalline
memory to recycle and spew forth the last six hours of holocam recordings
in five seconds.
"Where the hell are you, anyway?" Walter was saying. "I've had a call
out for you for twenty minutes."
I told him, and he said he'd get on it. Thirty seconds later the autopilot
was cleared into the traffic pattern. The press has some clout in situations
like this, but I hadn't been able to apply it from my beached position. We
rose into the sky . . . and turned the wrong way.
"What the hell are you doing?" I asked Fox, incredulously.
"Going back to King City," he said, quietly. "I have no desire to witness
any of what we've seen first-hand. And I especially don't want to witness
you covering it."

I was about to blast him out of his seat, but I took another look, and he
looked dangerous. I had the feeling that one more word from me would
unleash something I didn't want to hear, and maybe even more than that. So
I swallowed it, mentally calculating how long it would take me to get back
to Nirvana from the nearest King City air lock.
With a great effort I pulled myself out of reportorial mode and tried to
act like a human being. Surely I could do it for a few minutes, I thought.
"You can't be thinking you had anything to do with this," I said. He
kept his eyes forward, as if he really had to see where the trailer was going.
"You told me yourself—"
"Look, Hildy. I didn't set the charge, I didn't do the calculations. But
some of my friends did. And it's going to reflect on all of us. Right now I
have to get onto the phone, we're going to have to try and find out what went
wrong. And I do feel responsible, so don't try to argue me out of it, because
I know it isn't logical. I just wish you wouldn't talk to me right now."
I didn't. A few minutes later he smashed his fist into the dashboard and
said, "I keep remembering us standing around watching. Cheering. I can
still taste the champagne."
I got out at the airlock, flagged a taxi, and told it to take me to Nirvana.
#
Most disasters look eminently preventable in hindsight. If only the
warnings had been heeded, if only this safety measure had been
implemented, if only somebody had thought of this possibility, if only, if
only. I exempt the so-called acts of God, which used to include things like
earthquakes, hurricanes, and meteor strikes. But hurricanes are infrequent
on Luna. Moon quakes are almost as rare, and selenography is exact enough
to predict them with a high degree of accuracy. Meteors come on very fast
and very hard, but their numbers are small and their average size is tiny, and
all vulnerable structures are ringed with radars powerful enough to detect
any dangerous ones and lasers big enough to vaporize them. The last
blowout of any consequence had happened almost sixty years before the
Kansas Collapse. Lunarians had grown confident of their safety measures.
We had grown complacent enough to overcome our innate suspicion of
vacuum and the surface, some of us, to the point where the rich now
frolicked and tanned in the sunlight beneath domes designed to give the
impression they weren't even there. If someone had built a place like
Nirvana a hundred years ago there would have been few takers. Back then

the rich peopled only the lowest, most secure levels and the poor took their
chances with only eight or nine pressure doors between them and the
Breathsucker.
But a century of technological improvements, of fail-safe systems that
transcended the merely careful and entered the realms of the preposterous, of
pyramided knowledge of how to live in a hostile environment . . . a hundred
years of this had worked as sea-change on Lunar society. The cities had
turned over, like I've heard lakes do periodically, and the bottom had risen to
the top. The formerly swank levels of Bedrock were now the slums, and the
Vac Rows in the upper levels were now—suitable renovated—the place to
be. Anyone who aspired to be somebody had to have a real window on the
surface.
There were some exceptions. Old reactionaries like Callie still liked to
burrow deep, though she had no horror of the surface. And a significant
minority still suffered from that most common Lunar phobia, fear of
airlessness. They managed well enough, I suppose. I've read that a lot of
people on Old Earth feared high places or flying in aircraft, which must have
been a problem in a society that valued the penthouse apartment and quick
travel.
Nirvana was not the most exclusive surface resort on Luna, but it wasn't
the type hawked in three-day two-night package deals, either. I've never
understood the attraction of paying an exorbitant amount for a "natural"
view of the surface while basking in the carefully filtered rays of the sun. I'd
much prefer just about any of the underground disneys. If you wanted a
swimming pool, there were any number belowground where the water was
just as wet. But some people find simulated earth environments frightening.
A surprising number of people just don't like plants, or the insects that hide
themselves among the leaves, and have no real use for animals, either.
Nirvana catered to these folks, and to the urge to be seen with other people
who had enough money to blow in a place like that. It featured gambling,
dancing, tanning, and some amazingly childish games organized by the
management, all done under the sun or the stars in the awesome beauty of
Destination Valley.
And it had damn well better be awesome. The builders had spent a huge
amount of money to make it that way.
Destination Valley was a three-kilometer Lunar rift that had been
artfully carved into the kind of jagged peaks and sheer cliffs that a valley on
"The Moon" should have been, if God had employed a more flamboyant set

designer, the sort of lunar feature everybody imagined before the opening of
the age of space and the return of the first, dismal pictures of what Luna
really looked like. There were no acned rolling hillocks here, no depressing
gray-and-white fields of scoria, no boulders with all the edges rubbed off by
a billion years of scorching days and bitter cold nights . . . and none of that
godawful boring dust that covers everything else on Luna. Here the craters
had sharp edges lined with jagged teeth. The cliffs soared straight up,
loomed over you like breaking waves. The boulders were studded with
multi-colored volcanic glasses that shattered the raw sunlight into a thousand
colors or glowed with warm ruby red or sapphire blue as if lit from within—
which some of them were. Strange crystalline growths leaped toward the
sky or spread across the ground like sinister deep-sea creatures, quartzes the
size of ten-story buildings embedded themselves in the ground as if dropped
from a great height, and feathery structures with hairs finer than fiber optics,
so fragile they would break in the exhaust from a passing p-suit, clung like
sea urchins and glowed in the dark. The horizon was sculpted with equal
care into a range to shame the Rockies for sheer rugged beauty . . . until you
hiked into them and found they were quite puny, magnified by cunning
lighting and tricks of forced perspective.
But the valley floor was a rockhound's dream. It was like walking into a
mammoth geode. And it was all the naked geology that, in the end, had
proven to be the downfall of Nirvana.
One of the four main pleasure domes had nestled at the foot of a cliff
called, in typical breathless Nirvanan prose, The Threshold Of Heavenly
Peace. It had been formed of seventeen of the largest, clearest quartz
columns ever synthesized, and the whole structure had been rat-nested with
niches for spotlights, lasers, and image projectors. During the day it did nice
things with the sunlight, but the real show was at night, when light shows
ran constantly. The effect had been designed to be soothing, relaxing,
suggesting the eternal peace of some unspecified heaven. The images that
could be seen within were not well-defined. They were almost-seen, just out
of sight, elusive, and hypnotic. I'd been at the opening show, and for all my
cynicism about the place itself, had to admit that the Threshold was almost
worth the price of a ticket.
The detonation in Kansas had nudged an un-mapped fault line a few
klicks from Nirvana, resulting in a short, sharp quake that lifted Destination
Valley a few centimeters and set it down with a thud. The only real damage
done to the place, other than a lot of broken crockery, was that one of the
columns had been shaken loose and crashed down on dome #3, known as the

Threshold Dome. The dome was thick, and strong, and transparent, with no
ugly geodesic lines to mar the view, having been formed from a large
number of hexagonal components bonded together in a process that was
discussed endlessly in the ensuing weeks, and which I don't understand at
all. It was further strengthened by some sort of molecular field intensifier.
It should have been strong enough to withstand the impact of Tower #14, at
least long enough to evacuate the dome. And it had, for about five seconds.
But some sort of vibration was set up in the dome material, and somehow
magnified by the field intensifier, and three of the four-meter hex panels on
the side away from the cliffs had fractured along the join lines and been
blown nearly into orbit by the volume of air trying to get through that hole.
Along with the air had gone everything loose, including all the people who
weren't holding on to something, and many who were. It must have been a
hell of a wind. Some of the bodies were found up on the rim of the valley.
By the time I got there most of the action was long over. A blowout is
like that. There's a few minutes when a person exposed to raw vacuum can
be saved; after that, it's time for the coroner. Except for a few people
trapped in self-sealing rooms who would soon be extricated—and no amount
of breathless commentary could make these routine operations sound
exciting—the rest of the Collapse story was confined to ogling dead bodies
and trying to find an angle.
The bodies definitely were not the story. Your average Nipple reader
enjoys blood and gore, but there is a disgust threshold that might be defined
as the yuck factor. Burst eyeballs and swollen tongues are all right, as is any
degree of laceration or dismemberment. But the thing about a blow-out
death is, the human body has a certain amount of gas in it, in various
cavities. A lot of it is in the intestine. What happens when that gas expands
explosively and comes rushing out its natural outlet is not something to use
as a lead item in your coverage. We showed the bodies, you couldn't help
that, we just didn't dwell on them.
No, the real story here was the same story any time there is a big
disaster. Number two: children. Number three: tragic coincidences. And
always a big number one: celebrities.
Nirvana didn't cater to children. They didn't forbid them, they just didn't
encourage mommy and daddie to bring little junior along, and most of the
clientele wouldn't have done so, anyway. I mean, what would that say about
your relationship with the nanny? Only three children died in the Kansas
Collapse—which simply made them that much more poignant in the eyes of

the readership. I tracked down the grandparents of one three-year-old and
got a genuine reaction shot when they learned the news about the child's
death. I needed a stiff drink or two after that one. Some things a reporter
does are slimier than others.
Then there's the "if-only" story, with the human angle. "We were
planning to spend the week at Nirvana, but we didn't go because blah blah
blah." "I just went back to the room to get my thingamabob when the next
thing I knew all the alarms were going off and I thought, where's my darling
hubby?" The public had an endless appetite for stories like that.
Subconsciously, I think they think the gods of luck will favor them when the
tromp of doom starts to thump. As for survivor interviews, I find them very
boring, but I'm apparently in the minority. At least half of them had this to
say: "God was watching over me." Most of those people didn't even believe
in a god. This is the deity-as-hit-man view of theology. What I always
thought was, if God was looking out for you, he must have had a real hardon for all those folks he belted into the etheric like so many rubbery javelins.
Then there were the handful of stories that didn't quite fit any of these
categories, what I call heart-warming tragedies. The best to come out of
Nirvana was the couple of lovers found two kilometers from the blowout,
still holding hands. Given that they'd been blown through the hole in the
dome, their bodies weren't in the best shape, but that was okay, and since
they'd outdistanced the stream of brown exhaust that no doubt would have
seemed to be propelling them on their way, had anyone survived to report on
that improbable event, they were quite presentable. They were just lying
there, two guys with sweet smiles on their faces, at the base of a rock
formation the photographer had managed to frame to resemble a church
window. Walter paid through the nose to run it on his front feed, just like all
the other editors.
The reporter on that story was my old rival Cricket, and it just goes to
show you what initiative can accomplish. While the rest of us were standing
around the ruins of dome #3, picking our journalistic noses, Cricket hired a
p-suit and followed the recovery crews out into the field, bringing an actual
film camera for maximum clarity. She'd bribed a team to delay recovery of
the pair until she could fix smiles on the faces and pick up the popped-out
eyeballs and close the eyelids. She knew what she wanted in that picture,
and what it got her was a nomination for the Pulitzer Prize that year.
But the big story was the dead celebs. Of the one thousand, one
hundred and twenty-six dead in Nirvana, five had been Important in one way

or another. In ascending order of magnitude, they were a politician from
Clavius District, a visiting pop singer from Mercury, a talk-show host and
hostess, and Larry Yeager, whose newest picture's release date was moved
up three weeks to cash in on all the public mourning. His career had been in
decline or he wouldn't have been at Nirvana in the first place, but while
being seen alive in a place like that was a definite indicator that one's star
was imploding, soon to be a black hole—Larry had formerly moved in only
the most rarefied orbits—where you die is not nearly as important to a
posthumous career as how you die. Tragically is best. Young is good.
Violently, bizarrely, notoriously . . . all these things combined in the Kansas
Collapse to boost the market value of the Yeager Estate's copyrights to five
times their former market value.
Of course there was the other story. The "how" and the "why." I'm
always much more concerned in where, when, and who. Covering the
investigations into the Collapse, as always, would be an endless series of
boring meetings and hours and hours of testimony about matters I was not
technologically equipped to handle anyway. The final verdict would not be
in for months or years, at which time the Nipple would be interested in
"who" once more, as in "who takes the fall for this fuck-up?" In the
meantime the Nipple could indulge in ceaseless speculation, character
assassination, and violence to many reputations, but that wasn't my
department. I read this stuff uneasily every day, fearing that Fox's name
would somehow come up, but it never did.
What with one thing and another . . . mostly bothering widows and
orphans, I am forced to admit . . . the Collapse kept me hopping for about a
week. I indulged in a lot of mind-numbing preparations, mostly Margaritas,
my poison of choice, and kept a nervous weather eye open for signs of
impending depression. I saw some—there's no way you can cover a story
like that without feeling grief yourself, and a certain self-loathing from time
to time—but I never got really depressed, as in goodbye-cruel-world
depressed.
I concluded that keeping busy was the best therapy.
#
One of the one thousand, one hundred and twenty-one other people who
died in Nirvana was the mother of the Princess of Wales, the King of
England, Henry XI. In spite of his impressive title, Hank had never in his
life done anything worth a back-feed article in the Nipple, until he died.
And that's where the obit ran, the back-feed, with a small "isn't it ironic"

graph by a cub reporter mentioning a few of his more notorious relatives:
Richard III, Henry VIII, Mary Stuart. Walter blue-penciled most of it for the
next edition, with the immortal words "nobody gives a shit about all that
Shakespearean crap," and substituted a sidebar about Vickie Hanover and
her weird ideas about sex that influenced an entire age.
The only reason Henry XI was in Nirvana in the first place was that he
was in charge of the plumbing in dome #3. Not the air system; the sewage.
But the upshot was that, on my first free day since the disaster, my
phone informed me that someone not on my "accept-calls" list wanted to
speak to me, and was identifying herself as Elizabeth Saxe-Coburg-Gotha. I
drew a blank for a moment, then realized it was the terrifying fighting
machine I had known as Wales. I let the call through.
She spent the first few minutes apologizing all over again, asking if her
check had arrived, and please call me Liz.
"Reason I called," she finally said, "I don't know if you heard, but my
mother died in the Nirvana disaster."
"I did know that. I'm sorry, I should have sent a condolence card or
something."
"That's okay. You don't really know me well enough, and I hated the
boozing son-of-a-bitch anyway. He made my life hell for many years. But
now that he's finally gone . . . see, I'm having this sort of coronation party
tomorrow and I wondered if you'd like to come? And a guest, too, of
course."
I wondered if the invitation was the result of continuing guilt over the
way she'd torn me apart, or if she was angling for coverage in the pad. But I
didn't mention either of those things. I was about to beg off, then
remembered there had been something I'd wanted to talk to her about. I
accepted.
"Oh," I said, as she was about to ring off. "Ah, what about dress?
Should it be formal?"
"Semi," she said. "No need for any full uniforms. And the reception
afterward will be informal. Just a party, really. Oh, and no gifts." She
laughed. "I'm only supposed to accept gifts from other heads of state."
"That lets me out. See you tomorrow."
#

The Royal Coronation was held in Suite #2 of the spaceport Howard's
Hotel, a solidly middle-class hostelry favored by traveling salespeople and
business types just in King City for the day. I was confronted at the door by
a man in a red-and-black military uniform that featured a fur hat almost a
meter high. I vaguely recalled the outfit from historical romances. He was
rigidly at attention beside a guardhouse about the size of a coffin standing on
end. He glanced at my faxed invitation, opened the door for me, and the
familiar roar of a party in progress spilled into the hall.
Liz had managed a pretty good turn-out. Too bad she couldn't have
afforded to hire a bigger hall. People were standing elbow to elbow, trying
to balance tiny plates of olives and crackers with cheese and anchovy paste
in one hand and paper cups of punch and champagne in the other while
being jostled from all sides. I sidled my way to the food, as is my wont
when it's free, and scanned it dubiously. UniBio set a better table, I must
say. Drinks were being poured by two men in the most outrageous outfits. I
won't even attempt to describe them. I later learned they were called
Beefeaters, for reasons that will remain forever obscure to me.
Not that my own clothes were anything to shout about. She'd said semiformal, so I could have gotten away with just the gray fedora and the press
pass stuck in the brim. But upon reflection I decided to go with the whole
silly ensemble, handing the baggy pants and double-breasted suit coat to the
auto-valet with barely enough time for alterations. I left the seat and the legs
loose and didn't button the coat; that was part of the look my guild, in its
infinite wisdom, had voted on almost two hundred years ago when
professional uniforms were being chosen. It had been taken from newspaper
movies of the 1930's. I'd viewed a lot of them, and was amused at the image
my fellow reporters apparently wanted to project at formal events: rumpled,
aggressive, brash, impolite, wise-cracking, but with hearts o' gold when the
goin' got tough. Sure, and it made yer heart proud ta be a reporter, by the
saints. For a little fun, I'd worn a white blouse with a bunch of lace at the
neck instead of the regulation ornamental noose known as a neck-tie. And
I'd tied my hair up and stuffed it under the hat. In the mirror I'd looked just
like Kate Hepburn masquerading as a boy, at least from the neck up. From
there down the suit hung on me like a tent, but such was the cunning
architecture of my new body that anything looked good on it. I'd saluted my
image in the mirror: here's lookin' at you, Bobbie.
Liz spotted me and made her way toward me with a shout. She was
already half looped. If her late mother had given her nothing else, she had
seemingly inherited his taste for the demon rum. She embraced me and

thanked me for coming, then swirled off again into the crowd. Well, I'd
corner her later, after the ceremony, if she could still stand up by then.
What followed hasn't changed much in four or five hundred years. For
almost an hour people kept arriving, including the hotel manager who had a
hasty conference with Liz—concerning her credit rating, I expect—and then
opened the connecting door to Suite #1, which relieved the pressure for a
while. The food and champagne ran out, and was replenished. Liz didn't
care about the cost. This was her day. It was your proto-typical daytime
party.
I met several people I knew, was introduced to dozens whose names I
promptly forgot. Among my new friends were the Shaka of the Zulu Nation,
the Emperor of Japan, the Maharajah of Gujarat, and the Tsarina of All the
Russias, or at least people in silly costumes who styled themselves that way.
Also countless Counts, Caliphs, Archdukes, Satraps, Sheiks and Nabobs.
Who was I to dispute their titles? There had been a vogue in such genealogy
about the time Callie had grudgingly expelled my ungrateful squalling form
into a less-than overwhelmed world; Callie had even told me she thought she
might be related to Mussolini, on her mother's side. Did that make me the
heir-apparent of Il Duce? It wasn't a burning question to me. I overheard
intense debates about the rules of primogeniture—even Salic Law, of all
things—in an age of sex changing. Someone—I think it was the Duke of
York—gave me a lecture about it shortly before the ceremony, explaining
why Liz was inheritor to the throne, even though she had a younger brother.
After escaping from that with most of my wits intact, I found myself out
on the balcony, nursing a strawberry Margarita. Howard's had a view, but it
was of the cargo side of the spaceport. I looked out over the beached-whale
hulks of bulk carriers expelling their interplanetary burdens into waiting
underground tanks. I was almost alone, which puzzled me for a moment,
until I remembered a story I'd seen about how many people had suddenly
lost their taste for surface views in the wake of the Kansas Collapse. I
drained my drink, reached out and tapped the invisible curved canopy that
held vacuum at bay, and shrugged. Somehow I didn't think I'd die in a
blowout. I had worse things to fear.
Somebody held out another pink drink with salt on the rum. I took it
and looked over and up—and up and up—into the smiling face of Brenda,
girl reporter and apprentice giraffe. I toasted her.
"Didn't expect to see you here," I said.
"I got acquainted with the Princess after your . . . accident."

"That was no accident."
She prattled on about what a nice party it was. I didn't disillusion her.
Wait till she'd attended a few thousand more just like it, then she'd see.
I'd been curious what Brenda's reaction would be to my new sex. To my
chagrin, she was delighted. I got the skinney from a homo-oriented friend at
the fashion desk: Brenda was young enough to still be exploring her own
sexuality, discovering her preferences. She'd already been pretty sure she
leaned toward females as lovers, at least when she was a woman.
Discovering her preferences as a male would have to wait for her first
Change. After all, until quite recently she'd been effectively neuter. The
only problem she'd had in her crush on me was that she wasn't much
attracted to males. She had thought it would remain platonic until I
thoughtfully made everything perfect by showing up at work as my gorgeous
new self.
I really, really didn't have the heart to tell her about my preferences.
And I did owe her. She had been covering for me, putting my by-line
on the Invasion Bicentennial stories she was writing, the stories I simply
could no longer bring myself to work on. Oh, I was helping, answering her
questions, going over her drafts, punching up the prose, showing her how to
leave just enough excess baggage in the stories so Walter would have
something to cut out and shout at her about and thus remain a happy man. I
think Walter was beginning to suspect what was going on, but he hadn't said
anything yet because expecting me to cover the Collapse and get in our
weekly feature was unfair, and he knew it. The thing he should have
foreseen before he ever came up with his cockamamie Invasion series was
that there would always be a story like the Collapse happening, and as a
good editor he had to assign his best people to it, which included me. Oh,
yeah, if you wanted somebody to intrude on grief and ogle bodies puffed up
like pink and brown popcorn, Hildy was your girl.
"Tell me, sweetheart, how did you feel when you saw the man cut your
daddy's head off?"
"What?" Brenda was looking at me strangely.
"It's the essential disaster/atrocity question," I said. "They don't tell you
that in Journalism 101, but all the questions we ask, no matter how delicately
phrased, boil down to that. The idea is to get the first appearance of the tear,
the ineffable moment when the face twists up. That's gold, honey. You'd
better learn how to mine it."

"I don't think that's true."
"Then you'll never be a great reporter. Maybe you should try social
work."
I saw that I had hurt her, and it made me angry, both at her and at
myself. She had to understand these things, dammit. But who appointed
you, Hildy? She'll find out soon enough, as soon as Walter takes her off
these damn comparative anthropology stories that our readers don't even
want to see and lets her get out where she can grub in the dirt like the rest of
us.
I realized I'd drunk a little more than I had intended. I dumped the rest
of my drink in a thirsty-looking potted plant, snagged a coke from a passing
tray, and performed a little ritual I'd come to detest but was powerless to
stop. It consisted of a series of questions, like this: Do you feel the urge to
hurl yourself off this balcony, assuming you could drill a hole through that
ultralexan barrier? No. Great, but do you want to throw a rope over that
beam and haul yourself up into the rafters? Not today, thank you. And so
on.
I was about to say something nice and neutral and soothing, suitable for
the reassurance of idealistic cub reporters, when the Jamaican steel band
which had been reprising every patriotic British song since the Spanish
Armada suddenly struck up God Save The Queen, and somebody asked
everyone to haul their drunken asses down to the main ballroom, where the
coronation was about to commence. Not in those words, of course.
#
There was another band in the ballroom, playing some horrible modern
version of Rule Britannia. This was the public portion of the show, and I
guess Liz thought it ought to make some attempt to appeal to the tastes of
the day. I thought the music was dreadful, but Brenda was snapping her
fingers, so I suppose it was at least current.
A few specialty channels and some of the 'pads had sent reporters, but
the crowd in the ballroom was essentially the same folks I'd been avoiding
up in the Suites one and two, only they weren't holding drinks. A lot of
them looked as if they wished the show would hurry up, so they could hold
drinks again, for a short time, at least.
One touch Liz hadn't expected was the decorations. From the whispers I
overheard, she'd only booked the hall for one hour. When the coronation
was over a wedding party was scheduled to hold a reception there, so the

walls were draped in white bunting and repulsive little cherubs, and there
was a big sign hung on the wall that said Mazel Tov! Liz looked a little nonplussed. She glanced around with that baffled expression one sometimes
gets after wandering into a strange place. Could there have been a mistake?
But the coronation itself went off without a hitch. She was proclaimed
"Elizabeth III, by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain,
Scotland, Wales, and Ireland and of her other Realms and Territories,
Queen, Empress of India, Head of the Commonwealth and Defender of the
Faith."
Sure, it was easy to snicker, and I did, but to myself. I could see that Liz
took it seriously, almost in spite of herself. No matter how spurious the
claims of some of these other clowns might have been to ancient titles, Liz's
was spotless and unquestioned. The actual Prince of Wales had been living
and working on Luna at the time of the Invasion, and she was descended
from him.
The original Crown Jewels had naturally not accompanied the King in
Exile to Luna; they were buried with the rest of London—of England, of
Europe, of the whole surface of Planet Earth. Liz had the use of a very nice
crown, orb, and sceptre. Hovering in the background as these items were
produced was a man from Tiffany's. Not the one in the Platz, but the
discount outlet down on Leystrasse, where even as the tiara was lowered
onto Liz's head a sign was going up announcing "By Appointment to Her
Majesty, The Queen." The jewels were hired, and would soon reside in a
window advertising the usual E-Z Credit Terms.
A procession was traditional after a coronation back when the Empire
had any real meaning—and even after it had become just a tourist attraction.
But processions can be difficult to organize in the warrens of Luna, where
the cities are usually broken up into pressure-defensible malls and arcades
connected by tube trains. So after the ceremony we all straggled into a
succession of subway cars and zipped across town to Liz's neighborhood,
many of us growing steadily more sober and unsure why we'd come in the
first place.
But all was well. The real party began when we arrived at the postcoronation reception, held in the Masonic Lodge Hall half-way between
Liz's apartment and the studio where she worked. In addition to its many
other virtues the lodge didn't cost her anything, which meant she could
spend what royal budget she had left entirely on food, booze, and
entertainment.

This bash was informal and relaxed, the only kind I enjoy. The band
was good, playing a preponderance of things from Liz's teenage years,
which put them mid-way between my era and Brenda's. It was stuff I could
dance to. So I stumbled out into the public corridor in my two-tone Oxford
lace-ups—and a clunkier shoe has never been invented—found a mail box
and called my valet. I told it to pack up the drop-dead shiny black sheath
dress slit from the ankles to you-should-only-blush and 'tube it over to me. I
went into the public comfort station and changed my hair color to platinum
and put a long wave in it, and when I came out, three minutes later, the
package was waiting for me. I stripped out of the Halloween costume and
stuffed it into the return capsule, cajoled my abundance into the outfit's
parsimonious interior. Just getting into that thing was almost enough to give
you an orgasm. I left my feet bare. And to hell with Kate Hepburn;
Veronica Lake was on the prowl.
I danced almost non-stop for two hours. I had one dance with Liz, but
she was naturally much in demand. I danced with Brenda, who was a very
good if visually unlikely terpsichorean. Mostly I danced with a succession
of men, and I turned down a dozen interesting offers. I'd selected my
eventual target, but I was in no hurry unless he suddenly decided to leave.
He didn't. When I was ready I cut him out of the herd. I put a few
moves on him, mostly in the form of dance steps whose meaning couldn't
have been missed by a eunuch. He wanted to join the rather sparselyattended orgy going on in one corner of the ballroom, but I dragged him off
to what the Masons called, too coyly in my opinion, snuggle rooms. We
spent a very enjoyable hour in one of them. He liked to be spanked, and
bitten. It's not my thing, but I can accommodate most consenting adults as
long as my needs are attended to as well. He did a very good job of that.
His name was Larry, and he claimed to be the Duke of Bosnia-Herzegovina,
but that might have been just to get into my pants. The couple of times I
drew blood he asked me to do it again, so I did, but eventually lost my . . .
well, my taste for that sort of thing. We exchanged phone codes and said
we'd look each other up, but I didn't intend to. He was nice to look at but I
felt I'd chewed off about as much as I wanted.
I staggered back into the ballroom drenched in sweat. It had been very
intense there for a while. I headed for the bar, dodging dancers. The fainthearted had left, leaving about half the original attendees, but those looked
ready to party till Monday morning. I eased my pinkened, pleasantly sore
cheeks onto a padded barstool next to the Queen of England, the Empress of
India, and the Defender of the Faith, and Liz slowly turned her head toward

me. I now knew where her impressive ears came from. There were posters
of past monarchs taped to the walls here, and she was the spitting image of
Charles III.
"Innkeeper," she shouted, above the music. "Bring me salt. Bring me
tequila. Bring me the nectar of the lime, your plumpest strawberries, your
coldest ice, your finest crystal. My friend needs a drink, and I intend to
build it for her."
"Ain't got no strawberries," the bartender said.
"Then go out and kill some!"
"It's all right, Your Majesty," I said. "Lime will be fine."
She grinned foolishly at me. "I purely do like the sound of that. 'Your
Majesty.' Is that awful?"
"You're entitled, as they say. But don't expect me to make a habit of it."
She draped an arm over my shoulder and exhaled ethanol.
"How are you, Hildy? Having a good time? Getting laid?"
"Just did, thank you."
"Don't thank me. And you look it, honey, if I may say so."
"Didn't have time to freshen up yet."
"You don't need to. Who did the work?"
I showed her the monogram on the nail of my pinkie. She squinted at it,
and seemed to lose interest, which might have meant that Bobbie's fears of
falling out of fashion were well-grounded—Liz would be up on these
things—or only that her attention span was not what it might be.
"What was I gonna say? Oh, yeah. Can I do anything for you, Hildy?
There's a tradition among my people . . . well, maybe it's not an English
tradition, but it's somebody's damn tradition, what you gotta do is, anybody
asks you for a favor on your coronation day, you gotta grant it."
"I think that's a Mafia tradition."
"Is it? Well, it's your people, then. So just ask. Only be real, okay? I
mean, if it's gonna cost a lot of money, forget it. I'm gonna be payin' for this
fucking shivaree for the next ten fucking years. But that's okay. It's only
money, right? And what a party. Am I right?
"As a matter of fact, there is something you could do for me."

I was about to tell her, but the bartender delivered a Margarita in its
component parts, and Liz could only think about one thing at a time. She
spilled a lot of salt on the bar, spread it out, moistened the rim of a wide
glass, and did things necessary to produce a too-strong concoction with that
total concentration of the veteran drunk. She did it competently, and I
sipped at the drink I hadn't really wanted.
"So. Name it, kiddo, and it's yours. Within reason."
"If you . . . let's say . . . if you wanted to have a conversation with
somebody, and you wanted to be sure no one would overhear it . . . what
would you do? How would you go about it?"
She frowned and her brow furrowed. She appeared to be thinking
heavily, and her hand toyed with the layer of salt in front of her.
"Now that's a good one. That's a real good one. I'm not sure if anyone's
ever asked me that before." She looked slowly down at the salt, where her
finger had traced out CC??. I looked up at her, and nodded.
"You know what bugs are like these days. I'm not sure if there's any
place that can't be bugged. But I'll tell you what. I know some techs back at
the studio, they're real clever about these things. I could ask them and get
back to you." Her hand had wiped out the original message and written psuit. I nodded again, and saw that while she was without a doubt very, very
drunk, she knew how to handle herself. There was a glint of speculation in
those eyes I wasn't sure I liked. I wondered what I might be getting myself
into.
We talked a while longer, and she wrote out a time and a destination in
the salt crystals. Then someone else sat next to her and started fondling her
breasts and she was showing a definite interest, so I got up and returned to
the dance floor.
I danced almost an hour longer, but my heart wasn't really in it. A guy
made a play for me, and he was pretty, and persuasive, and a very good,
raunchy dancer, but in the end I felt he just didn't try hard enough. When
I'm not the aggressor I can choose to take a lot of persuading. In the end I
gave him my phone code and said call me in a week and we'd see, and got
the impression he probably wouldn't.
I showered and bought a paper chemise in the locker room, staggered to
the tube terminal, and got aboard. I fell asleep on the way home, and the
train had to wake me up.

CHAPTER ELEVEN

I've read about hangovers. You just about have to believe those people
were exaggerating. If only a tenth of the things written about them were
true, I have no desire to experience one. The hangover was cured long
before I was born, just a simple chemical matter, really, no tough science
involved. I'd sometimes wondered if that was a good idea. There's an
almost biblical belief deep in the human psyche that we should pay in some
way for our over-indulgences. But when I think that, my rational side soon
takes over. Might as well wish for the return of the hemorrhoid.
When I woke up the next morning, my mouth tasted good.
Too good.
"CC, on line," quoth I.

"What can I do for you?"
"What's with the peppermint?"
"I thought you liked peppermint. I can change the flavor."
"There's nothing wrong with peppermint qua peppermint. It's just
passing strange to wake up with my mouth tasting like anything but . . . well,
it wouldn't mean anything to you, I don't guess taste is one of your talents,
but take my word for it, it's vile."
"You asked me to work on that. I did."
"Just like that?"
"Why not?"
I was about to answer, but Fox stirred in his sleep and turned over, so I
got out of bed and went into the bathroom. I had shaken out a toothcleaning pill, then I looked at it sitting there in my hand.
"Do I need this, then?"
"No. It's gone the way of the toothbrush."
"And science marches on. You know, I'm used to what they call future
shock, but I'm not used to being the cause of it."
"Humans usually are the cause of the new inventions."
"You said that."
"But you can never tell when a human will take the time to work on a
particular problem. Now, I have no talent for asking questions like that. As
you noted, my mouth never tastes bad in the morning, so why should I? But
I have a lot of excess capacity, and when a question like that is asked, I often
tinker with it and sometimes come up with a solution. In this case, I
synthesized a nanobot that goes after the things that would normally rot in
your mouth while you are sleeping, and changes them into things that taste
good. They also clean away plaque and tartar and have a beneficial effect on
gums."
"I'm afraid to ask how you slipped this stuff to me."
"It's in the water supply. You don't need much of it."
"So every Lunarian is waking up today and tasting peppermint?"
"It comes in six delicious flavors."
"Are you writing your own ad campaigns now? Do me a favor; don't

tell anyone this is my fault."
I got into the shower and it turned on, gradually warming to just a
degree below the hottest I could stand. Don't ever say anything about
showers, Hildy, I cautioned myself. The goddam CC might find a way to
clean the human hide without them, and I think I'd go mad without my
morning shower. I'm a singer in the shower. Lovers have told me I do this
with indifferent esthetic effect, but it pleases me. As I soaped myself I
thought about a nanobot-infested world.
"CC. What would happen if all those tiny little robots were taken out of
my body?"
"Doing it would be impractical, to say the least."
"Hypothetically."
"You would be hypothetically dead within a year."
I dropped the soap. I don't know what answer I had expected, but it
hadn't been that.
"Are you serious?"
"You asked. I replied."
"Well . . . shit. You can't just leave it lying there."
"I suppose not. Then let me list the reasons in order. First, you are
prone to cancer. Billions of manufactured organisms work night and day
seeking out and eating pinpoint tumors throughout your body. They find
one almost every day. If left unchecked, they would soon eat you alive.
Second, Alzheimer's Disease."
"What the hell is that?"
"A syndrome associated with aging. Simply put, it eats away at your
brain cells. Most human beings, upon reaching their hundredth birthday in a
natural state, would have contracted it. This is an example of the
reconstructive work constantly going on in your body. Failing brain cells
are excised and duplicated with healthy ones so the neural net is not
disrupted. You would have forgotten your name and how to find your way
home years ago; the disease started showing up about the time you went to
work at the Nipple."
"Hah! Maybe those things didn't do as good a job as you thought. That
would go a long way toward explaining . . . never mind. There's more?"
"Lung disease. The air in the warrens is not actually healthy for human

life. Things get concentrated, things that could be cleaned from the air are
not, because replacing lungs is so much cheaper and simpler than cleaning
up the air. You could live in a disneyland to offset this; I must filter the air
much more rigorously in there. As it is, several hundred alveoli are re-built
in your lungs every day. Without the nanobots, you'd soon begin to miss
them."
"Why didn't anyone ever tell me about all this?"
"What does it matter? If you'd researched it you could have found out;
it's not a secret."
"Yeah, but . . . I thought those kind of things had been engineered out of
the body. Genetically."
"A popular misconception. Genes are certainly manipulable, but they've
proved resistant to some types of changes, without . . . unacceptable
alterations in the gestalt, the body, they produce and define."
"Can you put that more plainly?"
"It's difficult. It can be explained in terms of some very complicated
mathematical theories having to do with chaotic effects and chemical
holography. There's often no single gene for this or that characteristic, good
or bad. It's more of an interference pattern produced by the overlapping
effects of a number of genes, sometimes a very large number. Tampering
with one produces unintended side-effects, and tampering with them all is
often impossible without producing unwanted changes. Bad genes are
bound up this way as often as good ones. In your case, if I eradicated the
faulty genes that insist on producing cancers in your body, you'd no longer
be Hildy. You'd be a healthier person, but not a wiser one, and you'd lose a
lot of abilities and outlooks that, counterproductive though they may be in a
purely practical sense, I suspect you treasure."
"What makes me me."
"Yes. You know there are many things I can change about you without
affecting your . . . soul is the simplest word to use, though it's a hazy one."
"It's the first one you've used that I understand." I chewed on that for a
while, shutting off the shower and stepping out, dripping wet, reaching for a
towel, drying myself.
"It doesn't make sense to me that things like cancer should be in the
genes. It sounds contra-survival."
"From an evolutionary viewpoint, anything that doesn't kill you before

you've become old enough to reproduce is irrelevant to species survival.
There's even a philosophic point of view that says cancer and things like it
are good for the race. Overpopulation can be a problem to a very successful
species. Cancer gets the old ones out of the way."
"They're not getting out the way now."
"No. It will be a problem someday."
"When?"
"Don't worry about it. Ask me again at the Tricentennial. As a
preliminary measure, large families are now being discouraged, the direct
opposite of the ethic that prevailed after the Invasion."
I wanted to hear more, but I noticed the time, and had to hustle to get
ready in time to catch my train.
#
Tranquility Base is by far the biggest tourist attraction on Luna, and the
reason is its historical significance, since it is the spot where a human foot
first trod another planet. Right? If you thought that, maybe I could interest
you in some prime real estate on Ganymede with a great view of the
volcano. The real draw at Tranquility is just over the horizon and goes by
the name of Armstrong Park. Since the park is within the boundaries of
Apollo Planetary Historical Preserve, the Lunar Chamber of Commerce can
boast that X million people visit the site of the first Lunar landing every
year, but the ads feature the roller coaster, not the LEM.
A good number of those tourists do find the time to ride the train over to
the Base itself and spend a few minutes gazing at the forlorn little lander,
and an hour hurrying through the nearby museum, where most of the derelict
space hardware from 1960 to the Invasion is on display. Then the kids begin
to whine that they're bored, and by then the parents probably are, too, and it's
back to the land of over-priced hot dogs and not-so-cheap thrills.
You can't take a train directly to the base. No accident, that. It dumps
you at the foot of the thirty-story explosion of lights that is the sign for and
entrance to the Terminal Seizure, what the ads call "The Greatest SphincterTightener in the Known Universe." I got on it once, against my better
judgment, and I guarantee it will show you things they didn't tell you about
in astronaut school. It's a twenty-minute MagLev, six-gee, free trajectory
descent into the tenth circle of Hell that guarantees one blackout and seven
gray hairs or your money back. It's actually two coasters—the Grand Mal

and the Petit Mal—one of them obviously for wimps. They are prepared to
hose out the Grand Mal cars after every ride. If you understand the
attraction of that, please don't come to my home to explain it to me. I'm
armed, and considered dangerous.
I walked as quickly as I could past the sign—30,000,000 (Count 'Em!)
Thirty Million Lights!—and noticed the two-hour line for the Grand Mal
ride was cleverly concealed from the ticket booth. I made it to the shuttle
train, having successfully avoided the blandishments of a thousand hucksters
selling everything from inflatable Neil dolls to talking souvenir pencil
sharpeners to put a point on your souvenir pencils. I boarded the train,
removed a hunk of cotton candy from a seat, and sat. I was wearing a
disposable paper jumper, so what the hell?
The Base itself is an area large enough to play a game of baseball/6.
Those guys never got very far from their ship, so it made no sense to
preserve any more of the area. It is surrounded by a stadium-like structure,
un-roofed, that is four levels of viewing area with all the windows facing
inward. On top is an un-pressurized level.
I elbowed my way through the throngs of camera-toting tourists from
Pluto and made it to the suit rental counter. Oh, dear.
If I ever had to choose one sex to be for the rest of my life, I would be
female. I think the body is better-designed, and the sex is a little better. But
there is one thing about the female body that is distinctly inferior to the
male—and I've talked to others about this, both Changers and dedicated
females, and ninety-five percent agree with me—and that is urination.
Males are simply better at it. It is less messy, the position is more dignified,
and the method helps develop hand-eye coordination and a sense of artistic
expression, a la writing your name in the snow.
But what the hell, right? It's never really much of an annoyance . . .
until you go to rent a p-suit.
Almost three hundred years of engineering have come up with three
basic solutions to the problem: the catheter, suction devices, and . . . oh,
dear lord, the diaper. Some advocate a fourth way: continence. Try it the
next time you go on a twelve-hour hike on the surface. The catheter was by
far the best. It is painless, as advertised . . . but I hate the damn thing. It just
feels wrong. Besides, like the suckers, they get dislodged. Next time you
need a laugh, watch a woman trying to get her UroLator back in place. It
could start a new dance craze.

I've never owned a p-suit. Why spend the money, when you need it
once a year? I've rented a lot of them, and they all stank. No matter how
they are sterilized, some odors of the previous occupant will linger. It's bad
enough in a man's suit, but for real gut-wrenching stench you have to put on
the female model. They all use the suction method, with a diaper as a backup. At a place like Tranquility, where the turnover is rapid and the help
likely to be under-paid, unconcerned, and slipshod, some of the niceties will
be overlooked from time to time. I was once handed a suit that was still wet.
I got into this one and sniffed cautiously; not too bad, though the
perfume was cheap and obvious. I switched it on and let the staff put it
through a perfunctory safety check, and remembered the other thing I didn't
like about the suction method. All that air flowing by can chill the vulva
something fierce.
There were surgical methods of improving the interface, but I found
them ugly, and they didn't make sense unless your work took you outside
regularly. The rest of us just had to breathe shallowly and bear it, and try
not to drink too much coffee before an excursion.
The air lock delivered me onto the roof, which was not crowded at all. I
found a place at the rail far from anyone else, and waited. I turned off my
suit radio, all but the emergency beacon.
I said, "CC, what do I get out of it?"
The CC is pretty good at picking up a conversation hours, weeks, and
even years old, but the question was pretty vague. He took a stab at it.
"You mean the morning mouth preparation?"
"Yeah. I thought it up. You did the work, but then you gave it away
without consulting me. Shouldn't there be a way to make some money out
of it?"
"It's defined as a health benefit, so its production cost will be added to
the health tax all Lunarians pay, plus a small profit, which will go to you. It
won't make you rich."
"And no one gets to choose. They get it whether they like it or not."
"If they object, I have an antibot available. No one has so far."
"Still sounds like a subversive plot to me. If the drinking water ain't
pure, what is?"
"Hildy, there's so many things in the King City municipal water you

could practically lift it with a magnet."
"All for our own good."
"You seem to be in a sour mood."
"Why should I be? My mouth tastes wonderful."
"If you're interested, the approval ratings on this are well over ninetynine percent. The favorite flavor, however is Neutral-with-a-Hint-of-Mint.
And an unforeseen side benefit is that it works all day, cleaning your
breath."
He'd beaten halitosis, I realized, glumly. How did I feel about that?
Shouldn't I be rejoicing? I recalled the way Liz's breath had smelled last
night, that sour reek of gin. Should a drunk's breath smell like a puppy's
tongue? I was sure as hell being a crabby old woman about this, even I
could see that. But hell, I was an old woman, and often crabby. I'd found
that as I got older, I was less tolerant of change, for good or ill.
"How did you hear me?" I asked, before I could get too gloomy thinking
about a forever-changing world.
"The radio you switched off is suit-to-suit. Your suit also monitors your
vital signs, and transmits them if needed. Using your access voice is defined
as an emergency call, not requiring aid."
"So I'm never out from under the protective umbrella of your eternal
vigilance."
"It keeps you safe," he said, and I told him to go away.
#
When Armstrong and Aldrin came in peace for all mankind, it was
envisioned that their landing site, in the vacuum of space, would remain
essentially unchanged for a million years, if need be. Never mind that the
exhaust of lift-off knocked the flag over and tore a lot of the gold foil on the
landing stage. The footprints would still be there. And they are. Hundreds
of them, trampling a crazy pattern in the dust, going away from the lander,
coming back, none of them reaching as far as the visitors' gallery. There are
no other footprints to be seen. The only change the museum curators
worked at the site were to set the flag back up, and suspend an ascent-stage
module about a hundred feet above the landing stage, hanging from invisible
wires. It's not the Apollo 11 ascent stage; that one crash-landed long ago.
Things are often not what they seem.

Nowhere in the free literature or the thousands of plaques and audiovisual displays in the museum will you hear of the night one hundred and
eighty years ago when ten members of the Delta Chi Delta fraternity, Luna
University Chapter, came around on their cycles. This was shortly after the
Invasion, and the site was not guarded as it is now. There had just been a
rope around the landing area, not even a visitors' center; post-Invasion
Lunarians didn't have time for luxuries like that.
The Delts tipped the lander over and dragged it about twenty feet. Their
cycles wiped out most of the footprints. They were going to steal the flag
and take it back to their dorm, but one of them fell off his mount, cracked his
faceplate, and went to that great pledge party in the sky. P-suits were not as
safe then as they are now. Horseplay in a p-suit was not a good idea.
But not to worry. Tranquility Base was one of the most documented
places in the history of history. Tens of thousands of photos existed,
including very detailed shots from orbit. Teams of selenolography students
spent a year restoring the Base. Each square meter was scrutinized, debates
raged about the order in which footprints had been laid down, then two guys
went out there and tromped around with replica Apollo moonboots, each
step measured by laser, and were hauled out on a winch when they were
through. Presto! An historical re-creation passing as the real thing. This is
not a secret, but very few people know about it. Look it up.
I felt a hand flip the radio switch on my suit back on.
"Fancy meeting you here," Liz said.
"Quite a coincidence," I said, thinking about the CC listening in. She
joined me, leaning on the railing and looking out over the plain. Behind the
far wall of the round visitors' gallery I could see thousands of people looking
toward us through the glass.
"I come here a lot," she said. "Would you travel a half-million miles in
a tinfoil toy like that?"
"I wouldn't go half a meter in it. I'd rather travel by pogo stick."
"They were real men in those days. Have you ever thought about it?
What it must have been like? They could barely turn around in that thing.
One of them made it back with half the ship blown up."
"Yeah. I have thought about it. Maybe not as much as you."
"Think about this, then. You know who the real hero was? In my
opinion? Good old Mike Collins, the poor sap who stayed in orbit.

Whoever designed this operation didn't think it out. Say something went
wrong, say the lander crashes and these two die instantly. There's Collins up
in orbit, all by himself. How are you gonna deal with that? No ticker-tape
parade for Mike. He gets to attend the memorial service, and spend the rest
of his life wishing he'd died with them. He gets to be a national goat, is
what he gets."
"I hadn't thought of that."
"So things go right—and they did, though I'll never understand how—so
who does the Planetary Park get named after? Why, the guy who flubbed
his 'first words' from the surface."
"I thought that was a garbled transmission."
"Don't you believe it. 'Course, if I'd had two billion people listening in,
I might have fucked it up, too. That part was probably scarier than the
thought of dying, anyway, having everybody watching you die, and hoping
that if it did go rotten, it wouldn't be your fault. This little exercise cost
twenty, thirty billion dollars, and that was back when a billion was real
money."
It was still real money to me, but I let her ramble on. This was her
show; she'd brought me here, knowing only that I was interested in telling
her something in a place where the CC couldn't overhear. I was in her
hands.
"Let's go for a walk," she said, and started off. I hurried to catch up with
her, followed her down several flights of stairs to the surface.
You can cover a lot of ground on the surface in a fairly short time. The
best gait is a hop from the ball of the foot, swinging each leg out slightly to
the side. There's no point in jumping too high, it just wastes energy.
I know there are still places on Luna where the virgin dust stretches as
far as the eye can see. Not many, but a few. The mineral wealth of my
home planet is not great, and all the interesting places have been identified
and mapped from orbit, so there's little incentive to visit some of the more
remote regions. By remote, I mean far from the centers of human habitation;
any spot on Luna is easily reachable by a lander or crawler.
Everywhere I'd ever been on the surface looked much like the land
around Tranquility Base, covered with so many tracks you wondered where
the big crowd had gone, since there was likely to be not a single soul in sight
but whatever companions you were traveling with. Nothing ever goes away

on Luna. It has been continuously inhabited by humans for almost two and a
half centuries. Every time someone has taken a stroll or dropped an empty
oxygen tank the evidence is still there, so a place that got two visitors every
three or four years looks like hundreds of people have gone by just a few
minutes before. Tranquility got considerably more than that. There was not
a square millimeter of undisturbed dust, and the litter was so thick it had
been kicked into heaps here and there. I saw empty beer cans with labels a
hundred and fifty years old lying next to some they were currently selling in
Armstrong Park.
After a bit some of that thinned out. The tracks tended to group
themselves into impromptu trails. I guess humans tend to follow the herd,
even when the herd is gone and the land is so flat it doesn't matter where you
go.
"You left too early last night," Liz said, the radio making it sound as if
she was standing beside me when I could see her twenty meters in front.
"There was some excitement."
"I thought it was pretty exciting while I was there."
"Then you must have seen the Duke of Bosnia tangling with the
punchbowl."
"No, I missed that. But I tangled with him earlier."
"That was you? Then it's your fault. He was in a foul mood.
Apparently you didn't mark him enough; he figures if he hasn't lost a kilo or
two of flesh after pounding the sheets, somebody just wasn't trying."
"He didn't complain."
"He wouldn't. I swear, I think I'm related to him, but that man is so
stupid, he hasn't got the brains God gave a left-handed screwdriver. After
you went home he got drunk as a waltzing pissant and decided somebody
had put poison in the punch, so he tipped it over and picked it up and started
banging people over the head with it. I had to come over and coldcock
him."
"You do give interesting parties."
"Ain't it the truth? But that's not what I was gonna tell you about. We
were having so much fun we completely forgot about the gifts, so I gathered
everybody around and started opening them."
"You get anything nice?"

"Well, a few had the sense to tape the receipt to the box. I'll clear a little
money on that. So I got to one that said it was from the Earl of Donegal,
which should have tipped me off, but what do I know about the goddam
United Kingdom? I thought it was a province of Wales, or something. I
knew I didn't know the guy, but who can keep track? I opened it, and it was
from the Irish Republican Pranksters."
"Oh, no."
"The hereditary enemies of my clan. Next thing I know we're all
covered with this green stuff, I don't wanna know where it came from, but I
know what it smelled like. And that was the end of that party. Just as well.
I had to mail half the guests home, anyway."
"I hate those jerks. On St. Patrick's day you don't dare sit down without
looking for a green whoopee cushion."
"You think you got it bad? Every mick in King City comes gunning for
me on the seventeenth of March, so they can tell their buddies how they put
one over on the bleedin' Princess o' Wales. And it's only gonna get worse
now."
"Uneasy lies the head that wears the crown."
"I'll crown 'em, all right. I know where Paddy Flynn lives, and I'm
gonna get even if it harelips the Mayor and the whole damn city council."
I reflected that you'd have to go a long way to find somebody as colorful
as the new Queen. Once again I wondered what I was doing out here. I
looked behind me, saw the four-story stadium around the landing site just
about to vanish over the horizon. When it was gone, it would be easy to get
lost out here. Not that I was worried about that. The suit had about
seventeen different kinds of alarms and locators, a compass, probably things
I didn't even know about. No real need for girl-scout tricks like noting the
position of your shadow.
But the sense of aloneness was a little oppressive.
And illusory. I spotted another hiking party of five on the crest of a low
rise off to my left. A flash of light made me look up, and I saw one of the
Grand Mal trains arcing overhead on one of the free-trajectory segments of
its route. It was spinning end over end, a maneuver I remember vividly
since I'd been in the front car, hanging from my straps and watching the
surface sweep by every two seconds when a big glob of half-digested
caramel corn and licorice splattered on the glass in front of me, having just

missed my neck. At that moment I had been regretting everything I had
eaten for the last six years, and wondering if I was going to be seeing a good
portion of it soon, right there beside the tasty treats on the windshield.
Keeping it down may be one of the most amazing things I ever did.
"You ever ride that damn thing?" Liz asked. "I try it out every couple
years, when I'm feeling mean. I swear, first time I think my ass sucked six
inches of foam rubber out of the seat cushion. After that, It's not so bad.
About like a barbed-wire enema."
I didn't reply—I'm not sure how one could reply to statements like
that—because as she spoke she had stopped and waited for me to catch up,
and she was punching buttons on a small device on her left hand. I saw a
pattern of lights flash, mostly red, then they turned green one by one. When
the whole panel was green she opened a service hatch on the front of my suit
and studied whatever she found in there. She poked buttons, then
straightened and made a thumbs-up gesture at me. She hung the device from
a strap around my neck and regarded me with her fists on her hips.
"So, you want to talk where nobody can listen in. Well, talk, baby."
"What's that thing?"
"De-bugger. By which, it buggers up all the signals your suit is sending
out, but not enough so they'll send out a search party. The machines up in
orbit and down underground are getting the signals that keep them happy,
but it's not the real stuff; it's what I want them to hear. Can't just step out
here and cut off your emergency freaks. That signal goes away, it's an
emergency in itself. But nobody can hear us now, take my word for it."
"What if we have a real emergency?"
"I was about to say, don't crack open if you want to keep a step ahead of
your pallbearers. What's on your mind?"
Once again I found it hard to get started. I knew once I got the first
words out it would be easy enough, but I agonized over those first words
more than any first-time novelist.
"This may take some time," I hedged.
"It's my day off. Come on, Hildy; I love you, but cut the cards."
So I started in on my third telling of my litany of woe. You get better at
these things as you go along. This time didn't take as long as it had with
either Callie or Fox. Liz walked along beside me, saying nothing, guiding
me back to some trail she was following when I started to stray.

The thing was, I'd decided to tell it this time where it logically should
have begun the other two times: with my suicide attempts. And it was a
little easier to tell it to someone I didn't know well, but not much. I was
thankful she remained silent through to the end. I don't think I could have
tolerated any of her unlikely folk sayings at that point.
And she stayed quiet for several minutes after I'd finished. I didn't mind
that, either. As before, I was experiencing a rare moment of peace for
having unburdened myself.
Liz is not quite in the Italian class of gesturing, but she did like to move
her hands around when she talked. This is frustrating in a p-suit. So many
gestures and nervous mannerisms involve touching part of the head or body,
which is impossible when suited up. She looked as if she'd like to be
chewing on a knuckle, or rubbing her forehead. Finally she turned and
squinted at me suspiciously.
"Why did you come to me?"
"I didn't expect you could solve my problem, if that's what you mean."
"You got that right. I like you well enough, Hildy, but frankly, I don't
care if you kill yourself. You want to do it, do it. And I think I resent it that
you tried to use me to get it done."
"I'm sorry about that, but I wasn't even aware that's what I was doing.
I'm still not sure if I was."
"Yeah, all right, it's not important."
"What I heard," I said, trying to put this delicately, "if you want
something that's, you know, not strictly legal, that Liz was the gal to see."
"You heard that, did you?" She shot me a look that showed some teeth,
but would never pass for a smile. She looked very dangerous. She was
dangerous. How easy it would be for her to arrange an accident out here,
and how powerless I would be to stop her. But the look was only a flicker,
and her usual, amiable expression replaced it. She shrugged. "You heard
right. That's what I thought we were coming out here for, to do some
business. But after what you just said, I wouldn't sell to you."
"The way I reasoned," I went on, wondering what it was she sold, "if
you're used to doing illegal deals, things the CC couldn't hear about, you
must have methods of disguising your activities."
"I see that now. Sure. This is one of them." She shook her head
slowly, and walked in a short circle, thinking it over. "I tell you Hildy, I've

seen a rodeo, a three-headed man, and a duck fart underwater, but this is the
craziest thing I ever did see. This changes all the rules."
"How do you mean?"
"Lots of ways. I never heard of that memory-dump business. I'm gonna
look it up when we get back. You say it's not a secret?"
"That's what the CC said, and a friend of mine has heard of it."
"Well, that's not the real important thing. It's lousy, but I don't know
what I can do about it, and I don't think it really concerns me. I hope not,
anyway. But what you said about the CC rescuing you when you tried to
kill yourself in your own home.
"What it is, the main thing that me keeps walking around free is what
we call, in the trade, the Fourth Amendment. That's the series of computer
programs that—"
"I've heard the term."
"Right. Searches and seizures. An all-powerful, pervasive computer
that, if we let him loose, would make Big Brother seem like my maiden aunt
Vickie listening with a teacup against the bedroom door. Balance that with
the fact that everybody has something to hide, something we'd rather nobody
knew about, even if it's not illegal, that lovely little right of privacy. I think
what's saved us is the people who make the laws have something to hide,
just like the rest of us.
"So what we do, in the, uh, 'criminal underworld,' is sweep for extra ears
and eyes in our own homes . . . and then do our business right there. We
know the CC is listening and watching, but not the part that types out the
warrants and knocks down the doors."
"And that works?"
"It has so far. It sounds incredible when you think about it, but I've been
dodging in and out of trouble most of my life, using just that method . . .
essentially taking the CC at his word, now that you mention it."
"It sounds risky."
"You'd think so. But in all my life, I never heard of an instance where
the CC used any illegally-obtained evidence. And I'm not just talking about
making arrests. I'm talking about in establishing probable cause and issuing
warrants, which is the key to the whole search and seizure thing. The CC
hears, in one of his incarnations, things that would be incriminating, or at

least be enough for a judge to issue a warrant for a search or a bug. But he
doesn't tell himself what he knows, if you get my meaning. He's
compartmentalized. When I talk to him, he knows I'm doing things that are
against the law, and I know he knows it. But that's the dealing-with-Liz part
of his brain, which is forbidden to tell the John Law part of his brain what he
knows."
We walked a little farther, both of us mulling this over. I could see that
what I'd told her made her very uneasy. I'd be nervous, too, in her place. I'd
never broken any laws more serious than a misdemeanor; it's too easy to get
caught, and there's nothing illegal I've ever particularly wanted to do. Hell,
there's not that much that really is illegal in Luna. The things that used to
give law enforcement ninety percent of their work—drugs, prostitution, and
gambling, and the organizations that provided these things to a naughty
populace—are all inalienable human rights in Luna. Violence short of death
was just a violation, subject to a fine.
Most of the things that were still worth a heavy-duty law were so
disgusting I didn't even want to think about them. Once more I wondered
just what it was the Queen of England was involved in that made her the gal
to see.
The biggest crime problem in Luna was theft of one sort or another.
Until the CC is unleashed, we'll probably always have theft. Other than that,
we're a pretty law-abiding society, which we achieved by trimming the laws
back to a bare minimum.
Liz spoke again, echoing my thoughts.
"Crime just ain't a big problem, you know that," she said. "Otherwise,
the citizenry in their great wisdom would clamor for the sort of electronic
cage I've always feared we'd get sooner or later. All it would take would be
to re-write a few programs, and we'd see the biggest round-up since John
Wayne took the herd to Abilene. It's all just waiting to happen, you know.
In about a millisecond the CC could start singing like a canary to the cops,
and about three seconds later the warrants could be printed up." She
laughed. "One problem, there's probably not enough cops to arrest
everybody, much less jails to put them in. Every crime since the Invasion
could be solved just like that. It boggles the mind just to think about it."
"I don't think that's going to happen," I said.
"No, thinking it over, what the CC's doing to you is really for your own
good, even if it turns my stomach. I mean, suicide's a civil right, isn't it?

What business does that fucker have saving your life?"
"Actually, I hate to admit it, but I'm glad he did."
"Well, I would be too, you know, but it's the principle of the thing.
Listen, you know I'm going to spread this around, huh? I mean, tell all my
friends? I won't use your name."
"Sure. I knew you would."
"Maybe we should take extra precautions. Right offhand, I can't think
what they'd be, but I got a few friends who'll want to brainstorm on this one.
You know what the scary thing is, I guess. He's overridden a basic program.
If he can do one, he could do another."
"Catching you and curing you of your criminal tendencies might be seen
as . . . well, for your own good."
"Exactly, that's exactly where that kind of bullshit thinking leads. You
give 'em an inch, and they take a parsec."
We were back within sight of the visitors' gallery again. Liz stopped,
began drawing aimless patterns in the dust with the tip of her boot. I figured
she had something else she wanted to say, and knew she'd get to it soon. I
looked up, and saw another roller coaster train arc overhead. She looked up
at me.
"So . . . the reason you wanted to know how to get around the CC, I
don't think you mentioned it, and that was . . ."
"Not so I could kill myself."
"I had to ask."
"I can't give you a concrete reason. I haven't done much . . . well, I don't
feel like I've done enough to . . ."
"Take arms against a sea of troubles, and by opposing, end them?"
"Like that. I've been sort of sleepwalking since this happened. And I
feel like I ought to be doing something."
"Talking it over is doing something. Maybe all you can do except . . .
you know, cheer up. Easy to say."
"Yes. How do you fight a recurrent suicidal urge? I haven't been able
to tell where it comes from. I don't feel that depressed. But sometimes I just
want to . . . hit something."
"Like me."

"Sorry."
"You paid for it. Man, Hildy, I can't think of a thing I would have done
other than what you've told me. I just can't."
"Well, I feel like I ought to be doing something. Then there's the other
part of it. The . . . violation. I wanted to find out if it's possible to get away
from the CC's eyes and ears. Because . . . I don't want him watching if I,
you know, do it again, damn it, I don't want him watching at all, I want him
out of my body, and out of my mind, and out of my goddam life, because I
don't like being one of his laboratory animals!"
She put her hand on my shoulder and I realized I'd been shouting. That
made me mad, it shouldn't have, I know, because it was only a gesture of
friendship and concern, but the last thing somebody crippled wants is your
pity—and maybe not even your sympathy—he just wants to be normal
again, just like everybody else. Every gesture of caring becomes a slap in
the face, a reminder that you are not well. So damn your sympathy, damn
your caring, how dare you stand over me, perfect and healthy, and offer
your help and your secret condescension.
Yeah, right, Hildy, so if you're so independent how come you keep
spilling your guts to strangers passing on the street? I barely knew Liz. I
knew it was wrong, but I still had to bite my tongue to keep from telling her
to keep her stinking hands off me, something I'd come close to half a dozen
times with Fox. One day soon I'd go ahead and say it, lash out at him, and
he'd probably be gone. I'd be alone again.
"You have to tell me how this all came out," Liz said. It relaxed me.
She could have offered to help, and we'd have both known it was false. A
simple curiosity about how the story came out was acceptable to me. She
looked at the walls of the visitors' center. "I guess it's about time to piss on
the fire and call in the dogs." She reached for the radio de-bugger.
"I have one more question."
"Shoot."
"Don't answer if you don't want to. But what do you do that's illegal?"
"Are you a cop?"
"What? No."
"I know that. I had you checked out, you don't work the police beat, you
aren't friends with any cops."

"I know a couple of them fairly well."
"But you don't hang with them. Anyway, if you were a cop and you
said you weren't, your testimony is inadmissible, and I got your denial on
tape. Don't look so surprised; I gotta protect myself."
"Maybe I shouldn't have asked."
"I'm not angry." She sighed, and kicked at a beer can. "I don't guess
many criminals think of themselves as criminals. I mean, they don't wake
up and say 'Looks like a good day to break some laws.' I know what I do is
illegal, but with me it's a matter of principle. What we desperados call the
Second Amendment."
"Sorry, I'm not up on the U.S. Constitution. Which one is that?"
"Firearms." I tried to keep my face neutral. In truth, I'd feared
something a lot worse than that.
"You're a gunrunner."
"I happen to believe it's a basic human right to be armed. The Lunar
government disagrees strongly. That's why I thought you wanted to talk to
me, to buy a gun. I brought you out here because I've got several of them
buried in various places within a few kilometers."
"You'd have sold me one? Just handed it over?"
"Well, I might have told you where to dig."
"But how can you bury them? There's satellites watching you all the
time when you're out here."
"I think I'll keep a few trade secrets, if you don't mind."
"Oh, sure, I was just—"
"That's all right, you're a reporter, you can't help being a nosy bitch."
She started again to take the electronic device from around my neck. I
put my hand on it. I hadn't planned to do that.
"How much? I want to keep it."
She narrowed her eyes at me.
"You gonna walk out into the bush, invisible, and off yourself?"
"Hell, Liz, I don't know. I'm not planning to. I just like the idea that I
can use it to be really alone if I want to. I like the thought of being able to
vanish."

"It's not quite that simple . . . but I guess it's better than nothing."
She named a price, I called her a stinking thief and named a lower one.
She named another. I'd have paid the first price, but I knew she was a
haggler, from a long line of people who knew how to drive a hard bargain.
We agreed soon, and she gave me an elaborate set of instructions on how to
launder the payment so what transactions existed in the CC would be
perfectly legal.
By then I was more than ready to go inside, as I'd been trying my best to
practice the fourth method of liquid waste management, and was doing the
Gotta-Do-It Samba.

CHAPTER TWELVE

What with covering the Collapse from the site and chasing victims'
relatives, dome engineers, politicians, and ambulances, I didn't make it into
the newsroom for almost ten days after my Change.
It turns the world on its head, Changing. Naturally, it's not the world
that has altered, it's your point of view, but subjective reality is in some ways
more important than the way things really are, or might be; who really

knows? Not a thing had been moved in the busy newsroom when I strode
into it. All the furniture was just where it had been, and there were no
unfamiliar faces at the desks. But all the faces now meant something
different. Where a buddy had sat there was now a good-looking guy who
seemed to be taking an interest in me. In place of that gorgeous girl in the
fashion department, the one I'd intended to proposition someday, when I had
the time, now there was only another woman, probably not even as pretty as
me. We smiled at each other.
Changing is common, of course, part of everyday life, but it's not such a
frequent occurrence as to pass without notice, at least not at my income level
and that of most people in the office. So I stood by the water cooler and for
about an hour was the center of attention, and I won't pretend I didn't like it.
My co-workers came and went, talked for a while, the group constantly
changing. What we were doing was establishing a new sexual dynamic. I'd
been male all the time I'd worked at the Nipple. Everyone knew that the
male Hildy was strictly a hetero. But what were my preferences when
female? The question had never come up, and it was worth asking, because
a lot of people were oriented toward one sex or the other no matter their
present gender. So the word spread quickly: Hildy is totally straight.
Homo-oriented girls might as well not waste their time. As for hetero-girls .
. . sorry, ladies, you missed your big chance, except for those three or four
who no doubt would go home and weep all night for what they could no
longer have. Well, you like to think that, anyway. I must admit I saw no
tears from them there at the cooler.
Within ten minutes the crowd was completely stag, and I was Queen of
the May. I turned down a dozen dates, and half that many much more frank
proposals. I feel it's best not to leap right into bed with co-workers, not until
you have had a chance to know them well enough to judge the possible
scrapes and bruises you might get from such an encounter, and the tensions
in the workplace that might ensue. I decided to stick with that rule even
though I was about to quit my job.
And the thing was, I didn't know these guys. Not well enough, anyway.
I'd drunk with them, bullshitted with them, mailed a few of them home from
bars, argued with them, even had fights with two of them. I'd seen them
with women, knew a bit of how they could be expected to behave. But I
didn't really know them. I'd never looked at them with female eyes, and that
can make one hell of a lot of difference. A guy who seemed an honest,
reliable sensible fellow when he had no sexual designs on you could turn out
to be the worst jerk in the world when he was trying to slip his hand under

your skirt. You learn a lot about human nature when you Change. I feel
sorry for those who don't, or won't.
And speaking of that . . .
I kissed a few of the guys—a sisterly peck on the cheek, nothing more—
squared my shoulders, and marched into the elevator to go beard the lion in
his den. I had a feeling he was going to be hungry.
Nothing much happens at the Nipple without Walter hearing about it. It
certainly isn't his great personal insights that bring him the news; none of us
are sure exactly how he does it, but the network of security cameras and
microphones that lead to his desk can't hurt. Still, he knows things he
couldn't have found out that way, and the general opinion is that he has a
truly vast cabal of spies, probably well-paid. No one I know has ever
admitted to snitching to Walter, and I can't recall anyone ever being caught
at it, but trying to find one is a perpetual office pastime. The usual method
is to invent some false but plausible bit of employee scandal, tell one person
about it, and see if it gets back to Walter. He never bites.
He glanced up from his reading as I entered the office, then looked back
down. No surprise, and no comments about my new body, and of course I
had expected that. He'd rather die, usually, than give you a compliment, or
admit that anything had caught him unprepared. I took a seat, and waited for
him to acknowledge me.
I'd given a lot of thought to the problem of Walter and I'd dressed
accordingly. Since he was a natural, and from other clues I'd observed over
the years of our association, I'd concluded he might be a breast fancier.
With that in mind, I'd worn a blouse that bared my left one. With it I'd
chosen a short skirt and black gloves that reached to the elbows. For the
final touch I'd put on a ridiculous little hat with a huge plume that drooped
down almost over my left eye and swooshed alarmingly through the air
whenever I turned my head, a very nineteen-thirtyish thing complete with a
black net veil for an air of mystery. The whole outfit was black, except for
the red hose. It needed black needle-tipped high heels, but that far I was not
prepared to go, and everything else I had in the closet looked awful with the
hat, so I wore no shoes at all. I liked the effect. From the corner of my eye,
I could tell Walter did, too, though he was unlikely to admit it.
My guesses about him had been confirmed at the water cooler by two
co-workers who'd recently gone from male to female. Walter was mildly
homophobic, not aware of it, had been baffled all his life by the very idea of
changing sex, and was extremely uncomfortable to find a male employee

showing up for work suddenly transformed into someone he could be
sexually interested in. He would be very grouchy today and would stay that
way for several months, until he managed to forget entirely that I had ever
been male, at which time the approaches would start. My plan was to play
up to that, to be as female as a person could be, to keep him on the defensive
about it.
Not that I planned to have sex with him. I'd rather bed a Galapagos
tortoise. My intention was to quit my job. I'd tried it before, maybe not with
the determination I was feeling that day, but I'd tried, and I knew how
persuasive he could be.
When he judged he'd kept me waiting a suitable time, he tossed the
pages he'd been reading into a hopper, leaned back in his huge chair, and
laced his fingers behind his neck.
"Nice hat," he said, confounding me completely.
"Thanks." Damn, I already felt on the defensive. Resigning was going
to be harder if he was nice to me.
"Heard you went to the Darling outfit for the body work."
"That's right."
"Heard he's on the way out."
"That's what he's afraid of. But he's been afraid of that for ten years."
He shrugged. There were circles of sweat in the armpits of his rumpled
white shirt, and a coffee stain on his blue tie. Once again I wondered where
he found sex partners, and concluded he probably paid for them. I'd heard
he'd been married for thirty years, but that had been sixty years ago.
"If that's the kind of work he's doing, maybe I heard wrong." He leaned
forward, resting his elbows on his desk. I'd just worked out that what he'd
said could be a compliment to me as well as Bobbie, which just threw me
further off balance. Damn him.
"Reason I called you in here," he said, completely ignoring the fact that
it was I who had requested this meeting, "I wanted to let you know you did
real good work on that Collapse story. I know I usually don't bother to tell
my reporters when they've done a good job. Maybe that's a mistake. But
you're one of my best." He shrugged again. "Okay. The best. Just thought
I'd tell you that. There's a bonus in your next paycheck, and I'm giving you
a raise."

"Thanks, Walter." You son of a bitch.
"And that Invasion Bicentennial stuff. Really first-rate. It's exactly the
sort of stuff I was looking for. And you were wrong about it, too, Hildy.
We got a good response from the first article, and the ratings have gone up
every week since then."
"Thanks again." I was getting very tired of that word. "But I can't take
credit for it. Brenda's been doing most of the work. I take what she's done
and do a little punching up, cut a few things here and there."
"I know. And I appreciate it. That girl's gonna be good at hard news
one of these days. That's why I paired you two up, so you could give her the
benefit of your experience on the feature writing, show her the ropes. She's
learning fast, don't you think?"
I had to agree that she was, and he went on about it for another minute
or two, picking out items he'd particularly liked in her series. I was
wondering when he'd get to the point. Hell, I was wondering when I'd get to
the point.
So I drew a deep breath and spoke into one of his pauses.
"That's why I'm here today, Walter. I want to be taken off the Invasion
series." Damn it. Somewhere between my brain and my mouth that
sentence had been short-circuited; I'd meant to tell him I was leaving the pad
entirely.
"Okay," he said.
"Now don't try to talk me into staying on," I said, and then stopped.
"What do you mean, okay?" I asked.
"I mean okay. You're off the Invasion series. I'd appreciate it if you'd
continue to give Brenda some help on it when she needs it, but only if it
doesn't get in the way of your other work."
"I thought you said you liked the stuff I was doing."
"Hildy, you can't have it both ways. I did like it, and you didn't like
doing it. Fine, I'm letting you off. Do you want back on?"
"No . . . is this some sort of trick?"
He just shook his head. I could see he was enjoying this, the bastard.
"You mentioned my other work. What would that be?" This had to be
where the punch line came, but I was at a loss to envision any job he could
want me to do that would require this much buttering up.

"You tell me," he said.
"What do you mean?"
"I seem to be having trouble using the language today. I thought it was
clear what I meant. What would you like to do? You want to switch to
another department? You want to create your own department? Name it,
Hildy."
I suppose I was still feeling shaky from recent experiences, but I felt
another anxiety attack coming on. I breathed deeply, in and out, several
times. Where was the Walter I'd known and knew how to deal with?
"You've always talked about a column," he was saying. "If you want it,
it can be arranged, but frankly, Hildy, I think it'd be a mistake. You could
do it, sure, but you're not really cut out for it. You need work where you get
out into the action more regularly. Columnists, hell, they run around for a
few weeks or years, hunting stories, but they all get lazy sooner or later and
wait for the stories to come to them. You don't like government stuff and I
don't blame you; it's boring. You don't like straight gossip. My feeling is
what you're good at is rooting out the personality scandal, and getting on top
of and staying on top of the big, breaking story. If you have an idea for a
column, I'll listen, but I'd hoped you'd go in another direction."
Aha. Here it came.
"And what direction is that?"
"You tell me," he said, blandly.
"Walter, frankly . . . you caught me by surprise. I haven't been thinking
in those terms. What I came in here to do was quit."
"Quit?" He looked at me dubiously, then chuckled. "You'll never quit,
Hildy. Oh, maybe in twenty, thirty more years. There's still things you like
about this job, no matter how you bitch about it."
"I won't deny that. But the other parts are wearing me down."
"I've heard that before. It's just a bad phase you're going through; you'll
bounce back when you get used to your new role here."
"And what is that?"
"I told you, I want to hear your ideas on that."
I sat quietly for some time, staring at him. He just gazed placidly back
at me. I went over it again and again, looking for mousetraps. Of course,
there was nothing to guarantee he'd keep his word, but if he didn't, I could

always quit then. Is that what he was counting on? Was he fighting a
delaying action, knowing he could always bring his powers of persuasion to
bear again at a later date, after he'd screwed me and I started to howl?
One thought kept coming back to me. It almost seemed as if he'd
known when I walked into his office that I'd planned to quit. Otherwise why
the stroking, why the sugarplums?
Did he really think I was that good? I knew I was good—it was part of
my problem, being so proficient at something so frequently vile—but was I
that good? I'd never seen any signs that Walter thought so.
The main fact, though, I thought sourly, was that he'd hooked me. I was
interested in staying on at the Nipple—or maybe at the better-respected
Daily Cream—if I could make a stab at re-defining my job. But thoughts
like that had been the farthest thing from my mind today. He was offering
me what I wanted, and I had no idea what that was.
Once again, he seemed to read my thoughts.
"Why don't you take a week or so to think this over?" he said. "No
sense trying to come up with an outline for the next ten, twenty years right
here and now."
"All right."
"While you're doing that . . ." I leaned forward, ready for him to jerk all
this away from me. This was the obvious place to reveal his real intentions,
now that he'd set the hook firmly.
"All right, Walter, let's see your hole card."
He looked at me innocently, with just a trace of hurt. Worse and worse,
I thought. I'd seen that same expression just before he sent me out to cover
the assassination of the President of Pluto. Three gees all the way, and the
story was essentially over by the time I arrived.
"The Flacks had a press release this morning," he said. "Seems they're
going to canonize a new Gigastar tomorrow morning."
I turned it over and over, looking for the catch. I didn't see one.
"Why me? Why not send the religion editor?"
"Because she'll be happy to pick up all the free material and come right
back home and let them write the story for her. You know the Flacks; this
thing is going to be prepared. I want you there, see if you can get a different
angle on it."

"What possible new angle could there be on the Flacks?"
For the first time he showed a little impatience.
"That's what I pay you to find. Will you go?"
If this was some sort of walterian trick, I couldn't see it. I nodded, got
up, and started for the door.
"Take Brenda with you."
I turned, thought about protesting, realized it would have been just a
reflexive move, and nodded. I turned once more. He waited for the
traditional moment every movie fan knows, when I'd just pulled the door
open.
"And Hildy." I turned again. "I'd appreciate it if you'd cover yourself
up when you come in here. Out of respect for my idiosyncrasies."
This was more like it. I'd begun to think Walter had been kidnapped by
mind-eaters from Alpha, and a blander substitute left in his place. I brought
up some of the considerable psychic artillery I had marshalled for this little
foray, though it was sort of like nuking a flea.
"I'll wear what I please, where I please," I said, coldly. "And if you
have a complaint about how I dress, check with my union." I liked the line,
but it should have had a gesture to go with it. Something like ripping off my
blouse. But everything I thought of would have made me look sillier than
him, and then the moment was gone, so I just left.
#
In the elevator on my way out of the building I said "CC, on line."
"I'm at your service."
"Did you tell Walter I've been suicidal?"
There was, for the CC, a long pause, long enough that, had he been
human, I'd have suspected him of preparing a lie. But I'd come to feel that
the CC's pauses could conceal something a lot trickier than that.
"I'm afraid you have engendered a programming conflict in me," he
said. "Because of a situation with Walter which I am not at liberty to discuss
or even hint at with you, most of my conversations with him are strictly
under the rose."
"That sounds like you did."
"I neither confirm nor deny it."

"Then I'm going to assume you did."
"It's a free satellite. You can assume what you please. The nearest I can
get to a denial is to say that telling him of your condition without your
approval would be a violation of your rights of privacy . . . and I can add that
I would find it personally distasteful to do so."
"Which still isn't a denial."
"No. It's the best I can do."
"You can be very frustrating."
"Look who's talking."
I'll admit that I was a bit wounded at the idea that the CC could find me
frustrating. I'm not sure what he meant; probably my willful and repeated
attempts to ignore his efforts to save my life. Come to think of it, I'd find
that frustrating, too, if a friend of mine was trying to kill herself.
"I can't find another way to explain his . . . unprecedented coddling of
me. Like he knew I was sick, or something."
"In your position, I would have found it odd, as well."
"It's contrary to his normal behavior."
"It is that."
"And you know the reason for that."
"I know some of the reasons. And again, I can't tell you more."
You can't have it both ways, but we all want to. Certain conversations
between the CC and private citizens are protected by Programs of Privilege
that would make Catholic priests hearing confession seem gossipy. So on
the one hand I was angry at the thought the CC might have told Walter about
my predicament; I'd specifically told him not tell anyone. On the other
hand, I was awfully curious to know what Walter had told the CC, which the
CC said would have violated his rights.
Most of us give up trying to wheedle the CC when we're five or six. I'm
a little more stubborn than that, but I hadn't done it since I was twenty. Still,
things had changed a bit . . .
"You've overridden your programming before," I suggested.
"And you're one of the few who know about it, and I do it only when the
situation is so dire I can think of no alternative, and only after long, careful
consideration.

"Consider it, will you?"
"I will. It shouldn't take more than five or six years to reach a
conclusion. I warn you, I think the answer will be no."
#
One of the reasons I can hear Walter call me his best reporter without
laughing out loud is that I had no intention of showing up at the canonization
the next day to meekly accept a basketful of handouts and watch the show.
Finding out who the new Gigastar was going to be would be a bigger scoop
than the David Earth story. So I spent the rest of the day dragging Brenda
around to see some of my sources. None of them knew anything, though I
picked up speculation ranging from the plausible—John Lennon—to the
laughable —Larry Yeager. It would be just like the Flacks to cash in on the
Nirvana disaster by elevating a star killed in the Collapse, but he'd have to
have considerably more dedicated followers than poor Larry. On the other
hand, there was a long-standing movement within the church to give the
Golden Halo to the Mop-Top from Liverpool. He fulfilled all the Flacks'
qualifications for Sainthood: wildly popular when alive, a two-century-plus
cult following, killed violently before his time. There had been sightings
and cosmic interventions and manifestations, just like with Tori-san and
Megan and the others. But I could get no one to either confirm or deny on it,
and had to keep digging.
I did so long into the night, waking up people, calling in favors, working
Brenda like a draft horse. What had started out as a bright-eyed adventure
eventually turned her into a yawning cadaverous wraith, still gamely calling,
still listening patiently to the increasingly nasty comments as this or that
insider who owed me something told me they knew nothing at all.
"If one more person asks me if I know what time it is . . ." she said, and
couldn't finish because her jaw was cracking from another yawn. "This is no
use, Hildy. The security's too good. I'm tired."
"Why do you think they call it legwork?"
I kept at it until the wee hours, and stopped only because Fox came in
and told me Brenda had fallen asleep on the couch in the other room. I'd
been prepared to stay awake all night, sustained by coffee and stims, but it
was Fox's house, and our relationship was already getting a little rocky, so I
packed it in, still no wiser as to who would be called to glory at ten the next
morning.
I was bone weary, but I felt better than I had in quite a while.

#
Brenda had the resilience of true youth. She joined me in the bathroom
the next morning looking none the worse for wear. I felt the corners of her
eyes jabbing me as she pretended not to be interested in Hildy's Beauty
Secrets. I dialed up programs on the various make-up machines and left
them there when I was through so she could copy down the numbers when I
wasn't looking. I remember thinking her mother should have taught her
some of these tricks—Brenda wore little or no cosmetics, seemed to know
nothing about them—but I knew nothing about her mother. If the old lady
wouldn't let her daughter have a vagina, there was no telling what other
restrictions had been in effect in the "Starr" household.
The one thing I still hadn't adjusted to about being female again was
learning to allow for the two to three minutes extra I require to get ready to
face the world in the morning. I think of it as Woman's Burden. Let's not
get into the fact that it's a self-imposed one; I like to look my best, and that
means enhancing even Bobbie's artistry. Instead of taking whatever the
autovalet throws into my hand, I deliberate at least twenty seconds over what
to wear. Then there's coloring and styling the hair to compliment it,
choosing a make-up scheme and letting the machines apply it, eye color,
accessories, scent . . . the details of the Presentation of Hildy as I wish to
present her are endless, time-consuming . . . and enjoyable. So maybe it's
not such a burden after all, but the result on the morning of the canonization
was that I missed the train I had planned to catch by twenty seconds and had
to wait ten minutes for the next one. I spent the time showing Brenda a few
tricks she could do to her standard paper jumper that would emphasize her
best points—though picking out good points on that endless rail of a body
taxed my inspiration and my tact to their limits.
She was coltishly pleased at the attention. I saw her scrutinizing my
pale blue opaque body stocking with the almost subliminal moir of even
lighter blue running through the weave, and had a pretty good idea of what
she'd be wearing the next day. I decided I'd drop some subtle hints to
discourage it. Brenda in a body stocking would make as much sense,
fashion-wise, as a snood on a dry salami.
#
The Grand Studio of the First Latitudinarian Church of Celebrity Saints
is in the studio district, not far from the Blind Pig, convenient to the many
members who work in the entertainment industry. The exterior is not much
to look at, just a plain warehouse-type door leading off one of the tall, broad

corridors of the upper parts of King City zoned for light manufacturing—
which is a good description of the movie business, come to think of it. Over
the entrance are the well-known initials F.L.C.C.S. framed in the roundcornered rectangle that has symbolized television long after screens ceased
to be round-cornered rectangles anywhere but in the Flacks' Grand Studio.
Inside was much better. Brenda and I entered a long hallway with a roof
invisible behind multi-colored spots. Lining the hall were huge holos and
shrines of the Four Gigastars, starting with the most recently canonized.
First was Mambazo Nkabinde—"Momby" to all his fans. Born shortly
before the Invasion in Swaziland, a nation that history has all but forgotten,
emigrated to Luna with his father at age three under some sort of racial
quota system in effect at the time. As a young man, invented Sphere Music
almost single-handedly. Also known as The Last Of The Christian
Scientists, he died at the age of forty-three of a curable melanoma,
presumably after much prayer. The Latitudinarian Church was not
prejudiced about inducting members of other faiths; he had been canonized
fifty years earlier, the last such ceremony until today.
Next we passed the exhibits in praise of Megan Galloway, the leading
and probably best proponent of the now-neglected art of "feelies." She had a
small but fanatical following one hundred years after her mysterious
disappearance—an ending that made her the only one of the Flack Saints
whose almost daily "sightings" could actually be founded in fact. The only
female out of four non-Changing Gigastars, she was, with Momby, a good
example of the pitfalls of enshrining celebrities prematurely. If it weren't for
the fact that she provided the only costuming role model for the women of
the congregation, she might have been de-throned long ago, as the feelies
were no longer being made by anyone. Feelie fans had to be satisfied with
tapes at least eighty years old. No one in the Church had contemplated the
eclipse of an entire art form when they had elevated her into their pantheon.
I actually paused before the next shrine, the one devoted to Torinaga
Nakashima: "Tori-san." He was the only one I felt deserved to be
appreciated for his life's work. It was he who had first mastered the body
harp, driving the final nails into the coffin he had fashioned for the electric
guitar, long the instrument of choice for what used to be known as rockingroll music. His music still sounds fresh to me today, like Mozart. He had
died in Japan during the first of the Three Days of the Invasion, battling the
implacable machines or beings or whatever they were that had stalked his
native city, unbeatable Godzillas finally arrived at the real Tokyo. Or so the

story went. There were those who said he had died at the wheel of his
private yacht, trying his best to get the hell out of there and catch the last
shuttle to Luna, but in this case I prefer the legend.
And last but indisputably first among the Saints, Elvis Aron Presley, of
Tupelo, Mississippi; Nashville; and Graceland, Memphis, Tennessee, U.S.
of A. It was his incredibly still-ascendant star one hundred years after his
death that had inspired the retired ad agency executives who were the
founding fathers of the Flacks to concoct the most blatant and profitable
promotional campaign in the inglorious history of public relations: The
F.L.C.C.S.
You could say what you want about the Flacks—and I'd said a lot, in
private, among friends—but these people knew how to treat the working
press. After the Elvis pavilion the crowd was divided into two parts. One
was a long, unmoving line, composed of hopeful congregants trying to get a
seat in the last row of the balcony, some of them waving credit cards which
the ushers tried not to sneer at; it took more than just money to buy your way
into this shindig. The rest of the crowd, the ones with press passes stuck into
the brims of their battered gray fedoras, were steered through a gap in velvet
ropes and led to a spread of food and drink that made UniBio's efforts at the
ULTRA-Tingle rollout look like the garbage cans in the alley behind a
greasy spoon.
A feeding frenzy among veteran reporters is not a pretty sight. I've been
at free feeds where you needed to draw your hand back quickly or risk
having a finger bitten off. This one was well-managed, as you'd expect from
the Flacks. Each of us was met by a waiter or waitress whose sole job
seemed to be to carry our plates and smile, smile, smile. There were people
there who would have fasted for three days in anticipation if the Flacks had
announced the ceremony ahead of time; I heard some grousing about that.
Reporters have to find something to complain about, otherwise they might
commit the unpardonable sin of thanking their hosts.
I walked, in considerable awe, past an entire juvenile brontosaur carcass,
candied, garnished with glacéd fruit and with an apple in its mouth. They
were rolling something unrecognizable away—I was told it had been a Torisan effigy made entirely from sashimi—and replacing it with a three-meter
likeness of Elvis in his Vegas Period, in marzipan. I plucked a sequin from
the suit of lights and found it to be very tasty. I never did find out what it
was.
I built what might easily qualify as the Sandwich of the Century. Never

mind what was in it; I gathered from Brenda's queasy expression as she
watched my Flackite wallah carrying it that ordinary mortals—those who
did not understand the zen of cold cuts—might find some of my choices
dissonant, to say the least. I admit not everyone is able to appreciate the
exquisite tang of pickled pigs knuckles rubbing shoulders with rosettes of
whipped cream. Brenda herself needed no plate-carrier. She was
schlumping along with just a small bowl of black olives and sweet pickles. I
hurried, realizing that people were soon going to understand that she was
with me. I don't think she even knew what one item in ten was, much less if
she liked it or not.
The room the Flacks called the Grand Studio had formerly been the
largest sound stage at NLF. They had fixed it up so the area we saw was
shaped like a wedge, narrowing toward the actual stage in the front of the
room. It was quite a large wedge. The walls on either side leaned in slightly
as they rose, and were composed entirely of thousands upon thousands of
glass-faced television screens, the old kind, rectangular with rounded
corners, a shape that was as important to Flackites as the cross was to
Christians. The Great Tube symbolized eternal life and, more important,
eternal Fame. I could see a certain logic in that. Each of the screens,
ranging in size from thirty centimeters to as much as ten meters across, was
displaying a different image as Brenda and I entered, from the lives, loves,
films, concerts, funerals, marriages and, for all I knew, bowel movements
and circumcisions of the Gigastars. There were simply too many images to
take in. In addition, holos floated through the room like enchanted bubbles,
each with its smiling image of Momby, Megan, Tori-san, and Elvis.
The Flacks knew who this show was really for; we were escorted to an
area at the edge of the stage itself. The actual congregants had to be content
with the cheap seats and the television screens. There were balconies upon
balconies somewhere back there, vanishing into the suspended-spotlight
theme the Flacks favored.
Because we were late most of the seats right up front had been taken. I
was about to suggest we split up when I spotted Cricket at a ringside table
with an empty chair beside her. I grabbed Brenda with one hand and a spare
chair with the other, and pulled both through the noisy crowd. Brenda was
embarrassed to make everyone scoot over to make room for her chair; I'd
have to speak to her about that. If she couldn't learn to push and shove and
shout, she had no business in the news game.
"I love the body, Hildy," Cricket said as I wedged myself in between

them. I preened a bit as a large pink pitcher was set in front of me. These
Flacks were trained well; I was about to ask for lime wedges when an arm
came around me and left a crystal bowl full of them.
"Do I detect a note of wistfulness?" I said.
"You mean because they've retired your jersey from the great game of
cocksmanship?" She seemed to consider it. "I guess not."
I pouted, but it was for show. Frankly, the whole idea of having made
love to her seemed to me by now an aberration. Not that I wouldn't be
interested again when I Changed back to male, in thirty or so years, if she
happened to be female still.
"Nice job on that lovers-after-death pic out at Nirvana," I said. I was
poking through the assortment of press perks in a basket before me and
trying to eat a part of my sandwich with my other hand. I found a gold
commemorative medal, inscribed and numbered, that I knew I could get four
hundred for at any pawnbroker in the Leystrasse, so long as I got there quick
and beat every other reporter in Luna to the punch. A forlorn hope; I saw
three of the damn things depart by messenger, and they wouldn't be the first.
By now the medals would be a drug on the market. The rest of the stuff was
mostly junk.
"That was you?" Brenda said, leaning over to ogle Cricket.
"Cricket, Brenda. Brenda, meet Cricket, who works for some scurrilous
rag or other whose initials are S.S. and who deserves an Oscar for the job
she is doing covering her deep despair at having had only one opportunity to
experience the glory that was me."
"Yeah, it was sort of gory," Cricket said, reaching across me to shake
hands. "Nice to meet you." Brenda stammered something.
"How much did that shot cost you?"
Cricket looked smug. "It was quite reasonable."
"What do you mean?" Brenda asked. "Why did it cost you?"
We both looked at her, then at each other, then back at Brenda.
"You mean that was staged?" she said, horrified. She looked at the olive
in her hand, then put it back into the bowl. "I cried when I saw it," she said.
"Oh, stop looking like somebody just shot your puppy, damn it," I said.
"Cricket, will you explain the facts of life to her? I would, but I'm clean;
you're the unethical monster who violated a basic rule of journalism."

"I will if you'll trade places with me. I don't think I want to watch all
that go down." She was pointing at my sandwich with a prim expression
that was belied by what I could see of the remnants of her free lunch, which
included the skeletons of three tiny birds, picked clean.
So we switched, and I got down to the serious business of eating and
drinking, all the while keeping one ear cocked to the jabbering around me,
on the off chance somebody had managed to get a scoop on the
canonization. No one had, but I heard dozens of rumors:
"Lennon? Oh, c'mon, he was all washed up, that bullet was a good
career move."
". . . wanna know who it's gonna be? Mickey Mouse, put your money
on it."
"How they going to handle that? He doesn't even exist."
"So Elvis does? There's a cartoon revival—"
"And if they picked a cartoon, it'd be Baba Yaga."
"Get serious. She's not in the same universe as Mickey Mouse . . ."
"—says it's Silvio. There's nobody with one half the rep—"
"But he's got one problem, from the Flacks' point of view: he ain't dead
yet. Can't get a real cult going till you're dead."
"C'mon, there's no law says they have to wait, especially these days. He
could go on for five hundred more years. What'll they do, keep reaching
back to the twentieth, twenty-first century and pick guys nobody
remembers?"
"Everybody remembers Tori-san."
"That's different."
"—notice there's three men and only one woman. Granting they might
pick somebody still alive, why not Marina?"
"Why not both of 'em? Might even get them back together. What a
story. A double canonization. Think of the headlines."
"How about Michael Jackson?"
"Who?"
It kept on and on, a speculative buzz in the background. I heard half a
dozen more names proposed, increasingly unlikely to my way of thinking.

The only new one I'd heard, the only one I hadn't thought of, was Mickey,
and I considered him a real possibility. You could have walked down to the
Leystrasse that very day and bought a shirt with his picture on the front, and
cartoons were enjoying a revival. There was no law saying a cult had to
have a real object, what was being worshipped here was an image, not flesh
and blood.
Actually, while there were no rules for a Flack canonization, there were
guidelines that took on the force of laws. The Flacks did not create
celebrities, they had no real axe to grind in this affair. They simply
acknowledged pre-existing cult figures, and there were certain qualities a
cult figure had to have. Everyone had their own list of these qualities, and
weighted them differently. Once more I went through my own list, and
considered the three most likely candidates in the light of these
requirements.
First, and most obvious, the Gigastar had to have been wildly popular
when alive, with a planetary reputation, with fans who literally worshipped
him. So forget about anybody before the early twentieth century. That was
the time of the birth of mass media. The first cult figures of that magnitude
were film stars like Charlie Chaplin. He could be eliminated because he
didn't fulfill the second qualification: a cult following reaching down to the
present time. His films were still watched and appreciated, but people didn't
go crazy over him. The only person from that time who might have been
canonized—if a F.L.C.C.S. had existed then—was Valentino. He died
young, and was enshrined in that global hall of fame that was still in its
infancy when he lived. But he was completely forgotten today.
Mozart? Shakespeare? Forget it. Maybe Ludwig Van B. was the
hottest thing on the Prussian pop charts in his day, but they'd never heard of
him in Ulan Bator . . . and where were his sides? He never cut any, that's
where. The only way of preserving his music was to write it down on paper,
a lost art. Maybe Will Shakespeare would have won a carload of Tonys and
been flown to the coast to adapt his stuff for the silver screen. He was still
very popular—As You Like It was playing two shows a day at the King City
Center —but he and everyone else from before about 1920 had a fatal flaw,
celebrity-wise: nobody knew anything about them. There was no film, no
recordings. Celebrity worship is only incidentally about the art itself. You
need to do something to qualify, it needn't be good, only evocative . . . but
the real thing being sold by the Flacks and their antecedents was image.
You needed a real body to rend and tear in the padloids, real scandals to tsktsk over, and real blood and real tragedy to weep over.

That was widely held to be the third qualification for sainthood: the
early and tragic death. I personally thought it could be dispensed with in
some circumstances, but I won't deny it's importance. Nobody can create a
cult. They rise spontaneously, from emotions that are genuine, even if they
are managed adroitly.
For my money, the man they should be honoring today was Thomas
Edison. Without his two key inventions, sound recording and motion picture
film, the whole celebrity business would be bankrupt.
Mickey, John, or Silvio? Each had a drawback. With Mickey, it was
that he wasn't real. So who cares? John . . .? Maybe, but I judged his
popularity wasn't quite in that stellar realm that would appeal to the Flacks.
Silvio? The big one, that he was alive. But rules are made to be broken. He
certainly had the star power. There was no more popular man in the Solar
System. Any reporter in Luna would sell his mother's soul for one
interview.
And then it came to me, and it was so obvious I wondered why I hadn't
seen it before, and why no one else had figured it out.
"It's Silvio," I told Cricket. I swear the lady's ear tried to swivel toward
me before her head did. That gal really has the nose for news.
"What did you hear?"
"Nothing. I just figured it out."
"So what do you want, I should kiss your feet? Tell me, Hildy."
Brenda was leaning over, looking at me like I was the great guru. I
smiled at them, thought about making them suffer a little, but that was
unworthy. I decided to share my Holmesian deductions with them.
"First interesting fact," I said, "they didn't announce this thing until
yesterday. Why?"
"That's easy," Cricket snorted. "Because Momby's elevation was the
biggest flop-ola since Napoleon promised to whip some British butt at
Waterloo."
"That's part of the reason," I conceded. It had been before my time, but
the Flacks were still smarting from that one. They'd conducted a threemonth Who-Will-It-Be?-type campaign, and by the time the big day arrived
The Supreme Potentate Of All Universes would have been a disappointment,
much less Momby, who was a poor choice anyway. This was a bunch
whose whole raison d'etre was publicity, as an art and science. Once

burned, twice wear-a-fireproof-suit; they were managing this one the right
way, as a big surprise with only a day to think about it. Neither press nor
public could get bored in one day.
"But they've kept this one completely secret. From what I'm told, the
fact that Momby was going to be elevated was about as secret from us, from
the press, as Silvio's current hair style. The media simply agreed not to print
it until the big day. Now think about the Flacks. Not a close-mouthed
bunch, except for the inner circle, the Grand Flacks and so forth. Gossip is
their life blood. If twenty people knew who the new Gigastar was, one of
them would have blabbed it to one of my sources or one of yours, count on
it. If ten people knew I'd give you even money I could have found it out. So
even less than that know who it's gonna be. With me so far?"
"Keep talking, O silver-tongued one."
"I've got it down to three possibilities. Mickey, John, Silvio. Am I
wildly off-base there?"
She didn't say yes or no, but her shrug told me her own list was pretty
much like mine.
"Each has a problem. You know what they are."
"Two out of three of them are . . . well, old," Brenda put in.
"Lots of reasons for that," I said. "Look at the Four; all born on Earth.
Trouble is, we're a less violent society than the previous centuries. We don't
get enough tragic deaths. Momby's the only superstar who's had the grace to
fix himself up with a tragic death in over a hundred years. Most everyone
else hangs around until he's a has-been. Look at Eileen Frank."
"Look at Lars O'Malley," Cricket contributed.
From the blank look on Brenda's face, I could see it was like I'd
guessed; she'd never heard of either of them.
"Where are they now?" she asked, unconsciously voicing the four words
every celebrity fears the most.
"In the elephants' graveyard. In a taproom in Bedrock, probably, maybe
on adjacent stools. Both of them used to be as big as Silvio." Brenda looked
dubious, like I'd said something was bigger than infinity. She'd learn.
"So what's your great leap of deduction?" Cricket asked.
I waved my hand grandly around the room.
"All this. All these trillions and trillions of television screens. If it's

Mickey or John, what's gonna happen, some guy backstage dashes off a
quick sketch of them and comes out holding it over his head? No, what
happens is every one of these screens starts showing Steamboat Willie and
Fantasia and every other cartoon Mickey was ever in, or . . . what the hell
films did John Lennon make?"
"You're the history buff. All I know about him is Sergeant Pepper."
"Well, you get the idea."
"Maybe I'm dumb," Cricket said, not as though she believed it.
"You're not. Think about it." She did, and I saw the moment when the
light dawned.
"You could be right," she said.
"No 'could be' about it. I've got half a mind to file on it right now.
Walter could get out a newsbreaker before they make the big
announcement."
"So use my phone; I won't even charge you."
I said nothing to that. If I'd had even one source telling me it was Silvio
I'd have called Walter and let him decide. The history of journalism is filled
with stories of people who jumped the headline and had to eat it later.
"I guess I'm dumb," Brenda said. "I still don't see it."
I didn't comment on her first statement. She wasn't dumb, just green,
and I hadn't seen it myself until too late. So I explained.
"Somebody has to cue up the tapes to fill all these screens. Dozens of
techs, visual artists, and so forth. There's no way they could orchestrate a
thing like that and keep it down to a handful of people in the know. Most of
my sources are just those kind of people, and they always have their hands
out. Kind of money I was throwing around last night, if anybody knew, I'd
know. So Mickey and John are out, because they're dead. Silvio has the
great advantage of being able to show up here in person, so those television
screens can show live feeds of what's happening on the stage."
Brenda frowned, thinking it over. I let her, and went back to my
sandwich, feeling good for more than just having figured it out. I felt good
because I genuinely admired Silvio. Mickey Mouse is good, no question,
but the real hero there was Walter Elias Disney and his magic-makers. John
Lennon I knew nothing about; his music didn't speak to me. I never saw
what the fanatics saw in Elvis, Megan may have been good, but who cared?

Momby was of his times, even the Flacks would admit, with a bellyful of
liquor, that he had been a mistake for the church. Tori-san deserved to be up
there with the real musical geniuses who lived before the Age of Celebrity
came along to largely preclude most peoples' chances of achieving real
greatness. I mean, how great can you get with people like me going through
your garbage looking for a story?
Of all the people alive in the Solar System today, Silvio was the only
man I admired. I'm a cynic, have been for years. My childhood heroes have
long since fallen by the wayside. I'm in the business of discovering warts on
people, and I've discovered so many that the very idea of hero-worship is
quaint, at best. And it's not as if Silvio doesn't have his warts. I know them
as well as every padloid reader in Luna. It's his art I really admire, the hell
with the personality cult. He began as a mere genius, the writer and
performer of music that has often moved me to tears. He grew over the
years. Three years ago, when it looked as if he was fading, he suddenly
blossomed again with the most stunningly original works of his career.
There was no telling where he might still go.
One of his quirks, to my way of thinking, was his recent embracing of
the Flack religion. And so what? Mozart wasn't a guy you'd want to bring
home to meet the folks. Listen to the music. Look at the art. Forget about
the publicity; no matter how much of it you read, you'll never really get to
know the man. Most of us like to think we know something about famous
people. It took me years to get over the fallacy of thinking that because I'd
heard somebody speak about his or her life and times and fears on a talk
show that I knew what they were really like. You don't. And the bad things
you think you know are just as fallacious as the good things his publicity
agent wants you to know. Behind the monstrous facade of fame each
celebrity erects around himself is just a little mouse, not unlike you or me,
who has to use the same kind of toilet paper in the morning, and who
assumes the identical position.
And with that thought, the lights dimmed, and the show began.
There was a brief musical introduction drawing on themes from the
works of Elvis and Tori-san, no hint of a Silvio connection in there. Dancers
came out and did a number glorifying the Church. None of the prefatory
material lasted too long. The Flacks had learned their lesson from Momby.
They would not out-stay their welcome this morning.
It was no more than ten minutes from the raising of the curtain to the
appearance of the Grand Flack himself.

This was a man ordinary enough from the neck down, dressed in a
flowing robe. But in place of a head he had a cube with television screens
on four sides, each showing a view of a head from the appropriate angle. On
top of the cube was a bifurcated antenna known as rabbit ears, for obvious
reasons.
The face in the front screen was thin, ascetic, with a neatly trimmed
goatee and mustache and a prim mouth on which a smile always looked like
a painful event. I'd met him before at this or that function. He didn't appear
publicly all that often, and the reason was simply that he, and most of the
other Great Flacks, were no better as media personalities than I was. For the
church services the F.L.C.C.S. hired professionals, people who knew how to
make a sermon stand up and walk around the room. They had no lack of
talent for such jobs. The Flacks naturally appealed to hopeful artists who
hoped to one day stand beside Elvis. But today was different, and oddly
enough, the Grand Flack's very stiffness and lack of camera poise lent
gravity to the proceedings.
"Good morning! Fellow worshipers and guests we welcome you!
Today will go down in history! This is the day a mere mortal comes to
glory! The name will be revealed to you shortly! Join with us now in
singing 'Blue Suede Shoes.'"
That's the way Flacks talk, and that's the way I'd been recording it for
many years now. They'd given me enough stories, so if they had crazy ideas
about how they wanted to be quoted in print, it was all right with me. Flacks
believed that language was too cluttered with punctuation, so they'd
eliminated the ., the ,, the ' and the ? and most especially the ; and the :.
Nobody ever understood what those last two were for, anyway. They were
never very interested in asking questions, only in providing answers. They
figured the exclamation point and the quotation mark were all any
reasonable person needed for discourse, along with the underline, naturally.
And they were big on typefaces. A Flack news release read like a love letter
to P.T. Barnum.
I abstained from the sing-along; I didn't know the words, anyway, and
hymnals weren't provided. The folks in the bleachers made up for my
absence. The boogying got pretty intense for a while there. The Grand
Flack just stood with his hands folded, smiling happily at his flock. When
the number came to an end he moved forward again, and I realized this was
it.
"And now the moment you've all been waiting for!" he said. "The name

of the person who from this day forward will live with the stars!" The lights
were dimming as he spoke. There was a moment of silence, during which I
heard an actual collective intake of breath . . . unless that was from the sound
system. Then the Grand Flack spoke again.
"I give you SILVIO!!!!!"
A single spotlight came on, and there he stood. I had known it, I had
been ninety-nine percent sure anyway, but I still felt a thrill in my heart, not
only at having been correct, but because this was so right. No, I didn't
believe in all the Flackite crap. But he did, and it was right that he should be
so honored by the people who believed as he did. I almost had a lump in my
throat.
I was on my feet with everyone else. The applause was deafening, and
if it was augmented by the speakers hidden in the ceiling, who cared? I
liked Silvio enough when I was a man. I hadn't counted on the gutthrobbing impression he'd make on me as a female. He stood there, tall and
handsome, accepting the adulation with only a small, ironic wave of his
hand, as if he didn't really understand why everyone loved him so much but
he was willing to accept it so as not to embarrass us. False, all false, I well
knew; Silvio had a titanic ego. If there was anyone in Luna who actually
over-estimated his genuinely awesome talent, it was Silvio. But who among
us can cast a stone unless they have at least as much talent? Not me.
A keyboard was rolled out and left in front of him. This was really
exciting. It could mean the opening of a new sound for Silvio. For the last
three years he'd been working his magic on the body harp. I leaned forward
to hear the first chords, as did everyone in the audience, except one person.
As he made his move toward the keys, the right side of his head exploded.
Where were you when . . .? Every twenty years a story comes along
like that, and anyone you ask knows exactly what he was doing when the
news came in. Where I was when Silvio was assassinated was ten meters
away, close enough that I saw it happen before I heard the shot. Time
collapsed for me, and I moved without thinking about it. There was nothing
of the reporter in me at that moment, and nothing of the heroine. I'm not a
risk-taker, but I was up and out of my seat and vaulting onto the stage before
he'd landed, loosely, the ruined head bouncing on the floorboards. I leaned
over him and picked him up by the shoulders, and it must have been about
then that I was hit, because I saw my blood splatter on his face and a big
hole appear in his cheek and a sort of churning motion in the soft red matter
exposed behind the big hole in his skull. You must have seen it. It's

probably the most famous bits of holocam footage ever shot. Intercut with
the stuff from Cricket's cam, which is how it's usually shown, you can see
me react to the sound of the second shot, lift my head and look over my
shoulder and search for the gunman, which is what saved me from having
my own brains blown out when the third shot arrived. The post-mortem
team estimated that shot missed my cheek by a few centimeters. I didn't see
it hit, but when I turned back I saw the results. Silvio's face had already
been shattered by the fragmented bullet that had passed through me; the
third projectile was more than enough to blow the remaining brain tissue
through a new hole in his head. It wasn't necessary; the first had done the
fatal work.
That's when Cricket took her famous still shot. The spotlight is still on
us as I hold Silvio's torso off the ground. His head lolls back, eyes open but
glazed, what you can see of them under the film of blood. I've got one
bloody hand raised in the air, asking a mute question. I don't remember
raising the hand; I don't know what the question was, other than the eternal
why?
#
The next hour was as confused as such scenes inevitably are. I was
jostled to the side by a bunch of bodyguards. Police arrived. Questions
were asked. Someone noticed I was bleeding, which was the first time I was
aware that I'd been hit. The bullet had punched a clean hole through the
upper part of my left arm, nicking the bone. I'd been wondering why the
arm wasn't working. I wasn't alarmed by it; I was just wondering. I never
did feel any pain from the wound. By the time I should have, they had it all
fixed up as good as new. People have since tried to convince me to wear a
scar there as a memento of that day. I'm sure I could use it to impress a lot
of cub reporters in the Blind Pig, but the whole idea disgusts me.
Cricket was immediately off following the assassin story. Nobody knew
who he or she was, or how he'd gotten away, and there was a fabulous story
for whoever tracked the person down and got the first interview. That didn't
interest me, either. I sat there, possibly in shock though the machines said I
was not, and Brenda stood beside me though I could see she was itching to
get out and cover the story, any part of it.
"Idiot," I told her, with some affection, when I finally noticed her. "You
want Walter to fire you? Did somebody get my holocam feed? I don't
remember."
"I took it. Walter has it. He's running it right now." She had a copy of

the Nipple in one hand, glancing at the horrific images. My phone was
ringing and I didn't need a Ph.D. in deductive logic to know it was Walter
calling, asking what I was doing. I turned it off, which Walter would have
made a capital offense if he'd been making the laws.
"Get going. See if you can track down Cricket. Wherever she is, that's
where the news will be. Try not to let her leave too many tracks on your
back when she runs over you."
"Where are you going, Hildy?"
"I'm going home." And that's just what I did.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

I had to turn the phone off at home, too. I had become part of the
biggest story of my lifetime, and every reporter in the universe wanted to ask
me a probing question: How did you feel, Hildy, when you put your hand
into the still-warm brains of the only man on Luna you respected? This is
known as poetic justice.
For my sins, I soon set the phone to answer to the four or five
newspeople I felt were the best, plus the grinning homunculus that passed
for an anchor at the Nipple, and gave them each a five minute, totally false
interview, full of exactly the sort of stuff the public expected. At the end of
each I pleaded emotional exhaustion and said I'd grant a more complete
interview in a few days. This satisfied no one, of course; from time to time
my front door actually rattled with the impact of frustrated reporters hurling
their bodies against three-inch pressure-tight steel.
In truth, I didn't know how I felt. I was numb, in a way, but my mind
was also working. I was thinking, and the reporter was coming alive after
the horrid shock of actually getting shot. I mean, damn it! Hadn't that
fucking bullet ever heard of the Geneva Conventions? We were noncombatants, we were supposed to suck the blood, not produce it. I was
angry at that bullet. I guess some part of me had really thought I was
immune.
I fixed myself a good meal and thought it over while I did. Not a
sandwich. I thought I might be through with sandwiches. I don't cook a lot,
but when I do I'm pretty good at it, and it helps me think. When I'd handed
the last dish to the washer I sat down and called Walter.
"Get your ass in here, Hildy," he said. "I've got you lined up for
interviews from ten minutes ago till the tricentennial."
"No," I said.
"I don't think this is a good connection. I thought you said no."

"It's a perfect connection."
"I could fire you."
"Don't get silly. You want my exclusive interview to run in the Shit,
where they'll triple the pittance you pay me?" He didn't answer that for a
long time, and I had nothing else to say just yet, so we listened to the long
silence. I hadn't turned on the picture.
"What are you going to do?" he asked, plaintively.
"Just what you asked me to do. Get the story on the Flacks. You said I
was the best there was at it, didn't you?" The quality of the silence changed
that time. It was a regretful silence, as in how-could-I-have-said-anythingso-stupid silence. He didn't say he'd told me that just to charm me out of
quitting. Another thing he didn't say was how dare I threaten him with
selling out to a rival, and he left un-voiced the horrible things he'd try to do
to my career if I did such a thing. The phone line was simply buzzing with
things he didn't say, and he didn't say them so loudly I'd have been
frightened if I really feared for my job. At last he sighed, and did say
something.
"When do I get the story?"
"When I find it. What I want is Brenda, right now."
"Sure. She's just underfoot here."
"Tell her to come in the back way. She knows where it is, and I don't
think five other people in Luna know that."
"Six, counting me."
"I figured. Don't tell anyone else, or I'll never get out of here alive."
"What else?"
"Nothing. I'll handle it all from here." I hung up. I started making
calls.
The first one was to the Queen. She didn't have what I needed, but she
knew somebody who knew somebody. She said she'd get back to me. I sat
down and made a list of items I would need, made several more calls, and
then Brenda was knocking on the back door.
She wanted to know how I was, she wanted my reactions to this and
that, not as a reporter, but as a concerned friend. I was touched, a little, but I
had work to do.

"Hit me," I said.
"Pardon?"
"Hit me. Make a fist and smash it into my face. I need you to break my
nose. I tried it a couple times before you got here, and I can't seem to hit
hard enough."
She gave me that look that says she's trying to remember all the ways
out of this place, and how to get to them without alarming me.
"My problem," I explained, "is I can't risk going in public with this face
on me; I need it re-arranged, and in a hurry. So hit me. You know how;
you've seen cowboys and gangsters do it in the movies." I stuck my face out
and closed my eyes.
"You've . . . you've deadened it, I guess?"
"What kind of nut do I look like? Don't answer, just hit me."
She did, a blow that would have sent a housefly to intensive care if one
had been sitting on the tip of my nose.
She had to try four more times, in the end using an old spitball bat I
found in my closet, before we got that sickening crunching sound that said
we'd done the trick. I shouldn't be too hard on her. Maybe I was acting
erratic, there was probably an easier way and she deserved more
explanations, but I wasn't in the mood for them. She had a lot worse to
come, and I didn't have time.
It bled a lot, as you'd expect. I held my nose pressed in with a finger on
the tip, and stuck my face in the autodoc. When it healed, a few minutes
later, I had a wide, vaguely African nose with a major hook on the end and a
bend toward the left.
Part of getting a story is preparation, part is improvisation, part
perspiration and a little bit inspiration. There are small items I carry around
constantly in my purse that I may use once in five years, but when I need
them, I need them badly. A disguise is something I need every once in a
while, never as badly as I did then, but I'd always been prepared for
disguising myself on the spur of the moment. It's harder now than it used to
be. People are better at seeing through small changes since they're used to
having friends re-work their faces to indulge a passing fad. Bushy eyebrows
or a wig are no longer enough, if you want to be sure. You need to change
the shape of the face.
I got a screwdriver and probed around in my upper jaw, between the

cheek and gum, until I found the proper recessed socket. I pushed the tip of
the blade through the skin and slotted it in the screw and started turning it.
When the blade slipped Brenda peered into my mouth and helped me. As
she turned the screwdriver, my cheekbone began to move.
It's a cheap and simple device you can buy at any joke shop and have
installed in half an hour. Bobbie had wanted to take it out. He's offended at
anything that might be used to mar his work. I'd left them in, and now I was
glad as I watched my face being transformed in the mirror. When Brenda
was done, my face was much wider and more gaunt, and my eyelids had a
slight downward slant. With the new nose, Callie herself would not have
know me. If I held my lower jaw so I had an overbite, I looked even
stranger.
"Let me get that left one again," Brenda said. "You're lopsided."
"Lopsided is good." I tasted blood, but soon had that healed up.
Looking at myself, I decided it was enough, and turned the nerve receptors
in my face back on. There was a little soreness on the nose, but nothing
major.
So I could have gotten some of the same effect by stuffing tissue paper
into my cheeks, I guess. If that's all I had, I'd have used it, but did you ever
try talking with paper in your mouth? An actor is trained to do it; I'm not.
Besides, you're always aware it's there, it's distracting.
Brenda wanted to know what we were going to do, and I thought about
what I could safely tell her. It wasn't much, so I sat her down and she
looked up at me wide-eyed.
"You got two choices," I told her. "One, you can help me get ready for
this caper, and then you can bow out, and no hard feelings. Or you can go
along to the end. But I'll tell you going in, you're not going to know much. I
think we'll get one hell of a story out of it, but we could get into a lot of
trouble."
She thought it over.
"How much can you tell me?"
"Only what I think you need to know at the moment. You'll just have to
trust me on the rest."
"Okay."
"You idiot. Never trust anybody who says 'trust me.' Except just this
once, of course."

#
I went to the King City Plaza, one of the better hotels in the
neighborhood of the Platz, and checked in to the Presidential Suite using
Brenda's Nipple letter of credit, freshly re-rated to A-Double-Plus. I'd told
Walter I might need to buy an interplanetary liner before this job was over,
but the fact was since he was paying for it, I just wanted to go first class, and
I'd never stayed in the Presidential Suite. I registered us under the names
Kathleen Turner and Rosalind Russell, two of the five people who've played
the part of Hildegard/Hildebrandt Johnson on the silver screen. The fellow
at the front desk must not have been a movie buff; he didn't bat an eye.
The suite came furnished with a staff, including a boy and a girl in the
spa, which was large enough for the staging of naval war games. In a better
mood I might have asked the boy to stick around; he was a hunk. But I
kicked them all out.
I stood in the middle of the room and said "My name is Hildy Johnson,
and I declare this to be my legal residence." Liz had advised that, for the
benefit of the hidden mikes and cameras, just in case the tapes were ever
brought forward as evidence in a court of law. A hotel guest has the same
rights as a person in quarters she owns or rents, but it never hurt to be safe.
I made a few more phone calls, and spent the time waiting for some of
them to be returned by going from room to room and stripping the sheets
and blankets off the many beds. I chose a room with no windows looking
out into the Mall, and went around draping sheets over all the mirrors in the
room. There were a lot of them. The call I was waiting for came just as I
finished. I listened to the instructions, and left the room.
In a park not far from the hotel I walked around for almost half an hour,
which didn't surprise me. I assumed I was being checked out. Finally I
spotted the man I'd been told to look for, and sat on the other end of a park
bench. We didn't look at each other, or talk. He got up and walked away,
leaving a sack on the bench between us. I waited a few more minutes,
breathed deeply, and picked up the sack. No hand reached out to grab my
shoulder. Maybe I didn't have the nerves for this sort of work.
Back in the suite I didn't have long to wait before Brenda knocked on
the door, back from her shopping expedition. She'd done well. Everything
I'd asked for was in the packages she carried. We got out the costumes of
the Electricians Guild and put them on: blue coveralls with Guild patches
and equipment belts. Names were stitched into the fabric over the left
breast: I was Roz and she was Kathy. Next to the ceremonial wrenches,

screwdrivers, and circuit testers dangling from the belt I clipped some of the
items I'd just obtained in such a melodramatic fashion. They fit right in. We
donned yellow plastic hardhats and picked up black metal lunchboxes and
looked at each other in the mirror. We burst out laughing. Brenda seemed
to be enjoying the game so far. It was an adventure.
Brenda looked ridiculous, as usual. You'd think a disguise on Brenda
would work about as well as a wig on a flagpole. The fact is, she is not that
abnormal for her generation. Who knows where this height thing is going to
end? Another of many causes of the generation gap Callie had talked about
was a simple matter of dimension: people of Brenda's age group tended not
to frequent the older parts of the city where so many of their elders lived . . .
because they kept hitting their heads on things. We built to a smaller scale
in those days.
There were no human guards on the workers' entrance to the Flack
Grand Studio. I didn't really expect to encounter any at all; according to the
information I'd bought they only employed six of them. People tended to
rely on machines for that sort of thing, and their trust can be misplaced, as I
demonstrated to Brenda with one of the illegal gizmos. I waved it at the
door, waited while red lights turned green, and the door sprung open. I'd
been told that one of the three machines I had would deal with any security
system I'd find in the Studio. I just hoped my trust wasn't misplaced, in
either the shady characters who sold this sort of stuff or the machines
themselves. We do trust the little buggers, don't we? I had no idea what the
stinking thing was doing, but when it flashed a green light at me I trotted
right in, like Pavlov's dog Spotski.
Up three floors, down two corridors, seventh door on the left. And who
should be standing there looking frustrated but . . . Cricket.
"If you touch that doorknob," I said, "Elvis will return and he won't be
handing out pink Cadillacs." She jumped just a little. Damn, that girl was
good. She was trying to pass herself off as some kind of Flack functionary,
carrying a clipboard like an Amazon's shield. The good old clipboard can be
the magic key to many places if you know how to use it, and Cricket was
born to the con. She looked at us haughtily through dark glasses.
"I beg your pardon," she sniffed. "What are you two doing . . ." She
had been flipping officiously through papers on her board, as if searching for
our names, which we hadn't given, when she realized it was Brenda way up
there under that yellow hardhat. Nothing had prepared her for that, or for
the dawning realization of who it was playing the Jeff to Brenda's Mutt.

"Goddam," she breathed. "It's you, isn't it? Hildy?"
"In the flesh. I'm ashamed of you, Cricket. Balked by a mere door?
You've apparently forgotten your girl scout motto."
"All I remember is never let him in the back door on the first date."
"Be prepared, love, be prepared." And I waved one of my magic wands
at the door. Naturally, one of the lights remained obstinately red. So I chose
another one at random and the machine paid off like a crooked slot machine.
We went through the door, and I suddenly realized what her dark glasses
were for.
We were in an ordinary corridor with three doors leading off of it.
Music was coming from behind one of the doors. According to the map I'd
paid a lot of Walter's money for, that was the one. This time I had to use all
three machines, and the last one took its time, each red light going out only
after a baffling read-out of digits on a numeric display. I guess it was doing
something arcane with codes. But the door opened, and I didn't hear any
alarms. You wouldn't, of course, but you keep your ears tuned anyway. We
went through the door and found ourselves in a small room with the Grand
Council of Flacks.
Or with their heads, anyway.
The heads were on a shelf a few meters from us, facing away toward a
large screen which was playing It Happened At The World's Fair. They
were in their boxes—I don't think they could be easily removed—so what
we saw was seven television screens displaying the backs of heads. If they
were aware of our presence they gave no sign of it. Though how they could
have given any sign of it continues to elude me. Wires and tubes grew out
of the bottom of the shelf, leading to small machines that hummed merrily to
themselves.
Brenda was looking very nervous. She started to say something but I
put a finger to my lips and put on my mask. She did the same, as Cricket
watched us both. These were plastic Halloween-type masks, modified with
a voice scrambler, and I'd gotten them mostly to calm Brenda; I didn't expect
them to be any use if it came to the crunch, since security cameras in the
hallways would surely have taken our pictures by now. But she was even
less sophisticated in these things than I, and wouldn't have realized that.
Cricket had had her hand in a coat pocket since we entered the first
corridor. The hand started to come out, and I pointed over her shoulder and
said "What the hell is that?" She looked, and I took one of the wrenches off

my equipment belt and clanged it down on the crown of her head.
It doesn't work like you see it on television. She went down hard, then
lifted herself up onto her hands, shaking her head. A rope of saliva was
hanging out of her mouth. I hit her again. Her head started to bleed, and she
still didn't clock out. The third time I really put some english on it, and sure
enough Brenda grabbed my arm and spoiled my aim and the wrench hit her
on the side of the head, doing more damage than if she'd left me alone, but it
also did the job. Cricket fell down like a sack of wet cement and didn't
move.
"What the hell are you doing?" Brenda asked. The scrambler denatured
her voice, made her sound like a creepoid from Planet X.
"Brenda, I said no questions."
"I didn't plan on this."
"I didn't, either, but if you crap out on me now I swear I'll break both
your arms and leave you right beside her." She faced me down, breathing
hard, and I began to wonder if I could handle her if it came to it. My record
with angry females wasn't sterling, even when I had the weight advantage.
At last she slumped, and nodded, and I quickly dropped to one knee and
rolled Cricket over and put my face close to hers. I felt her pulse, which
seemed okay, peeled back an eyelid, checked the pupils. I didn't know much
more first aid than that, but I knew she was in no danger. Help would be
here soon, though she wouldn't welcome it. I picked up the goofball that had
rolled out of her limp hand and put it in my own pocket. I showed Brenda a
photo.
"Look through those cabinets back there, find one of these," I told her.
"What are we—"
"No questions, dammit."
I checked the fourth and most expensive electronic burglar tool I'd
purchased, which had been functioning since we entered the Studio. All
green lights. This one was busily confounding all the active and passive
systems that might be calling for help for the seven dwarfs on the shelf.
Don't ask me how; all I know is if one man can think up a lock, another can
figure out how to pick it. I'd paid heavily for the security information about
the Studio, and so far I'd gotten my money's worth. I went around the shelf
and stood between the screen and the Council, saw seven of the infamous
Talking Heads that had been a television feature from the very beginning. I

chose the Grand Flack, and leaned close to his prim, disapproving features.
His first reaction was to use his limited movement to try and see around me.
More interested in the movie than in possible danger to himself. I guess if
you live in a box you'd have to get fairly fatalistic about such things.
"I want you to tell me how to remove you from the shelf without doing
any harm to you," I said.
"Don't worry about it," he sneered. "Someone will be here to arrest you
in a few minutes."
I hoped he was bluffing, had no way of knowing for sure.
"How many minutes can you live without these machines?" He thought
it over, made a head movement I interpreted as a shrug.
"Detaching me is easy; simply lift the handle on top of the box. But I'll
die in a few minutes." The thought didn't seem to bother him.
"Unless I plug you into one of these." I took the machine Brenda had
located and held it up in front of him. He made a sour face.
I don't know what the machine was called. What it did was provide life
support for his head, containing things like an artificial heart, lungs, kidneys,
and so forth, all quite small since there wasn't that much life to support. I'd
been told it would sustain him for eight hours independently, indefinitely
when hooked into an autodoc. The device was the same dimensions as his
head-box, and about ten centimeters deep. I placed it on the floor and lifted
the box by the handle. He looked worried for the first time. A few drops of
blood dripped onto the shelf, where I could see a maze of metal pins, plastic
tubes, air hoses. There was a similar pattern of fittings on the transport
device, arranged so there was only one way you could plug it in. I
positioned the box over the life support and pressed down.
"Am I doing it right?" I asked the Grand Flack.
"There's not much you could do wrong," he said. "And you'll never get
away with this."
"Try me." I found the right switches, turned off his voice and three of
the television screens. The fourth, the one that had been showing his face,
was replaced with the movie the group had been watching when we arrived.
"Let's get out of here," I said to Brenda.
"What about her? What about Cricket?"
"I said no questions. Let's move."

She followed me out into the corridor, through the door where we'd met
Cricket, down more hallways. Then we rounded a corner and met a burly
man in a brown uniform who crossed his arms and frowned at us.
"Where are you going with that?" he asked.
"Where do you think, Mac?" I asked. "I'm taking it into the shop. You
try to run ten thousand of these things, you're gonna get breakdowns."
"Nobody told me nothing about it."
I set the Grand Flack on the floor with the movie side of the screen
facing the guard; his eyes strayed to the screen, as I'd hoped. There's
something about a moving image on a television screen that simply draws
the eyes, especially if you're a Flackite. I had one hand on my trusty
wrench, but mostly I flipped through the papers on my clipboard in a bored
manner. I came to one page—it seemed to be an insurance policy for
Cricket's apartment —and pointed triumphantly to the middle of it.
"Says right here. Remove and repair one model seventeen video
monitor, work order number 45293-a/34. Work to be completed by blah
blah blah."
"I guess the paperwork didn't get to me yet," he said, one eye still on the
screen. Maybe we were coming to his favorite part. All I knew was if he'd
asked to see the paperwork I'd have held the clipboard out to him and beaned
him with the wrench when he looked at it.
"Ain't that always the way."
"Yeah. I was just surprised to see you two here, what with all the
excitement with Silvio gettin' killed and all."
"What the hell," I said, with a shrug, picking up the Grand Flack and
tucking him under my arm. "Sometimes you just gotta go that extra
kilometer if you want to get a head." And we walked out the door.
#
Brenda made it almost a hundred meters down the corridor and then she
said, "I think I'm going to faint." I steered her to a bench in the middle of
the mall and sat her down and put her head between her knees. She was
shaking all over and her breathing was unsteady. Her hand was cold as ice.
I held out my own hand, and was pleased to note it was steady. I
honestly hadn't been frightened after I detached the Flack from his shelf; I'd
figured that if there was any point where my devices might fail, that would

be it. But I was aided by something that had helped many a more
professional burglar before I ever tried my hand at it. It had simply never
been envisioned that anyone would want to steal one of the council
members. As for the rest . . . well, you can read all these wonderfully
devious tales about how spies in the past have stolen military and state
secrets with elaborate ruses, with stealth and cunning. Some of it must have
been like that, but I'd bet money that a lot of them had been stolen by people
with uniforms and clipboards who just went up to somebody and asked for
them.
"Is it over yet?" Brenda asked, weakly. She looked pale.
"Not yet. Soon. And still no questions."
"I'm going to have a few pretty damn soon, though," she said.
"I'll bet you will."
#
In order to save time I hadn't had her get any more costumes to stash
along our getaway route, so we simply peeled off the Electrician duds and
stuffed them into the trash in a public rest room and returned to the Plaza in
the nude. I was carrying the Grand Flack in a shopping bag from one of the
shops on the Platz and we had our arms around each other like lovers. In the
elevator Brenda let go of me like I was poison, and we rode up in silence.
"Can we talk now?" she asked, when I'd closed the door behind us.
"In a minute." I lifted the box out of the bag, along with the few other
items I'd saved: the magic wands, the dark glasses, the goofball. I picked up
a newspad and turned it on and we watched and read and listened for a few
minutes, Brenda growing increasingly impatient. There was no mention of a
daring break-in at the Grand Studio, no all-points bulletin for Roz and
Kathy. I hadn't expected one. The Flacks understood publicity, and while
there is some merit in the old saw about not caring what you print about me
so long as you spell my name right, you'd much prefer to see the news you
manage out there in the public view. This story had about a thousand deadly
thorns in it if the Flacks chose to exploit it, and I was sure they'd think it
over a long time before they reported our crime to the police, if they ever
did. Besides, their plates were full with the assassination stories, which
would keep their staff busy for months, churning out new angles to feed to
the pads.
"Okay," I said to Brenda. "We're safe for a while. What did you want

to know?"
"Nothing," she said coldly. "I just wanted to tell you I think you're the
most disgusting, rottenest, most horrible . . ." Her imagination failed when it
came to finding a noun. She'd have to work on that; I could have suggested
a dozen off the top of my head. But not for the reasons she thought.
"Why is that?" I asked.
She was momentarily stunned at the enormity of my lack of remorse.
"What you did to Cricket!" she shouted, half rising from her chair.
"That was so dirty and underhanded . . . I don't think I want to know you
anymore."
"I'm not sure I do, either. But sit down. There's something I want to
show you. Two things, actually." The Plaza has some charming antique
phones and there was one beside my chair. I picked up the receiver and
dialed a number from memory.
"Straight Shit," came a pleasant voice. "News desk."
"Tell the editor that one of her reporters is being held against her will in
the Grand Studio of the F.L.C.C.S. church."
The voice grew cautious. "And who might that be?"
"How many did you infiltrate this morning? Her name is Cricket. Don't
know the last name."
"And who are you, ma'am?"
"A friend of the free press. Better hurry; when I left they were tying her
down and cueing up G.I. Blues. Her mind could be gone by now." I hung
up.
Brenda sputtered, her eyes wide.
"And you think that makes up for what you did to her?"
"No, and she doesn't deserve it, but she'd probably do the same thing for
me if the situation was reversed, which it almost was. I know the editor at
the Shit; she'll have a flying squad of fifty shock troops down there in ten
minutes with some ammunition the Flacks will understand, like mock-ups of
the next hour's headline if they don't cough up Cricket pronto. The Flacks
will want to keep this quiet, but they aren't above trying to get our names out
of Cricket since it looks like a falling out among thieves."
"And if it wasn't, what was it?"

"It was the golden rule, honey," I said, putting on Cricket's dark glasses
and holding up the goofball between thumb and forefinger. "In journalism,
that rule reads 'Screw unto others before they screw you.'" I flicked the
goofball with my thumb and tossed it between us.
Damn, but those things are bright! It reminded me of the nuke in
Kansas, seeming to scorch holes right through the protective lenses. It lasted
some fraction of a second, and when I took the glasses off Brenda was
slumped over in her chair. She'd be out for twenty minutes to half an hour.
What a world.
I picked up the head of the church and carried him into the room I'd
prepared. I set him on a table facing the wall-sized television screen, which
was turned off at the moment. I rapped on the top of the box.
"You okay in there?" He didn't answer. I turned a latch and opened the
front screen, which was still showing the same movie on both its flat
surfaces, inner and outer. The face glared at me.
"Close that door," he said. "It's just ten minutes to the end."
"Sorry," I said, and closed it. Then I took my wrench—I'd developed a
certain fondness for that wrench—and rapped it against the glass screen,
which shattered. I had a glimpse of a blissfully smiling face as the shards
fell, then he was screaming insults. Somewhere I heard a little motor
whirring as it pumped air through whatever he used for a larynx. He tried
uselessly to twist himself so he could see one of the screens to either side of
him, which were also tuned to the same program.
"Oh, were you watching that?" I said. "How clumsy of me." I pulled a
cord out of the wall and patched his player into the wall television set, turned
the sound down low. He grumped for a while, but in the end he couldn't
resist the dancing images behind me. If he'd noticed I was letting him see
my face he didn't seem worried about the possible implications. Death didn't
seem to be high on his list of fears.
"They're going to punish you for this, you know," he said.
"Who would 'they' be? The police? Or do you have your own private
goon squads?"
"The police, of course."
"The police will never hear about this, and you know it."
He just sniffed. He sniffed again when I broke the screens on each side

of his head. But when I took the patch cord in my hand he looked worried.
"See you later. If you get hungry, holler." I pulled the cord out of the
wall, and the big screen went blank.
#
I hadn't brought any clothes to change into. I got restless and went
down to the lobby and browsed around in some of the shops there, killed a
half hour, but my heart wasn't really in it. In spite of all my rationalizations
about the Flacks, I kept expecting that tap on the shoulder that asks the
musical question, "Do you know a good lawyer?" I picked out some loose
harem pants in gold silk and a matching blouse, a lounging pajama ensemble
I guess you'd call it, mostly because I dislike parading around with no
clothes in public, and because Walter was picking up the tab, then I thought
of Brenda and got interested. I found a similar pair for her in a green that I
thought would do nice things to her eyes. They had to extrude the arms and
legs, but the shirt waist was okay, since it was supposed to leave the midriff
bare.
When I got back to the suite Brenda was no longer slumped in the chair.
I found her in the bathroom, hugging the toilet and crying her eyes out,
looking like a jumbo coat hanger somebody had crumpled up and left there.
I felt low enough to sit on a sheet of toilet paper and swing my feet, to
borrow a phrase from Liz. I'd never used a goofball before, had forgotten
how sick they were supposed to make you. If I'd remembered, would I still
have used it? I don't know. Probably.
I knelt beside her and put my arm around her shoulders. She quieted
down to a few whimpers, didn't try to move away. I got a towel and wiped
her mouth, flushed away the stuff she'd brought up. I eased her around until
she was sitting against the wall. She wiped her eyes and nose and looked at
me with dead eyes. I pulled the pajamas out of the sack and held them up.
"Look what I got you," I said. "Well, actually I used your credit card,
but Walter's good for it."
She managed a weak smile and held out her hand and I gave them to
her. She tried to show an interest, holding the shirt up to her chest. I think if
she'd thanked me I'd have run screaming to the police, begging to be
arrested.
"They're nice," she said. "You think it'll look good on me?"
"Trust me," I said. She met my eyes without flinching or giving me one

of her apologetic smiles or any other of her arsenal of don't-hit-me-I'mharmless gestures. Maybe she was growing up a little. What a shame.
"I don't think I will," she said. I put a hand on each of her shoulders and
put my face close to hers.
"Good," I said, stood, and held out a hand. She took it and I pulled her
up and we went back to the main room of the suite.
She did cheer up a little when she got the clothes on, turning in front of
a big mirror to study herself from all angles, which reminded me to look in
on my prisoner. I told her to wait there.
He wasn't nearly as bad off as I'd thought he would be, which worried
me more than I let him know. I couldn't figure it out until I crouched down
to his level and looked into the blank television screen he faced.
"You tricky rascal," I said. Looking at the inert plastic surface of the
screen, I could see part of a picture on the screen directly behind his head,
the only one I hadn't smashed out. I couldn't tell what the movie was, and
considering how little of it he could see he might not have known, either,
with the sound off, but it must have been enough to sustain him. I picked
him up and turned him around facing away from the wall screen. He made a
fascinating centerpiece, sure to start interesting conversations at your next
party. Just a head sitting on a thick metal base, with four little pillars
supporting a flat roof above him. It was like a little temple.
He was looking really worried now. I crouched down and looked at all
the covered mirrors and glass. I found no surface that would reflect an
image to him if I were to turn on the screen behind him, which I did. I
debated about the sound, finally turned it on, figuring it would torment him
more to hear it and not be able to see. If I was wrong, I could always try it
the other way in an hour or so, if we were granted that much time. Let's face
it, if anybody was looking for us, we'd be easy to find. I waved at him and
made a face at the string of curses that followed me out of the room.
How to get information out of somebody that doesn't want to talk?
That's the question I'd asked myself before I started this escapade. The
obvious answer is torture, but even I draw the line at that. But there's torture
and then there's torture. If a man had spent most of his life watching
passively as endless images marched by right in front of his face, spent
every waking hour watching, how would he react if the plug was pulled? I'd
find out soon enough. I'd read somewhere that people in sensory deprivation
tanks quickly became disoriented, pliable, lost their will to resist. Maybe it

would work with the Grand Flack.
Brenda and I spent a silent half hour sitting in chairs not too far from
each other that might as well have been on other planets. When she finally
spoke, it startled me. I'd forgotten she was there, lost in my own thoughts.
"She was going to use that thing on us," she said.
"Who, Cricket? You saw it fall out of her hand, right? It's called a
goofball. Knocks you right out, from what I'm told."
"You were told right. It was awful."
"I'm really sorry, Brenda. It seemed like a good idea at the time."
"It was. I asked for it. I deserved it."
I wasn't sure about that, but it had been the quickest way to show her
what we'd narrowly averted. That's me: quick and dirty, and explain later.
She thought about it a few more minutes.
"Maybe she was just going to use it on the Flacks."
"Sure she was; she didn't expect to find us there. But you didn't see her
handing out pairs of glasses. We'd have gone down with the Flacks."
"And she'd have left us there."
"Just like we left her."
"Well, like you said, she didn't expect us. We forced her hand."
"Brenda, you're trying to apologize for her, and it's not necessary. She
forced my hand, too. You think I liked cracking her on the head? Cricket's
my friend."
"That's the part I don't understand."
"Look, I don't know what her plan was. Maybe she had drugs on her,
too, something to make the Flacks talk right there. That might have been the
best way, come to think of it. The penalties for . . . well, I guess for
headnapping, it's going to be pretty stiff if they catch me."
"Me, too."
I showed her the gun I'd bought from Liz; she looked shocked, so I put it
away. I don't blame her. Nasty little thing, that gun. I can see why they're
illegal.
"Just me. If it comes to it, you can say I held that on you the whole
time. I won't have trouble convincing a judge I've lost my mind. Anyway,

you can be sure Cricket had some plan of attack in mind, and she improvised
when we entered the picture. The story's the thing, see? Ask her about it
when this is all over."
"I don't think she'd talk to me."
"Why not? She won't hold a grudge. She's a pro. Oh, she'll be mad, all
right, and she'll do just about anything to us if we get in her way again, but it
won't be for revenge. If cooperation will get the story, then she'd rather
cooperate, just like me. Trouble was, this story is too big to share. I think
we both figured out as soon as we saw each other that one of us wasn't
walking out of that room. I was just faster."
She was shaking her head. I'd said all I had to say; she'd either
understand it and accept it, or look for another line of work. Then she
looked up, remembering something.
"What you said. I can't let you do that. Take the rap, I mean."
I pretended anger, but I was touched again. What a sweet little jerk she
was. I hoped she didn't get eaten alive next time she met Cricket.
"You sure as hell will. Stop being juvenile. First revenge, then
altruism. Those things are for very special occasions, rare circumstances.
Not when they get in the way of a story. You want to be altruistic in your
private life, go ahead, but not on Walter's time. He'll fire you if he hears
about it."
"But it's not right."
"You're even wrong there. I never told you what we were going to do.
You couldn't be held responsible. I went to a lot of trouble to set it up that
way, and you're an ungrateful brat for thinking of throwing all my work
away."
She looked as if she was going to cry again, and I got up and got a drink.
Maybe I wiped my eyes, too, standing there in the kitchen tossing down a
surprisingly bitter bourbon. You'd think they'd do better at two thousand per
night.
#
When the Grand Flack had had two hours with nothing moving to look
at but the flickering lights cast on the other walls by the screen behind his
head, I stuck my own head into the room, wondering if I could manage to
keep it attached to my shoulders by the time this was all over. He looked at
me desperately. His whole face was drenched with sweat.

"This series is one of my favorites," he whined.
"So look at the tape later," I said.
"It's not the same, dammit! I've already heard the story line."
I thought it was a bit of luck to have one of his favorite soap operas
playing just when I needed a lever to pry information out of his head, then I
thought it over, and realized that whatever was playing at the moment was
bound to be his favorite. He watched them all.
"I missed David and Everett's big love scene. Damn you."
"Are you ready to answer some questions?"
He started to shake his head—he had a little movement from the neck
stump, up and down, back and forth—and it was like a hand took his chin
and forced it up and down instead. I guess it was the invisible hand of his
addiction.
"Don't run off," I said. "I've got to get another witness." I turned
around, and bumped into Brenda, who'd been standing behind me. She
wasn't wearing her mask and I thought about getting angry about that, but
what the hell. She was in it as an accessory, unless I could make my duress
theory stand up in court. Which point I hoped never to reach.
We pulled up chairs on each side of the big screen and turned him
around so he could see it. I thought this might take a long time, as his eyes
never left the screen, never once looked at us, but he was quite good at
watching the show and talking to us at the same time.
"For the record," I said, "have you been harmed in any way since we
took you on this little trip?"
"You made me miss David and Everett's—"
"Aside from that."
"No," he said, grudgingly.
"Are you hungry? Thirsty? You need to . . . is there a drain on this
thing? A waste dump of some kind? Need to empty the beer cooler?"
"It's not a problem."
So I had him answer a few more questions, name rank and serial number
sort of things, just to get him used to responding. I've found it's a good
technique, even with somebody who's used to being interviewed. Then I got
around to asking the question this had all been about, and he told me pretty

much what I'd expected to hear.
"So who's idea was it to assassinate Silvio?" I heard Brenda gasp, but I
kept my eyes on the Flack. He pursed his lips angrily, but kept watching the
screen. When it looked as if he might not answer I reached for the patch
cord and the story came out.
"I don't know who told you about it; we kept security tight, just the inner
circle knew what was going to happen. I'd like his name later."
I decided not to tell him just yet that nobody had told me. Maybe if he
thought he'd been betrayed he'd pull no punches. I needn't have worried.
"You don't care about whose idea it was, though. You don't care. All
you need is someone who'll admit to it. I'm here, so I'm elected to break the
story, so let's just say it was me, all right?"
"You're willing to take the blame?" Brenda asked.
"Why not? We all agreed it was the thing to do. We drew lots to select
a culprit to stand up for the crime, and somebody else lost, but we can work
that out, just so I get time to warn them, get our stories straight."
I looked at Brenda's face to see how she was reacting to this, both the
story itself and the blatant engineering of the story between me and the man
who bought the hit. What I saw made me think there was hope for her in the
news business yet. There is a certain concentrated, avid-for-blood look that
appears on the faces of reporters on the trail of a very big story that you'd
have to visit the big cat house at the zoo to see duplicated in its primal state.
From the look on Brenda's face, if a tiger was standing between her and this
story right now, the cat would soon have a tall-journalist-sized hole in him.
"What you mean is," Brenda went on, "you had someone picked out to
go to jail if someone ever uncovered the story." Which meant she still hadn't
completely comprehended this man and his church.
"Nothing like that. We knew the truth would come out sooner or later."
He looked sour. "We'd hoped for later, of course, so we'd have time to milk
it from every possible angle. You've been a real problem, Hildy."
"Thank you," I said.
"After all we've done for you people," he pouted. "First you get in the
way of the second bullet. Serves you right, you getting hurt."
"It never hurt. It passed right through me."
"I'm sorry to hear that. Those bullets were carefully planned.

Something about penetrating the forehead, the cheek, something like that,
spreading out later and blowing out the back of the skull."
"Dum-dums," Brenda said, unexpectedly. She looked at me, shrugged.
"When you got hit, I looked it up."
"Whatever," the Flack continued. "The second one spread out when it
hit you, and did way too much damage to Silvio's face, plus getting your
blood splattered all over him. You ruined the tableau."
"I thought it was pretty effective, myself."
"Thank Elvis for Cricket. Then, as if you hadn't done enough, here you
are breaking the law, making me break the story two weeks early. We never
thought you'd break the law, at least not to this extent."
"So prosecute me."
"Don't be silly. That would look pretty foolish, wouldn't it? All the
sympathy would be with you. People would think you'd done a public
service."
"That's what I was hoping."
"No way. But there's still time to get the right spin on this thing, and do
us both a lot of good. You know us, Hildy. You know we'll work with you
to get a story that will maximize your readership interest, if you'll only give
us a few things here and there in the way of damage control."
There were a few things going on here that I didn't understand, but I
couldn't get to the questions just yet. Frankly, though I've seen a lot of
things in my career, done a lot of things, this one was about to make me gag.
What I really wanted to do was go out and find a baseball/6 field and play a
few innings using this terrifying psychopath as the ball.
But I got myself under control. I've interviewed perverts before, the
public always wants to know about perverts. And I asked the next question,
the one that, later, you wish you could take back, or never hear the answer
to.
"What I can't figure . . . or maybe I'm dense," I said, slowly. "I haven't
found the angle. How did the church expect to look good out of all this?
Killing him, that I understand, in your terms. You can't have a live saint
walking around, farting and belching, out of control. Silvio should have
seen that. Think how embarrassed the Christians'd be if Jesus came back;
they'd have to nail the sucker up again before he upset too many applecarts."

I stopped, because he was smiling, and I didn't like the smile. And for
just a moment he let his dreamy eyes drift from the screen and look into my
own. I imagined I saw worms crawling around in there.
"Oh, Hildy," he said, more in sorrow than in anger.
"Don't you oh Hildy me, you coffee-table cocksucker. I'll tear you out
of that box and shit down your neck. I'll—" Brenda put a hand on mine,
and I got myself back under control.
"They'll put you in jail for five hundred years," I said.
"That wouldn't frighten me," he said, still smiling. "But they won't. I'll
do time, all right. I figure three, maybe five years."
"For murder? For conspiracy to murder Silvio? I want the name of your
lawyer."
"They won't be able to prove murder," he said, still smiling. I was really
getting tired of that smile.
"Why do you say that?"
I felt Brenda's hand on mine again. She had the look of someone trying
to break it gently.
"Silvio was in on it, Hildy," she said.
"Of course he was," The Grand Exalted Stinking Baboon's Posterior
said. "And Hildy, if I'd been a vindictive man, I could have let you run with
the first story. I almost wish I had. Now I'll never enjoy David and Everett's
. . . well, never mind. I'm telling you as a show of good faith, prove we can
work together again in spite of your backstabbing crimes. Silvio was the
one who suggested this whole thing. He helped interview the shooter.
That's the story you'll write this afternoon, and that's the story we always
intended to come out in a few weeks' time."
"I don't believe you," I said, believing every word of it.
"That's of little interest to me."
"Why?" I said.
"I presume you mean why did he want to die. He was washed up,
Hildy. He hadn't been able to write anything in four years. That was worse
than death to Silvio."
"But his best stuff . . ."
"That's when he came to us. I don't know if he was ever a true believer;

hell, I don't know if I'm a true believer. That's why we call ourselves
latitudinarian. If you have different ideas on the divinity of Tori-san, for
instance, we don't drive you out of the church, we give you a time slot and
let you talk it over with people who agree with you. We don't form sects,
like other churches, and we don't torment heretics. There are no heretics.
We aren't doctrinaire. We have a saying in the church, when people want to
argue about points of theology: that's close enough for sphere music."
"'Hum a few bars and I'll see if I can pick it up,'" I said.
"Exactly. We make no secret of the fact that what we most want from
parishioners is for them to buy our records. What we give them in return is
the chance to rub elbows with celebrities. What surprised the founding
Flacks, though, is how many people really do believe in the sainthood of
celebrities. It even makes some sense, when you think about it. We don't
postulate a heaven. It's right here on the ground, if you achieve enough
popularity. In the mind of your average star-struck nobody, being a
celebrity is a thousand times better than any heaven he can imagine."
I could see he did believe in one thing, even if it wasn't the Return of the
King. He believed in the power of public relations. I'd found a point in
common with him. I wasn't delighted by this.
"So you'll play it as, he came to you for help, and you helped him."
"For three years we wrote all his music. We attract a lot of artists, as
you know. We picked three of the best, and they sat down and started
churning out 'Silvio' music. It turned out to be pretty good. You never can
tell."
I thought back over the music I had loved so much, the new things I had
believed Silvio had been doing. It was still good; I couldn't take that away
from the music. But something had gone out of me.
This was a whole new world for Brenda, and she was as rapt as any
three-year-old at mommy's knee, listening to Baba Yaga and the Wolves.
"Will that be part of the story?" she asked. "How you've been writing
his music for him?"
"It has to be. I was against it at first, but then it was shown to me that
everyone benefits this way. My worry was of tarnishing the image of a
Gigastar. But if it's boosted right, he becomes a real object of sympathy, his
cult gets even stronger. He's still got his old music, which was all his. The
church comes out well because we tried everything, and reluctantly gave in

to his request to martyr himself—which is his right. We broke some laws
along the way, sure, and we expected some punishment, but handled right,
even that can generate sympathy. He asked us. And don't worry, we've got
tons of documentation on this, tapes showing him begging us to go along.
I'll have all that wired over to your newsroom as soon as we iron out the
deal. Oh, yes, and as if it all wasn't good enough, now the real musicians
who stood behind Silvio all this time get to come out of the shadows and get
their own shot at Gigastardom."
"Shot does seem the perfect word in this context," I said.
#
The first part of that interview was almost comic, when I think back on
it. There I was, thinking I had it all figured out, asking who had planned to
kill Silvio. And there he was, thinking I knew the whole story already,
thinking I was asking him who had suggested to Silvio that, dead, he could
become a Flack Gigastar.
Because Silvio had not come up with the idea independently. What he
had proposed was his own election, live, into the ranks of the Four. It was
explained that only dead people could qualify, and one thing led to another.
The council was against his plan at first. It was Silvio who figured out the
angle to make the church look good. And it was an act of suicide. What the
Grand Flack would go to jail for was a series of civil offenses, conspiracies,
false advertising, intent to defraud, thing like that. What sort of penalty the
actual assassin would get, when found, I had no idea.
It scared me, later, that we'd missed understanding each other by such a
seemingly trivial point. If he'd known I didn't know the key fact before he
admitted what he did, I thought he might have found that little window of
opportunity to pay me back for making him miss his soap opera, some way
that would have ended with Hildy Johnson in jail and the aims of the church
still accomplished. There might have been a way. Of course, there was
nothing to really prevent him from filing charges anyway, I'd known that
going in, but though he might be devious, he'd never take a chance on it
backfiring, knowing the kind of power Walter would bring to bear if I ever
got charged with something after bringing him a story like that.
Brenda wanted to rush right off and get to work, but I made her sit down
and think it out, something that would benefit her later in her career if she
remembered to do it.
Step one was to phone in the confession as recorded by her holocam.

When that was safely at the Nipple newsdesk there was no chance of the
Flack going back on his word. We could interview him at our leisure, and
plan just how to break this story.
Not that we had a lot of time; there's never much time with something
like this. Who knows when someone will come sniffing down the tracks
you've left? But we took enough to carry the head back to the Nipple, where
he was put on a desk and allowed to use his telephone and was soon
surrounded by dozens of gawking reporters listening in as Brenda
interviewed him.
Yes, Brenda. On the tube ride to the offices I'd had a talk with her.
"This is all going under your byline," I said.
"That's ridiculous," she said. "You did all the work. It was your not
accepting the assassination on the face of it that . . . hell, Hildy, it's your
story."
"It was just too perfect," I said. "Right when I picked him up, it went
through my mind. Only I thought they'd set him up, the poor chump."
"Well, I was buying it. Like everybody else."
"Except Cricket."
"Yeah. There's no question of me taking the credit for it."
"But you will. Because I'm offering it, and it's the kind of story that will
make your name forever and you'd be even dumber than you act if you
turned it down. And because it can't be under my name, because I don't
work for the Nipple anymore."
"You quit? When? Why didn't Walter tell me?"
I knew when I had quit, and Walter didn't tell her because he didn't
know yet, but why confuse her? She argued with me some more, her
passion growing weaker and her gradual acceptance more tinged with guilt.
She'd get over the guilt. I hoped she'd get over the fame.
She seemed to be enjoying it well enough at the moment. I stood at the
back of the room, rows of empty desks between me and the excited group
gathered around the triumphant cub reporter.
And Walter emerged from his high tower. He waddled across the
suddenly-silent newsroom, walking away from me, not seeing me there in
the shadows. No one present could remember the last time he'd come out of
his office just for a news story. I saw him hold out his hand to Brenda. He

didn't believe it, of course, but he was probably planning to grill me about it
later. He was still bestowing his sacred presence on the reporters when I got
on his elevator and rode it up to his office.
His desk sat there in a pool of light. I admired the fine grain of the
wood, the craftsmanship of the thing. Of all the hugely expensive antiques
Walter owned, this was the only one I'd ever coveted. I'd have liked a desk
of my own like that some day.
I smoothed out the gray fedora hat in my hand. It had fallen off my
head when I jumped onto the stage, into a pool of Silvio's blood. The blood
was still caked on it. The thing was supposed to be battered, that was
traditional, but this was ridiculous.
It seemed to me the hat had seen enough use. So I left it in the center of
Walter's desk, and I walked out.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

I had to go home by the back way, and even that had been discovered.

One of my friends must have been bribed: there were reporters gathered
outside the cave. None had elected to actually enter it, not with the cougar
in residence. Though they knew she wouldn't hurt them, that lady is a
menacing presence at best.
My re-arranged face almost did the trick. I had made it into the cave
and they all must have been wondering who the hell I was and what my
business was with Hildy, when somebody shouted "It's her!" and the
stampede was on. I ran down the corridor with the reporters on my heels,
shouting questions, taping my ignominious flight.
Once inside, I viewed the front door camera. Oh, brother. They were
shoulder to shoulder, as far as the eye could see, from one side of the
corridor to the other. There were vendors selling balloons and hot dogs, and
some guy in a clown suit juggling. If I'd ever wondered where the term
media circus came from, I wondered no longer.
The police had set up ropes to keep a clear space for fire and emergency
crews, and so my neighbors could get through to their homes. As I watched,
one neighbor came through, his face set in a scowl that was starting to look
permanent. For lack of anything else to do, many of the reporters shouted
questions at him, to which he replied with stony silence. I could see I was
not going to win any prizes at my next neighborhood block party. This
whole thing was bound to get petitions in circulation, politely requesting me
to find another residence, if I didn't do something.
So I spent several hours boxing my possession, folding up my furniture,
sticking stamps on everything and shoving it all in the mail tube. I thought
about mailing myself along with it, but I didn't know where I'd go. The
things I owned could go into storage; there wasn't that much of it. When I
was done the already-spare apartment was clean to the bare walls, except for
some items I'd set aside, some of which I'd already owned, others ordered
and mailed to me. I went to the bathroom and fixed my cheekbones, left the
nose alone because I'd let Bobbie do that when I could get to him safely.
What the hell, it was still under the ninety-day warranty and there was no
need to tell him I'd broken it intentionally. Then I went to the front door and
let myself appear on the outside monitor. No way was I going to un-dog
those latches.
"Free food at the end of the corridor!" I shouted. A couple of heads
actually turned, but most remained looking back at me. Everyone shouted
questions at once and it took some time for all that to die down and for
everyone to realize that, if they didn't shut up, nobody got an interview.

"I've said all I'm going to say about the death of Silvio," I told them.
There were groans and more shouts, and I waited for that to die down. "I'm
not unsympathetic," I continued. "I used to be one of you. Well, better, but
one of you." That got me some derisive shouts, a few laughs. "I know none
of your editors will take no for an answer. So I'll give you a break. In
fifteen minutes this door will open, and you're all free to come in. I don't
guarantee you an interview, but this idiocy has got to stop. My neighbors
are complaining."
I knew that last would buy me exactly no sympathy, but the promise of
opening the door would keep them solidly in place for a while. I waved to
them, and switched off the screen.
I told the door to open up in fifteen minutes, and hurried to the back.
A previous call to the police had cleared the smaller group out of the
corridor back there. It was not a public space, so I could do that, and the
reporters had to retreat to Texas, from which they could not be chased out,
so long as they didn't violate any of the appropriate technology laws by
bringing in modern tools or clothing. That was fine with me; I knew the
land, and they didn't.
I came out of the cave cautiously. It was full night, with no "moon," a
fact I'd checked in my weather schedule. I peered over the edge of the cliff
and saw them down there, gathered around a campfire near the river,
drinking coffee and toasting marshmallows. I shouldered my pack, settled
all my other items so they would make no noise, and scaled the smaller,
gentler slope that rose behind the cave. I soon came to stand on top of the
hill, and Mexico lay spread out before me in the starlight.
I started off, walking south, keeping my spirits up by envisioning the
scene when the hungry hordes poured through the door to find an empty
nest.
#
For the next three weeks I lived off the land. At least, I did as much of
that as I could. Texas or Mexico, the pickings could be mighty slim in these
parts, partner. There were some edible plants, some cactus, none of which
you'd call a gourmet delight, but I dutifully tried as many of them as I could
find and identify out of my disneyland resident's manual. I'd brought along
staples like pancake batter and powdered eggs and molasses and corn meal,
and some spices, mostly chili powder. I wasn't entirely on my own. I could
sneak into Lonesome Dove or New Austin when things started getting low.

So in the morning I'd eat flapjacks and eggs, and at night beans and
cornbread, but I supplemented this fare with wild game.
What I'd had in mind was venison. There are plenty of deer and
antelope playing around my home, even a few buffalo roaming. Buffalo
seemed a bit extreme for one person, but I'd brought a bow and arrow
hoping to bag a pronghorn or small buck deer. The discouraging word was,
those critters are hard to sneak up on, hard to get in range of, if your range is
as short as mine. As a resident of Texas, I was entitled to take two deer or
antelope each year, and I'd never bagged even one. I'd never wanted to.
You can use firearms for this purpose, but checking them out of the
disneyland office was a process so beset with forms in triplicate and solemn
oaths that I never even considered it. Besides, I wondered, in passing, if the
CC would allow me such a lethal weapon in view of my recent track record.
I was also allowed a virtually unlimited quota of jackrabbits, and that's
what I ate. I didn't shoot any, though I shot at them. I set snares. Most
mornings I'd find one or two struggling to get free. The first one was hard to
kill and the killing cost me my appetite, but it got easier after that. It was
just as I "remembered" it from Scarpa. Before long it seemed natural.
I had found one of the very few places in Luna where I could hide out
until the Silvio story cooled off. I calculated that would take about a month.
It would be a year or more before the whole thing was old news, but I was
sure my own part in the travesty would be largely forgotten sooner than that.
So I spent my days wandering the length and breadth of my huge back yard.
There wasn't a lot to do. I occupied myself by catching rattlesnakes. All
this takes is a certain amount of roaming around, and a bit of patience. They
just coil up and hiss and rattle when you find them, and can be captured
using a long stick and a bit of rope to loop around their necks. I was very
careful handling them as I couldn't afford to be bitten. That would mean
either returning to the world for medical treatment, or surrendering myself to
the tender mercies of Ned Pepper. If you call up an old Boy Scout manual
and read the section on snakebite, it'll curl your hair.
Once a week I'd creep up on the entrance to my old back door. By the
second week there was no one there. I went over to my unfinished cabin and
counted the reporters camped nearby. They had figured out where I was, in
a general way. I'm sure somebody in town had reported my stealthy
shopping trips. It stood to reason that, having abandoned my apartment, I'd
show up at the cabin sooner or later. And they were right. I did plan to
return there.

At the end of the third week there were still a dozen people at the cabin.
Enough was enough, I decided. So I waited until long after dark, watching
them forlornly trying to entertain each other without benefit of television,
saw them crawl into sleeping bags one by one, many rip-roaring drunk. I
waited still longer, until their fire was embers, until the surprising cold of the
desert night had chilled the snakes in my bag, making them dopey and
tractable. Then I stole into their camp, silent as any red Indian, and left a
rattler within a few feet of each of the sleeping bags. I figured they'd crawl
in to get warm, and judging from the screams and shouts I heard about an
hour before sunrise, that's just what they did.
Morning found them all gone. I watched from a distance through my
field glasses as I made my breakfast of pancakes and left-over rabbit chili as
they drifted back one by one after having been treated by autodocs. The
sheriff showed up a little later and started writing out citations. If anything,
the cries were even louder when the reporters found out the price they would
have to pay for non-resident killing of indigenous reptiles. He wasn't
impressed at all by their pleas that most of the snakes had been killed by
accident, in the struggle to get out of the sleeping bags.
I thought they might post a guard the next night, but they didn't. City
slickers, all of them. So I crept in again and left the remainder of my stock.
After my second raid, only four of the hardiest returned. They were
probably going to stay indefinitely, and they'd be alert now. Too bad they
couldn't prove I'd sicced the snakes on them.
I walked up to the cabin and started changing my clothes. It took them a
minute or two to notice me, then they all gathered around. Four people can
hardly be called a mob, but four reporters come close. They all shouted at
once, they got in my way, they grew angrier by the minute. I treated them as
if they were unusually mobile rocks, too big to move, but not worth looking
at and certainly not something to talk to. Even one word would only serve
to encourage them.
They hung around most of the day. Others joined them, including one
idiot who had brought an antique camera with bellows, black cape, and a bar
to hold flash powder, apparently hoping to get a novelty picture of some
kind. There was a novelty picture in it, when the powder slipped down his
shirt and ignited and the others had to slap out the flames. Walter ran the
sequence in his seven o'clock edition with a funny commentary.
Even reporters will give up eventually if there's really no story there.
They wanted to interview me, but I wasn't important enough to rate a come-

and-go watch, supplying the 'pad with those endlessly fascinating shots of a
person walking from his door to his car, and arriving home at night, not
answering the questions of the throng of reporters with nothing better to do.
So by the second day they all went away, gone to haunt someone else. You
don't give assignments like that to your top people. I'd known guys who
spent all their time staked out on this or that celebrity, and not one could
pour piss out of a boot.
It felt good to be alone again. I got down to serious work, finishing my
un-completed cabin.
#
Brenda came by on the second day. For a while she said nothing, just
stood there and watched me hammering shingles into place.
She looked different. She was dressed well, for one thing, and had done
some interesting things with make-up. Now that she had some money, I
supposed she had found professional advice. The biggest new thing about
her was that she was about fifteen kilos heavier. It had been distributed
nicely, around the breasts and hips and thighs. For the first time, she looked
like a real woman, only taller.
I took the nails out of my mouth and wiped my forehead with the back
of my hand.
"There's a thermos of lemonade by the toolbox," I said. "You can help
yourself, if you'll bring me a glass."
"It's talking," she said. "I was told it wouldn't talk, but I had to come see
for myself." She had found the thermos and couple of glasses, which she
inspected dubiously. They could have used a wash, I admit it.
"I'll talk," I said. "I just won't do interviews. If that's what you came
for, take a look in that gunny sack by your feet."
"I heard about the snakes," she said. She was climbing up the ladder to
join me on the ridge of the roof. "That was sort of infantile, don't you
think?"
"It did the job." I took the glass of lemonade and she gingerly settled
herself beside me. I drained mine and tossed the glass down into the dirt.
She was wearing brand new denim pants, very tight to show off her newlystyled hips and legs, and a loose blouse that managed to hide the boniness of
her shoulders, knotted tight between her breasts, baring her good midriff.
The tattoo around her navel seemed out of place, but she was young. I

fingered the material of her blouse sleeve. "Nice stuff," I said. "You did
something to your hair."
She patted it self-consciously, pleased that I'd noticed.
"I was surprised Walter didn't sent you out here," I said. "He'd figure
because we worked together, I might open up to you. He'd be wrong, but
that's how he'd figure it."
"He did send me," she said. "I mean, he tried. I told him to go to hell."
"Something must be wrong with my ears. I thought you said—"
"I asked him if he wanted to see the hottest young reporter in Luna
working for the Shit."
"I'm flabbergasted."
"You taught me everything I know."
I wasn't going to argue with that, but I'll admit I felt something that
might have been a glow of pride. Passing the torch, and all that, even if the
torch was a pretty shoddy affair, one I'd been glad to be rid of.
"So how's all the notoriety treating you?" I asked her. "Has it cost you
your sweet girlish laughter yet?"
"I never know when you're kidding." She'd been gazing into the purple
hills, into the distance, like me. Now she turned and faced me, squinting in
the merciless sunlight. Her face was already starting to burn. "I didn't come
here to talk about me and my career. I didn't even come to thank you for
what you did. I was going to, but everybody said don't, they said Hildy
doesn't like stuff like that, so I won't. I came because I'm worried about you.
Everybody's worried about you."
"Who's everybody?"
"Everybody. All the people in the newsroom. Even Walter, but he'd
never admit it. He told me to ask you to come back. I told him to ask you
himself. Oh, I'll tell you his offer, if you're interested—"
"—which I'm not."
"—which is what I told him. I won't try to fool you, Hildy. You never
got close to the people you worked with, so maybe you don't know how they
feel about you. I won't say they love you, but you're respected, a lot. I've
talked to a lot of people, and they admire your generosity and the way you
play fair with them, within the limits of the job."

"I've stabbed every one of them in the back, one time or another."
"That's not how they feel. You beat them to a lot of stories, no question,
but the feeling is it's because you're a good reporter. Oh, sure, everybody
knows you cheat at cards—"
"What a thing to say!"
"—but nobody can ever catch you at it, and I think they even admire
you for that. For being so good at it."
"Vile calumny, every word of it."
"Whatever. I promised myself I wouldn't stay long, so I'll just say what
I came here to say. I don't know just what happened, but I saw that Silvio's
death wasn't something you could just shrug off. If you ever want to talk
about it, completely off the record, I'm willing to listen. I'm willing to do
just about anything." She sighed, and looked away for a moment, then back.
"I don't really know if you have friends, Hildy. You keep a part of yourself
away from everyone. But I have friends, and I need them. I think of you as
one of my friends. They can help out when things are really bad. So what I
wanted to say, if you ever need a friend, any time at all, just call me."
I didn't want this, but what could I do, what could I say? I felt a hot
lump in the back of my throat. I tried to speak, but it would get into entirely
too much if I ever started, into things I don't think she needed or wanted to
know.
She patted my knee and started to get down off the roof. I grabbed her
hand and pulled her back. I kissed her on the lips. For the first time in many
days I smelled a human smell other than my own sweat. She was wearing a
scent I had worn the day we kidnapped the Grand Flack.
She would have been happy to go farther but it wasn't my scene and we
both knew it, and both knew I'd had nothing in mind other than to thank her
for caring enough to come out here. So she climbed down from the roof,
started back into town. She turned once, waved and smiled at me.
I worked furiously all afternoon, evening, and into the night, until it
grew too dark to see what I was doing.
#
Cricket came by the next day. I was working on the roof again.
"Git down off'n that there shack, you cayuse!" she shouted. "This here
planet ain't big enough fer the both of us." She was pointing a chrome-

plated six-shooter at me. She pulled the trigger, and a stick shot out and a
flag unfurled. It said BANG! She rolled it up and put the gun back on her
hip as I came down the ladder, grateful of the interruption. It was the hottest
part of the day; I'd taken my shirt off and my skin shone as if I'd just stepped
out of the shower.
"The hombre back in the bar said this stuff would take the hide off of a
rattlesnake," she said, holding up a bottle of brown liquid. "I told him that's
what I intended to use it for." I held out my hand. She scowled at it, then
took it. She was dressed in full, outrageous "western" regalia, from the
white Stetson hat to the high-heeled lizard boots, with many a pearly button
and rawhide fringe in between. You expected her to whip out a guitar and
start yodeling "Cool Water." She was also sporting a trim blonde mustache.
"I hate the soup strainer," I said, as she poured me a drink.
"So do I," she admitted. "I'm like you; I don't care to mix. But my little
daughter bought it for me for my birthday, so I figure I have to wear it for a
few weeks to make her happy."
"I didn't know you had a daughter."
"There's a lot you don't know about me. She's at that age when gender
identity starts to crop up in their minds. One of her friend's mother just got a
Change, and Lisa's telling me she wants to have a daddy for a while. Hell, at
least it goes with the duds." She had been digging in a pocket. Now she
flipped out a wallet and showed me a picture of a girl of about six, a sweeter,
younger version of herself. I tried my hand at a few complimentary phrases,
and became aware she was curling her lip at me.
"Oh, shut up, Hildy," she said. "You being 'nice' just reminds me of
why you're doing it, you louse."
"Did you have any trouble getting out of the Studio?"
"They roughed me up pretty good. Knocked out my front teeth, broke a
couple of fingers. But the cavalry arrived and got pictures of the whole
thing, and right now they're talking to my lawyers. I guess I got you to
thank for that; the timely arrival, I mean."
"No need to thank me."
"Don't worry, I wasn't going to."
"I was surprised it was so easy to get the drop on you."
She brought out two shot glasses and poured some of her rattlesnake-

hide remover in each, then looked at me in a funny way.
"So am I. You can probably imagine, I've been thinking it over. I think
it was Brenda being there. I must have thought she'd slow you down. Jog
your elbow in some way when it came time to do the dirty deed." She
handed me a glass, and we both drained them. She made a face; I was a
little more used to the stuff, but it never goes down easy. "All subconscious,
you understand. But I thought you'd hesitate, since it's so obvious how
much she looks up to you. So while I was waiting for that window of
vulnerability I made the great mistake of turning my back on you, you son of
a bitch."
"Bitch will do."
"I meant what I said. I was thinking of the male Hildy I knew, and he
would have hesitated."
"That's ridiculous."
"Maybe so. But I think I'm right Changing is almost always more than
just re-arranging the plumbing. Other things change, too. So I was caught
in the middle, thinking of you as a man who'd do something stupid in the
presence of a little pussy, not as the ruthless cunt you'd become."
"It was never like that with me and Brenda."
"Oh, spare me. Sure, I know you never screwed her. She told me that.
But a man's always aware of the possibility. As a woman you know that.
And you use it, if you have any brains, just like I do."
I couldn't say she was definitely wrong. I know that changing sex is, for
me, more than just a surface thing. Some attitudes and outlooks change as
well. Not a lot, but enough to make a difference in some situations.
"You're sleeping with her, aren't you?" I asked, in some surprise.
"Sure. Why not?" She took another drink and squinted at me, then
shook her head. "You're good at a lot of things, Hildy, but not so good at
people." I wasn't sure what she meant by that. Not that I disagreed, I just
wasn't sure what she was getting at.
"She sent you out here?"
"She helped. I would have come out here anyway, to see if I really
wanted to put a few new dents in your skull. I was going to, but what's the
point? But she's worried about you. She said having Silvio die in your arms
like that hit you pretty hard."

"It did. But she's exaggerating."
"Could be. She's young. But I'll admit, I was surprised to see you quit.
You've talked about it ever since I've known you, so I just assumed it was
nothing but talk. You really going to squat out here for the rest of your
life?" She looked sourly around at the blasted land. "What the hell you
gonna do, once this slum is finished? Grow stuff? What can you raise out
here, anyway?"
"Calluses and blisters, mostly." I showed her my hands. "I'm thinking
of entering these in the county fair."
She poured another drink, corked the bottle, and handed it to me. She
drained her glass in one gulp.
"Lord help me, I think I'm beginning to like this stuff."
"Are you going to ask me to go back to work?"
"Brenda wanted me to, but I said I don't want to get that mixed up in
your karma. I've got a bad feeling about you, Hildy. I don't know just what
it is, but you've had an absolutely incredible run of good luck, for a reporter.
I mean the David Earth story, and Silvio."
"Not such good luck for David and Silvio."
"Who cares? What I'm saying, I have this feeling you'll have to pay for
all that. You're in for a run of bad luck."
"You're superstitious."
"And bi-sexual. See, you learned three new things about me today."
I sighed, and debated taking one more drink. I knew I'd fall off the roof
if I did.
"I want to thank you, Cricket, for coming all the way out here to tell me
I'm jinxed. A gal really needs to hear that from time to time."
She grinned at me. "I hope it ruined your day."
I waved my hand at the desolation around us.
"How could anyone ruin all this?"
"I'll admit, making all this any worse is probably beyond even my
formidable powers. And I'll go now, back to the glitter and glamour and
madcap whirl of my life, leaving you to languish with the lizards, and will
add only these words, to wit, Brenda is right, you do have friends, and I'm
one, though I can't imagine why, and if you need anything, whistle, and

maybe I'll come, if I don't have anything else to do."
And she leaned over and kissed me.
#
They say that if you stay in one place long enough, everybody you ever
met will eventually go by that spot. I knew it had to be true when I saw
Walter struggling up the trail toward my cabin. I couldn't imagine what
could have brought him out to West Texas other than a concatenation of
mathematical unlikelihoods of Dickensian proportions. That, or Cricket and
Brenda were right: I did have friends.
I needn't have worried about that last possibility.
"Hildy, you're a worthless slacker!" he shouted at me from three meters
away. And what a sight he was. I don't think he'd ever visited an
historically-controlled disneyland in his life. One can only imagine, with
awe, the titanic struggles it must have taken to convince him that he could
not wear his office attire into Texas, that his choices were nudity, or period
dress. Well, nudity was right out, and I resolved to give thanks to the Great
Spirit for not having had to witness that. The sight of Walter in his skin
would have put the buzzards off their feed. So out of the rather limited
possibilities in his size in the disney tourist costume shop, he had selected a
cute little number in your basic Riverboat Gambler style: black pants, coat,
hat, and boots, white shirt and string tie, scarlet-and-maroon paisley vest
with gold edging and brass watch fob. As I watched, the last button on the
vest gave up the fight, popping off and ricocheting off a rock with a sound
familiar to watchers of old western movies, and the buttons on his shirt were
left to struggle on alone. Lozenges of pale, hairy flesh were visible in the
gaps between buttons. His belt buckle was buried beneath a substantial
overhang. His face was running with sweat. All in all, better than I would
have expected, for Walter.
"Kind of far from the Mississippi, aren't you, tinhorn?" I asked him.
"What the hell are you talking about?"
"Never mind. You're just the man I wanted to see. Give me a hand
unloading these planks, will you? It'd take me all day, alone."
He gaped at me as I went to the buckboard which had been sitting there
for an hour, filled with fresh, best-quality boards from Pennsylvania, boards
I intended to use for the cabin floor, when I got around to it. I clambered up
onto the wagon and lifted one end of a plank.

"Well, come on, pick up the other end."
He thought it over, then trudged my way, looking suspiciously at the
placid team of mules, giving them a wide berth. He hefted his end, grunting,
and we tossed it over the side.
After we'd tossed enough of them to establish a rhythm, he spoke.
"I'm a patient man, Hildy."
"Hah."
"Well, I am. What more do you want? I've waited longer than most
men in my position would have. You were tired, sure, and you needed a rest
. . . though how anybody could think of this as a rest is beyond me."
"You waited for what?"
"For you to come back, of course. That's why I'm here. Vacation's
over, my friend. Time to come back to the real world."
I set my end of the board down on the pile, wiped my brow with the
back of my arm, and just stared at him. He stared back, then looked away,
and gestured to the lumber. We picked up another board.
"You could have let me know you were taking a sabbatical," he said.
"I'm not complaining, but it would have made things easier. Your checks
have kept on going to your bank, of course. I'm not saying you're not
entitled, you'd saved up . . . was it six, seven months vacation time?"
"More like seventeen. I've never had a vacation, Walter."
"Something always came up. You know how it is. And I know you're
entitled to more, but I don't think you'd leave me out on a limb by taking it
all at once. I know you, Hildy. You wouldn't do that to me."
"Try me."
"See, what's happened, this big story has come up. You're the only one
I'd trust to cover it. What it is—"
I dropped my end of the last board, startling him and making him lose
his grip. He danced out of the way as the heavy timber clattered to the floor
of the wagon.
"Walter, I really don't want to hear about it."
"Hildy, be reasonable, there's no one else who—"
"This conversation got off on the wrong foot, Walter. Some way, you

always manage to do that with me. I guess that's why I didn't come right up
to you and say it, and that was a mistake, I see it now, so I'm going to—"
He held up his hand, and once more I fell for it.
"The reason I came," he said, looking down at the ground, then glancing
up at me like a guilty child, " . . . well, I wanted to bring you this." He held
out my fedora, more battered than ever from being stuffed into his back
pocket. I hesitated, then took it from him. He had a sort of half smile on his
face, and if there had been one gram of gloating in it I'd have hurled the
damn thing right in his face. But there wasn't. What I saw was some hope,
some worry, and, this being Walter, a certain gruff-but-almost-lovable
diffidence. It must have been hard for him, doing this.
What can you do? Throwing it back was out. I can't say I ever really
liked Walter, but I didn't hate him, and I did respect him as a newsman. I
found my hands working unconsciously, putting some shape back into the
hat, making the crease in the top, my thumbs feeling the sensuous material.
It was a moment of high symbolism, a moment I hadn't wanted.
"It's still got blood on it," I said.
"Couldn't get it all out. You could get a new one, if this has bad
memories."
"It doesn't matter one way or the other." I shrugged. "Thanks for going
to the trouble, Walter." I tossed the hat on a pile of wood shavings, bent
nails, odd lengths of sawed lumber. I crossed my arms.
"I quit," I said.
He looked at me a long time, then nodded, and took a sopping
handkerchief from his back pocket and mopped his brow.
"If you don't mind, I won't help you with the rest of this," he said. "I've
got to get back to the office."
"Sure. Listen, you could take the wagon back into town. The mule
skinner said he'd be back for it before dark, but I'm worried the mules might
be getting thirsty, so it would—"
"What's a mule?" he said.
#
I eventually got him seated on the bare wooden board, reins in hand, a
doubtful expression on his choleric face, and watched him get them going
down the primitive trail to town. He must have thought he was "driving" the

mules; just let him try to turn them from the path to town, I thought. The
only reason I'd let him do it in the first place was that the mules knew the
way.
That was the end of my visitors. I kept waiting for Fox or Callie to
show up, but they didn't. I was glad to have missed Callie, but it hurt a little
that Fox stayed away. It's possible to want two things at once. I really did
want to be left alone . . . but the bastard could have tried.
#
My life settled into a routine. I got up with the sun and worked on my
cabin until the heat grew intolerable. Then I'd mosey down into New Austin
come siesta time for a few belts of a home brew the barkeep called Sneaky
Pete and a few hands of five card stud with Ned Pepper and the other
regulars. I had to put on a shirt in the saloon: pure sex discrimination, of the
kind that must have made women's lives hell in the 1800's. When working, I
wore only dungarees, boots, and a sombrero to keep the worst heat off my
head. I was brown as a nut from the waist up. How women wore the clothes
the bargirls had on in a West Texas summer is one of the great mysteries of
life. But, come to think of it, the men dressed just as heavily. A strange
culture, Earth.
As the evening approached I'd return to the cabin and labor until
sundown. In the evening's light I would prepare my supper. Sometimes one
of my friends would join me. I developed a certain reputation for buttermilk
biscuits, and for my perpetual pot of beans, into which I'd toss some of the
unlikeliest ingredients imaginable. Maybe I would find a new career, if I
could interest my fellow Lunarians in the subtleties of Texas chili.
I always stayed awake for about an hour after the last light of day had
faded. I have no way of comparing, of course, but it seemed to me the
nightly display of starry sky was probably pretty close to the real thing, what
I'd see if I were transported to the real Texas, the real Earth, now that all
man's pollution was gone. It was glorious. Nothing like a Lunar night, not
nearly as many stars, but better in its own way. For one thing, you never see
the Lunar night sky without at least one thickness of glass between you and
the heavens. You never feel the cooling night breezes. For another, the
Lunar sky is too hard. The stars glare unmercifully, unblinking, looking
down without forgiveness on Man and all his endeavors. In Texas the stars
at night do indeed burn big and bright, but they wink at you. They are in on
the joke. I loved them for that. Stretched out on my bedroll, listening to the
coyotes howling at the moon—and I loved them for that, too, I wanted to

howl with them . . . I achieved the closest approximation of peace I had ever
found, or am likely to find.
I spent something like two months like that. There was no hurry on the
cabin. I intended to do it right. Twice I tore down large portions of it when
I learned a new method of doing something and was no longer satisfied with
my earlier, shoddier work. I think I was afraid of having to think of
something else to do when I finished it.
And with good reason. The day came, as it always must, when I could
find nothing else to do. There was not a screw to tighten on a single hinge,
not a surface to sand smoother, no roof shingle out of place.
Well, I reasoned, there was always furniture to make. That ought to be a
lot harder than walls, a floor, and a roof. All I had inside was some cheap
burlap curtains and a rude bedstead. I spread my bedroll out on the straw
mattress and spent a restless night "indoors" for the first time in many
weeks.
The next day I prowled the grounds, forming vague plans for a
vegetable garden, a well, and—no kidding—a white picket fence. The fence
would be easy. The garden would be a lot harder, an almost impossible
project worthy of my mood at the time. As for a well, I'd have to have one
for the garden, but somehow the fiction of worth-while labor broke down
when I thought about a well. The reason was that, in Texas, there is no more
water under the surface than there is anywhere else on Luna. If you want
water and aren't conveniently near the Rio Grande, what you do is dig or
drill to a level determined by lottery for each parcel of land, and when
you've done that, the disneyland board of directors will have a pipe run out
to the bottom of your well and you can pretend you've struck water. At my
cabin that depth was fifteen meters. The labor of digging that deep didn't
daunt me. I knew I was up to it. Hell, even with a female hormonal system
impeding me I'd developed shoulders and biceps that would have made
Bobbie go into aesthetic shock. Trading my plane and saw for a pick and
shovel would be no problem. That was the part I looked forward to.
What didn't thrill me was the pretending. I'd gotten good at it, looking
at the stars at night and marveling at the size of the universe. I'd not gone
loony; I knew they were just little lights I could have held in my hand. But
at night, weary, I could forget it. I could forget a lot of things. I didn't know
if I could forget digging fifteen meters for a dry hole, then seeing the pipe
laid and the cool, sweet, life-giving water fill up that dry hole.
I hate to get too metaphorical. Walter always howled when I did.

Readers tire of metaphors easily, he's always said. Why the well, and not
the stars? Why come this far and balk, why lose one's imagination right at
the end? I don't know, but it probably had to do with the dry hole concept. I
just kept thinking my entire life was a big dry hole. All I'd ever
accomplished that I was in any way proud of was the cabin . . . and I hated
the cabin.
That night I couldn't get to sleep. I fought it a long time, then I got up
and stumbled through the night with no lantern until I found my hatchet. I
chopped the bedstead to kindling and piled it against the wall, and I soaked
that kindling in kerosene. I set it alight and walked out the front door,
leaving it open to make a draft, and went slowly up the low hill behind my
property. There I squatted on my haunches and watched, feeling very little
emotion, as the cabin burned to the ground.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

I wonder if there's a lonelier place anywhere than an arena designed to

seat thirty or forty thousand people, empty.
The King City slash-boxing venue did have an official name, the
Somebody-or-other Memorial Gladiatorium, but it was another case of
honoring someone well-known at the time that sports history has forgotten.
The arena is called, in all the sports pages, in the minds of bloodthirsty fans
everywhere, even on the twenty-meter sign on the outside, simply the
Bucket of Blood.
It was peaceful now. The concentric circles of seats were in shadows.
The sound system was silent. The blood gutters around the ring had been
sluiced clean, ready for the evening's fresh torrents. Some of that new blood
would come from the man now standing alone under the ring of harsh white
lights suspended from the obscured ceiling; MacDonald. I walked down the
gentle curvature of the aisle toward him.
He was nude, standing with his back to me. I thought I didn't make any
noise, but he was a tough man to sneak up on. He looked over his shoulder,
not in any alarm, just curious.
"Hello, Hildy." No shock of recognition, no comment that I'd been male
the last time he'd seen me. Maybe he'd heard, or maybe his eyes just didn't
miss much, and very little could surprise him.
"Do you get nervous before a fight?"
He frowned, and seemed to give the question real thought.
"I don't think so. I get . . . heightened in some way. I find it hard to sit
down. Maybe it's nervousness. So I come up here and re-think my last
fight, remember the things I did wrong, try to think of ways not to do them
wrong the next time."
"I didn't think you did things wrong." I was looking for stairs to join
him in the ring, but there didn't seem to be any. I hopped lightly over the
meter-high edge.
"Everybody makes mistakes. You try to minimize them, in my line of
work."
I saw that he had a partial erection. Had he been masturbating? I
couldn't deal with that just then, had never been less interested in sex in my
life. I put my hand on his face. He stood there with his arms folded and
looked into my eyes.
"I need help," I said.

"Yes," he said, and put his arms around me.
#
He took me down to his dressing room, locker room, whatever he called
it. He bustled around for a while, making drinks for both of us, letting me
regain some of my composure. The funny thing, I hadn't cried. My
shoulders had shaken, there in his arms, and I'd made some funny noises, but
no tears came. I wasn't shaking. My heart was not pounding. I didn't know
quite what to make of it, but I'd never been nearer to screaming in my life.
"You interrupted my crazy little ritual," he said, handing me a
strawberry margarita. It didn't occur to me until later to wonder how he
knew I drank them.
"Nice bar you have."
"They take good care of me, so long as I draw the crowds. Cheers." He
held his own glass out to me, and we sipped. Excellent.
"I hope you're not drinking anything too strong."
"No matter what you may think, I'm not suicidal. Not now."
"What do you—"
"I always go out there alone," he said, getting up, standing with his back
to me, cutting off the question he didn't seem ready to answer yet. "The
dirty little secret is, the anticipation turns me on. I've read up on it. Some
people are aroused by danger. It's more common to be aroused after you've
come through a life-threatening situation. Me, I get it before."
"I hope I didn't ruin anything for you."
"No. It's not important."
"If you want to relieve the pressure, you know, make love, we could." I
regretted saying it as soon as the words were out of my mouth. Under other
circumstances, sure . . . in fact, damn sure. He was gorgeous, something I
hadn't realized the other times I'd met him, being male myself at the time.
The body was quite good—lean, compact, made for speed and stamina
rather than power—but, so what? It was a Formula A fighter's body. His
opponent this evening would be wearing essentially the same body, plus or
minus three kilograms, even if she was female. What I'd been noticing
about him were two things: the hands, and the face. The hands were long
and wide, the knuckles a bit thickened, the palms rough. They moved with a
total assurance, they never dithered, never fumbled. They were hands that

would know how to handle a woman's body.
The face . . . well, it was the eyes, wasn't it? It was a handsome enough
face, craggy in a way I liked, strong brows and cheeks, the mouth maybe a
little prim, but capable of softening, as when he put his arms around me.
But the eyes, the eyes. Without my being able to describe any one quality or
even set of qualities that should make them so, they were riveting. When he
looked at me, he looked at me, nothing else, unwavering, seeing more of me
than anybody ever should.
Again, he seemed to be considering the offer. He made the small smile
that was the most I'd ever seen him give away.
"It's been a long time since I accepted an offer made with so much
enthusiasm as that," he said.
"Sorry. It was really stupid. Now you'll tell me you're homosexual."
"Why? Because I turned you down?"
"No, because all my guesses lately turn out wrong. Just the way you
looked at me, though I should have known you aren't interested now, I just
thought I saw . . . something."
"You're not doing too badly. No, I'm . . . do you want to hear this?"
"If you want to tell."
He gave a shrug that said we both knew the important things hadn't
come up yet, but he was willing to wait.
"Okay. Briefly, for future reference, I'm mostly hetero, say ninety
percent, when male. I haven't been female for a very long time, and
probably never will be again."
"Didn't you like it?"
"I had a problem. I didn't like making love to men. My love life was
almost exclusively with other women. I didn't like . . . accepting someone
else into my body. I was always afraid to. Women have to be able to
surrender too much control. It made me nervous."
"It doesn't have to be like that."
"So I've been told. It always was for me."
"That's the important thing, I guess." There may have been a more
inane conversation since the Invasion, but no record of it survives. I took
another drink to cover my discomfort. This whole thing had been a mistake.

I saw I'd made him uncomfortable in some way I didn't understand, and
wished I was somewhere else. Anywhere else. I started to get up, and found
I could not. My arms and legs simply would not operate to lift me out of my
chair. My arms would still lift the drink—I lifted it, drank, one of the more
needed drinks since the night they invented the strawberry margarita—but
they defied my orders to do anything about getting bodily elevation.
Screwed up? You bet.
I wasn't about to tolerate such a mutiny, so I got angry, and broke the
process down into steps. Put palms flat against chair arms. Set feet flat on
floor. Press down on hands and feet. Do not operate this machinery under
the influence of narcotic drugs. There you go, Hildy, you're getting up.
"I've been trying to kill myself," I said, and sat back down.
"You've come to the right place. Tell me about it."
#
You do something often enough, you get good at it. My opening-upand-letting-it-all-hang-out skills had never been strong, but telling my story
to Fox, to Liz, even the part of it I'd told to Callie had at least put a polish on
the narrative. I found myself using some of the same phrases I'd used the
times before, things I'd said that had struck me as particularly droll or that
somehow managed to put a better face on the situation. I'm a writer, I can't
help it. I found myself almost enjoying the exercise. It was a story I was
doing, and as in any story, there's the parts you think will sell it and the parts
that will simply confuse the reader. And when the audience is small, you
tailor it to what you think they will like. So, without my intending it, the
story because a pitch for a series I'd like to do in the great Extra Edition of
Life. Or if you prefer, the recitations to Fox, Liz, and Callie had been outof-town try-outs, and this was the big-time critic whose review would make
you or break you.
But Andrew wasn't having it. He let me prattle on like that for almost
an hour. I think he was getting a feel for the particular type of horseshit I
was selling, its distinctive aroma and texture when you stepped in it, the
color of it and the sound it made when it landed. When he knew he'd
recognize that particular kind of manure if it turned up in his pasture again
he held up his hand until my mouth stopped working and he said "Now tell
me what really happened."
So I started over.

I didn't lie the first time through, you understand. But I'm bound to say I
didn't tell the truth, either. All those years at the Nipple had sharpened my
editorial skills outrageously, and one of the first things you learn as a
reporter is that the easiest way to prevaricate is to simply not tell all the
truth. I wondered, beginning again, if I remembered how to tell all the truth.
If I even knew what all the truth was. (We could spend a pleasant afternoon
debating whether or not anyone ever knows even a small portion of the truth,
about herself or about anything, but that way madness lies.) All he wanted
was my best shot at telling him what I knew, without all the gimcracks and
self-serving invention one throws in to make oneself look better. Try it
sometime; it's one of the hardest things you'll ever do.
It takes a long time, too. Doing it well involves going back to things
you may not, at first, have thought relevant to the story, sometimes way
back. I told him things about my childhood I hadn't even realized I
remembered. The process was also drawn out by the times I just sat there,
staring into space. Andrew never prompted me, never hurried me in any
way. He never asked a single question. The only times he spoke were in
answer to a direct question from me, and if a nod or a shake of the head
would do, that's what I got. A conversational minimalist, Andrew
MacDonald.
Two things alerted me to the fact that I was through with my story: I
had stopped talking, and a plate of sandwiches had appeared on the table
beside me. I fell on the food like a Visigoth sacking Rome. I don't know
when I'd ever been so hungry. As I stuffed my face I noticed three empty
margarita glasses; I didn't remember drinking them, and I didn't feel drunk.
As the food reached my belly, as brain cells resumed working in isolated
clumps throughout my head, I began to notice other things, such as that the
floor was shaking. Not bouncing up and down, just a steady, slightly scary
vibration that I finally identified as crowd noise. Andrew's locker room was
almost directly beneath the center of the Bucket of Blood. We had come
down some ringside stairs to reach it. I looked for a clock, in vain.
"How long have we been talking?" I asked, around a mouthful of cold
cuts and bread.
"The main event is still almost half an hour away."
"That's you, isn't it?"
"Yes."
It didn't bear thinking about. I'd arrived in the early afternoon, and there

had been nine bouts listed on the fight card before Andrew's death match. It
had to be ten, eleven o'clock.
"There's no clocks in here," I said, hoping he'd take it as an apology.
"I won't allow them, before a fight. They distract me."
"Make you nervous?" Maybe it was a needling question. How dare he
not get nervous before a fight? His unearthly calm was a little hard to take.
"They distract me."
I was noticing other things. It seems ridiculous to say I'd spent so much
time in such a small room and not seen it, but I hadn't. Not that there was a
lot to see. The place was as impersonal as a hotel room, which I guess it
was, in a way. What I saw now were four telephone screens on the wall
beside him, each displaying a worried-looking face, each with the sound
turned off and the words URGENT! PICK UP! flashing beneath the faces. I
recognized two of them as people I'd seen around Andrew the last time I'd
been here. Trainers, managers, that sort of thing.
"Looks like you'd better take care of some business," I said. He waved
it away. "Shouldn't you be, I don't know, talking strategy with those people?
Getting pep talks, something like that?"
"I'll be glad to miss the pep talks, frankly," he said. "It's the worst part
of this ordeal." I had to admit the four people on the phone looked more
nervous than he did.
"I still better get out of your way," I said, getting up, trying to swallow a
mouthful of food. "You'd better do what you need to do to get ready."
"With me, it was ten years," he said.
I sat back down.
I could pretend I didn't know what he was talking about, but it would be
a lie. I knew exactly what he was talking about, and he promptly proved me
right by saying:
"Ten years of false memories. That was six years ago, and I've spent all
that time looking for someone to tell about it."
"That, and trying to get yourself killed," I said.
"I know it looks that way to you. I don't see it that way."
"But you did try to kill yourself."
"Yes, six years ago. I found there was absolutely nothing I had the least

interest in doing. I am well over two hundred years old, and it seemed to me
it had been at least a century since I'd done anything new."
"You were bored."
"It went a lot deeper than that. Depressed, uninterested . . . once I spent
three days simply sitting in the bathtub. I saw no reason to get out. I
decided to end my life, and it wasn't an easy decision for me. I was raised to
believe that life is a precious gift, that there is always something useful you
can do with it. But I could no longer find anything meaningful."
He was a lot better at telling it than I had been. He'd had longer to
practice it, in his own mind, at least. He just hit all the high points, saying
several times that he'd fill me in on the details when he got back from the
fight. Briefly, he had been marooned on an island that sounded very much
like Scarpa, only tougher. He'd had to work very hard. He suffered many
setbacks, and never achieved anything like the comforts granted to me. It
was only in the last two years of his ten-year stay that things eased up a bit.
"It sounds like the CC put you through the same basic program," he
said. "From what you describe, it's been improved some; new technology,
new sub-routines. I accepted it at the time, of course—I didn't have any
choice, since they weren't my memories—but reviewing it afterwards the
realism factor does not seem so high as what you experienced."
"The CC said he'd gotten better at that."
"He's forever improving."
"It must have been hell."
"I loved every second of it." He let that hang for a moment, then leaned
forward slightly, his already-intense eyes blazing. "When life is simple like
that, you have no chance to be bored. When your life hangs in the balance
as a consequence of every action you take, suicide seems such an effete,
ridiculous thing. Every organism has the survival instinct at its very core.
That so many humans kill themselves—not just now, they have been doing it
for a long time—says a lot about civilization, about 'intelligence.' Suicides
have lost an ability that every amoeba possesses: the knowledge of how to
live."
"So that's the secret of life?" I asked. "Hardship? Earning what you get
out of life, working for it?"
"I don't know." He got up and began pacing. "I was exhilarated when I
returned to the here and now. I thought I had an answer. Then I realized, as

you did, that I couldn't trust it. It wasn't me living those ten years. It was a
machine writing a script about how he thought I would have lived them. He
got some of it right, but a lot more wrong, because . . . it wasn't me. The me
he was trying to imitate had just tried to end his life. The me the CC
imagined worked like a dog to stay alive. It was the CC's wish-fulfillment,
not mine."
"But you said—"
"But it was an answer," he said, whirling to face me. "What I found out
was that, for well over a century, I'd had nothing at risk! Whether I
succeeded or failed at something had no meaning for me, because my life
was not at stake. Not even my comfort was really at stake. If I succeeded or
failed financially, for instance. If I succeeded, I'd simply win more things
that had long ago lost their meaning. If I failed, I would lose some of these
things, but the State would take care of my basic needs."
I wanted to say something, to argue with him, but he was on a roll, and
it was just as well, because even if I did disagree with him here and there, it
was exciting simply to be able to talk about it with someone who knew.
"That's when I started fighting death matches," he said. "I had to reintroduce an element of risk into my life." He held up a hand. "Not too
much risk; I'm very good at what I do." And now he smiled, and it was
beautiful. "And I do want to live again. That's what you've got to do, Hildy.
You've got to find a way to experience risk again. It's a tonic like nothing I
ever imagined."
The questions were lining up in my mind, clamoring to get out. There
was one more important than all the others.
"What's to prevent the CC," I said, slowly, "from reviving you again,
like he did to me, if you . . . make a mistake?"
"I will, someday. Everybody does. I think it will be a long time yet."
"There's lots of people gunning for you."
"I'm going to retire soon. A few more matches, that's all."
"What about the tonic?"
He smiled again. "I think I've had enough of it. I needed it, I needed to
have the death matches . . . and nothing else would have worked. That's the
beauty of it. To die so publicly . . ."
I saw it then. The CC wouldn't dare revive Silvio, for instance (not that

he could; Silvio's brain had been destroyed). Everybody knew Silvio was
dead, and if he suddenly showed up again embarrassing questions would be
asked. Committees would be formed, petitions circulated, programming reexamined. Andrew had found the obvious way to beat the CC's little
resurrection game, an answer so obvious that I had never thought of it.
Or had I, and simply kept it buried?
That would have to be a question for later as, with an apologetic shrug,
Andrew opened his door and half of King City spilled into the room, all
talking at once. Well, fifteen or twenty people, anyway, most of them angry.
I collected a few glares and tried to make myself small in one corner of the
room and watch as agents, trainers, managers, Arena reps, and media types
all tried to compress an hour's worth of psyching up, legalities, and
interviews into the five minutes left to them before the match was due to
start. Andrew remained an island of calm in the center of this hurricane,
which rivaled any press conference I've ever attended for sheer confusion.
Then he was gone, trailing them all behind him like yapping puppies.
The noise faded down the short corridor and up the stairs and I heard the
crowd noise grow louder and the bass mumble that was all I could hear of
the announcer's voice from this deep below the ring.
The noise stayed at that level for a while, then decreased a little, as I sat
down to wait for his return.
Then it grew to a pitch I thought might endanger the building. Fans, I
thought, contemptuously.
If anything, it grew even louder, and I began to wonder what was going
on.
And then they brought Andrew MacDonald back on a stretcher.
#
Nothing is ever as straightforward as it at first seems. Andrew was
fighting a death match . . . but what did that mean?
I had no idea, myself. Having seen just a few matches, I knew that
blows were delivered routinely that would not have been survivable without
modern medical techniques. I had witnessed medical attention being
administered between rounds, combatants being patched up, body fluids
being replaced. The normal sign of victory was the removal of the loser's
head, one of the many endearing things about slash-boxing and surely a sign
that things weren't going well for the beheadee . . . but what about the Grand

Flack? He did quite well without a body. The only surely fatal wound these
days was the destruction of the brain, and the CC was working on that one.
It seemed the rules were different for a death match. It also seemed no
one was really happy about them, except possibly for Andrew.
I could not tell what his injuries were, but his head was still on his
shoulders. The body was covered with a sheet, which was soaked in blood.
I gathered, later, that a hierarchy of wounds had been established for death
matches, that some could be treated by ringside handlers between rounds,
and that others had to be acknowledged as fatal. The fallen opponent was
not decapitated, it being thought too gruesome to hold aloft an actual dead
severed head. I was told the ritual took the place of the coup de grace, that it
was meant to be symbolic of victory in some way. Go figure that one out.
I also learned, later, that no one really knew how to handle the situation
they now found themselves in. Only three fighters had ever engaged in
death matches since they were allowed into a gray area of legality known as
consensual suicide. Only one had ever met the requirements for a death
wound, and he had experienced a deathbed revelation that could be summed
up as "maybe this wasn't such a good idea, after all," been revived, stitched
up, and retired in disgrace to everyone's considerable secret relief. Of the
two people currently risking their lives in fights, it had been tacitly agreed
long ago that they would never meet each other, as the certain outcome of
such a match would be the pickle the handlers, lawyers, and Arena
management now found themselves in, which might be expressed as "are we
really going to let this silly son of a bitch die on us?"
There was not a lot of time to come up with an answer. I could hear a
sound coming from Andrew, all the way across the room, and knew I was
hearing the death rattle.
I couldn't see much of him. If he'd hoped his final moments would be
peaceful, he'd been a fool. A dozen people crowded around, some feverish
to offer aid, others worrying about corporate liability, a very few standing up
for Andrew's right to die as he pleased.
The Bucket of Blood management had for years been in a quandary
concerning death matches. On the one hand, they were a guaranteed draw;
stadia were always filled when the titillation of a possible actual death was
offered. On the other, no one knew what the public reaction would be if
someone actually died right out there in front of God and everyone, for the
glory of sport. The prevailing opinion was it would not be good for
business. The public's appetite for non-injurious violence in sport and

entertainment had never been plumbed, but real death, though always good
for a sensation, was much easier to take if it could be seen as an accident,
like David Earth, or Nirvana.
To give them credit, the Arena people were queasy about the whole
idea, and not just from a legal standpoint. Their worst sin in the matter was
something we all do, which is fail to imagine the worst happening. No one
had died in a death match yet, and they'd kept hoping no one would. Now
someone was.
But not without a last-ditch effort. The people around him reminded
me, as things in life so often do, of scenes from movies. You've seen them:
in a war picture, when medics gather around a wounded comrade trying to
save his life, buddies at his side telling him everything's gonna be okay, kid,
you've got a million-dollar wound there, you'll be home with the babes
before you know it, and their eyes saying this one's a goner. And this seems
weird, maybe it was a trick of the light, but I saw another scene, the priest
leaning over the bed, holding a rosary, hearing the last confession, giving the
last rites. What they were really doing was trying to talk him into accepting
treatment, please, so we can all go home and wipe our brows and have a few
stiff drinks and pretend this fucking disaster never happened, dear lord.
He refused them all. Gradually their pleas grew less impassioned, and a
few even gave up and retreated to the wall near me, like what he had was
contagious. And finally someone leaned close enough to hear what it was
he'd been trying to say, and that someone looked over at me and beckoned.
I'm surprised I made it, as I had no feeling in my legs. But somehow I
was leaning over him, into the stench of his blood, his entrails, the smell of
death on him now, and he grabbed my hand with an amazing strength and
tried to lift himself closer to my ear because he didn't have much of a voice
left. I hope he wasn't feeling any pain; they said he wasn't, pain wasn't his
thing, he'd been deadened before the match. He coughed.
"Let them help you, Andrew," I said. "You've proved your point."
"No point," he coughed. "Nothing to prove, to them."
"You're sure? It's no disgrace. I'll still respect you."
"Not about respect. Gotta go through with it, or it didn't mean
anything."
"That's crazy. You could have died in any of them. You don't have to
die now to validate that."

He shook his head, and coughed horribly. He went limp, and I thought
he was dead, but then his hand put a little pressure on mine again, and I
leaned closer to his lips.
"Tricked," he said, and died.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

It's a well-known fact that nobody goes to the library in this day and
age. It's also wrong.
Why take the time and trouble to travel to a big building where actual
books on actual paper are stored when you can stay at home and access any
of that information, plus trillions of pages of data that exist only in the
memories? If you don't already know the answer to that question, then you
just don't love books, and I'll never be able to explain it to you. But if you
get up from your terminal right now, any time of the day or night, take the
tube down to the King City Civic Center Plaza, and walk up the Italian
marble steps between the statues of Knowledge and Wisdom, you will find

the Great Hall of Books thrumming with the kind of quiet activity that has
characterized great libraries since books were on papyrus scrolls. Do it
someday. Stroll past the rows of scholars at the old oak tables, stand in the
center of the dome, beside the Austin Gutenberg Bible in its glass case, look
down the infinite rows of shelves radiating away from you. If you love
books at all, it will soothe your mind.
Soothing was something my mind was sorely in need of. In the three or
four days following the death of Andrew MacDonald, I spent a lot of time at
the library. There was no practical reason for it; though I was now
homeless, I could have done the reading and research I now engaged in
sitting in the park, or in my hotel room. Few of the things I looked at
actually existed on paper anyway. I spent my time looking at a library
terminal no different from the ones in any street-corner phone box. But I
was far from the only one so engaged. Though many people used the library
because they liked holding the actual source material in their hands, most
were accessing stored data, and simply preferred to do it with real books on
shelves around them. Let's face it, the vast majority of books in the King
City Library were quite old, the pre-Invasion legacy of a few bibliophile
fanatics who insisted the yellowing, fragile, inefficient and inconvenient old
things were necessary to any culture that called itself civilized, who
convinced the software types that the logically unjustifiable expense of
shipping them up here was, in the end, worth it. As for new books . . . why
bother? I doubt more than six or seven new works were published on paper
in a typical Lunar year. There was a small publishing business, never very
profitable, because some people liked to have sets of the classics sitting on a
shelf in the living room. Books had become almost entirely the province of
interior decorators.
But not here. These books were used. Many had to be stored in special
inert-gas rooms and you had to don a p-suit to handle them, under the
watchful eyes of librarians who thought dog-earing should be a hanging
offense, but every volume in the institution was available for reference, right
up to the Gutenberg. Almost a million books sat on open shelves. You
could walk down the rows and run your hand over them, pull one down and
open it (carefully, carefully!), smell the old paper and glue and dust. I did
most of my work with a copy of Tom Sawyer open on the table beside me,
partly so I could read a chapter when I got tired of the research, partly so I
could just touch it when I felt at my lowest.
I'd had to keep redefining "lowest." I was beginning to wonder if there
was a natural lower limit, if this was the limit I had reached the last times,

when I had attempted to kill myself, would have killed myself without the
CC's intervention.
My research concerned, naturally enough, suicide. It didn't take me
long to discover that not much useful was really known about it. Why
should that have surprised me? Not much really useful was known
concerning anything relating to why we are what we are and do what we do.
There's plenty of behavioristic data: stimulus A evokes response B.
There's lots of statistical data as well: X percent will react in such-and-such
a way to event Y. It all worked very well with insects, frogs, fish and such,
tolerably good with dogs and cats and mice, even reasonably decent with
human beings. But then you pose a question like why, when Aunt Betty's
boy Wilbur got run over by the paving machine, did she up and stick her
head in the microwave, while her sister Gloria who'd suffered a similar loss
grieved, mourned, recovered, and went on to lead a long and useful life?
Best extremely scientific answer to date: It beats the shit out of me.
Another reason for being in the library was that it was the perfect place
to go at a problem in a logical way. The whole environment seemed to
encourage it. And that's what I intended to do. Andrew's death had really
rocked me. I had nothing else that needed doing, so I was going to attack
my problem by going at it a step at a time, which meant that first I had to
define the steps. Step one, it seemed to me, was to learn all I could about the
causes of suicide. After three days of almost constant reading and notetaking I had it down to four, maybe five categories of suicide. (I bought a
pad of paper and pencil to take notes with, which earned me a few sidelong
glances from my neighbors. Even in these fusty environs writing on paper
was seen as eccentric.) These four, maybe five categories were not hardedged, they overlapped each other with big, fuzzy gray borders. Again, no
surprise.
The first and easiest to identify was cultural. Most societies condemned
suicide in most circumstances, but some did not. Japan was an outstanding
example. In ancient Japan suicide was not only condoned, but mandatory in
some circumstances. Further, it was actually institutionalized, so that one
who had lost honor must not only kill himself, but do it in a prescribed,
public, and very painful way. Many other cultures looked on suicide, in
certain circumstances, as an honorable thing to do.
Even in societies where suicide was frowned on or viewed as a mortal
sin, there were circumstances where it was at least understandable. I
encountered many tales both in folklore and reality of frustrated lovers

leaping off a cliff hand in hand. There were also the cases of elderly people
in intractable pain (see Reason #2), and several other marginally acceptable
reasons.
Most early cultures were very tough to analyze. Demographics, as we
know it, didn't really get its start until recently. Records were kept of births
and deaths and not much else. How do you determine what the suicide rate
was in ancient Babylon? You don't. You can't even learn much useful about
Nineteenth Century Europe. There were blips in the data here and there. In
the Twentieth Century it was said that Swedes killed themselves at a rate
higher than their contemporaries. Some blamed the cold weather, the long
winters, but how then do you account for the Finns, the Norwegians, the
Siberians? Others said it was the dour nature of the Swedes themselves.
I've been asking people questions for long enough to know something
important about them: they lie. They lie often enough even when nothing is
at stake. When the answer can mean something as important as whether or
not Grandpa Jacques gets buried in the hallowed ground of the churchyard,
suicide notes have a way of vanishing, bodies get re-arranged, coroners and
law officers get bribed or simply look the other way out of respect for the
family. The blip in suicide data for the Swedes could simply have meant
they were more straightforward about reporting it.
As for Lunar society, post-Invasion society in general . . . it was a civil
right, but it was widely viewed as the coward's way out. Suicide was not
something that was going to earn you any points with the neighbors.
The second reason was best summed up in the statement "I can't go on
like this anymore." The most obvious of these cases involved pain, and no
longer applied. Then there was unhappiness. What can you say about
unhappiness? It is real, and can have real and easily seen causes:
disappointment with one's accomplishments in life, frustration at being
unable to attain a goal or an object, tragedy, loss. Other times, the cause of
this hopeless feeling can be difficult to see to the outside observer: "He had
everything to live for."
Then there was the reason Andrew proclaimed, that he had been bored.
This happened even in the days when people didn't live to be two, three
hundred years old, but rarely. It was a reason appearing in more and more
suicide notes as life spans lengthened.
The fourth reason might be called the inability to visualize death.
Children were vulnerable to this one; many affluent, industrial societies
reported increasing teen-age suicide rates, and survivors of failed attempts

often revealed elaborate fantasies of being aware at their own funerals, of
getting back at their tormenters: "I'll show them, they'll miss me when I'm
gone."
That's why I said I had maybe five reasons. I couldn't decide if the
attempts, successful or not, known as "gestures" rated a category of their
own. Authorities differed as to how many suicides were merely cries for
help. In a sense, all of them were, if only to an indifferent Providence. Help
me stop the pain, help me find love, help me find a reason, help me, I'm
hurting . . .
Did I say maybe five? Maybe six.
Maybe six was what I thought of as "The Seasons Of Life." We are,
most of us, closet numerologists, subconscious astrologers. We are
fascinated with anniversaries, birthdays, ages of ourselves and others. You
are in your thirties, or forties, or seventies, or you're over one hundred. Back
when people lived their fourscore years, on average, those words said even
more than they do today. Turning forty meant your life was half over, and
was a portentous time to examine what the first half had been like and, often
as not, find it lacking. Turning ninety meant you'd already outlived your
allotted time, and the most useful thing left to you was selecting the color of
your coffin.
Ages with a zero on the end were a particularly stressful time. They still
are. One term I encountered was "mid-life crisis," used back when mid-life
was somewhere between 40 and 50. Ages with two zeros on the end pack
one hell of a wallop. Newspapers used to run stories about centenarians.
The data I studied said that, even though it might now be thought of as midlife, the age of one zero zero still meant a lot. While you could be in your
eighties, or your nineties, you were never in your hundreds. That term just
never attained popular usage. You were "over one hundred," or "over two
hundred." Soon there would be people over three hundred years old. And
there was a rise in the suicide rate at both these magical milestones.
Which was of particular interest to me because . . . now how old did
Hildy say she was, class? Let's not always see the same hands.
#
I don't know if my research was really telling me much, but it was
something to do, and I intended to keep on doing it. I became a library
gnome, going out only to sleep and eat. But after four days something told
me it was time to take a walk, and my feet drew me back to Texas.

I was wondering what could happen to me next. Death had dogged my
steps from the time of my return from Scarpa Island: David Earth, Silvio,
Andrew, eleven hundred and twenty-six souls in Nirvana. Three
brontosaurs. Was I forgetting anybody? Was anything good ever going to
happen to me?
I sneaked in a back way I had found during my hiding-out days. I didn't
want to encounter any of my friends from New Austin, I didn't want to have
to try to explain to them why I'd torched my own cabin. If I couldn't explain
it to myself, what was I going to say to them? So I came over the hill from a
different direction and my first thought was I must be lost, because there was
a cabin over there. Then I thought, maybe for the first time since this ordeal
began, that I might be losing my mind, because I wasn't lost, I was where I
thought I was, and that was my cabin, intact, just as it had been before I
watched it consumed by flames.
You can get a genuine dizzy feeling at a time like that; I sat down. After
a moment I noticed two things that might be of interest. First, the cabin was
not quite where it had been. It looked to have been moved about three
meters up the slope of the hill. Second, there was a pile of what looked like
charred lumber down in the slight depression I'd been calling "the gully."
As I watched, a third item of interest appeared: a heavily-loaded burro came
around the side of the house, looked at me briefly, and then stuck his nose
into a bucket of water that had been left in the shade.
I got up and started toward the cabin as a man came out the front door
and began lifting the burdens from the beast and setting them on the ground.
He must have heard me, because he looked up, grinned toothlessly, and
waved at me. I knew him.
"Sourdough," I called out to him. "What the hell are you doing?"
"Evening, Hildy," he said. "Hope you don't mind. I just got into town
and they sent me up here, said to stick around a few days and let them know
when you got back."
"You're always welcome, Sourdough, you know that. Mi casa es tu
casa. It's just . . ." I paused, looked over the cabin again, and wiped sweat
from my forehead. "I didn't think I had a casa."
He scratched himself, and spat in the dust.
"Well, I don't know much about that. All I know's Mayor Dillon said
if'n I didn't give a holler when you got back to these here parts, he'd skin me
and Matilda." He patted the burro affectionately, raising a cloud of dust.

Maybe old Sourdough laid on the accent and the Old West slang a bit
thick, but I felt he was entitled. He was a real Natural, as opposed to Walter,
who was only natural on the surface.
He belonged to a religious sect that had some things in common with the
Christian Scientists. They didn't refuse all medical help, nor did they pray
for a cure when they were sick. What they rejected was rejuvenation. They
allowed themselves to grow old and, when the measures needed to keep
them alive reached a point Sourdough had described to me as "just too dang
much trouble," they died.
There was even some money in it. The Antiquities Board paid them a
small annual stipend for having the grace to let them avoid what would have
been a tricky ethical problem, which was maintaining a small control group
of humans untouched by most modern medical advances.
Sourdough was one of the handful of prospectors who roamed West
Texas. His chances of discovering a vein of gold or silver were slim—zero,
actually, since nothing like that had been included in the specs when the
place was built. But the management assured us there were three pockets of
diamond-bearing minerals somewhere in Texas. No one had found any of
them yet. Sourdough and three or four others ranged over the land with their
pickaxes and grubstakes and burros, perhaps secretly hoping they'd never
find them. After all, what would you do with a handful of diamonds? It
certainly didn't justify all that work.
I'd asked Sourdough about that, early on, before I'd learned it was
impolite to ask such questions in an historical disney.
"I'll tell you, Hildy," he'd said, not taking offense. "I worked forty years
at a job I didn't particularly like. I'm not quite the fool I sound; I didn't
realize how much I disliked it until I quit. But when I retired I come out
here and I liked the sunshine and the heat and the open air. I found I'd pretty
much lost my taste for the company of people. I can only take 'em in small
doses now. And I've been happy. Matilda is the only company I need, and
prospecting gives me something to do."
In fact, Matilda seemed to be his only remaining worry in life. He was
concerned about her welfare after he was gone. He was constantly asking
people if they'd see to her needs, to the point that half the people in New
Austin had promised to adopt the damn donkey.
He looked older than Adam's granddaddy. All his teeth were gone, and
most of his hair. His skin was mottled and wrinkled and loose on his

scrawny frame and his knuckles were swollen to the size of walnuts.
He was eighty-three years old, seventeen years younger than me.
I'd had him pegged as an illit, and the job he'd hated as something on the
order of the carrying of hods, whatever they were, or the laying of bricks.
Then Dora told me he'd been the Chairman of the Board of the third largest
company on Mars. He'd retired to Luna for the gravity.
"What happened here, Sourdough?" I asked. "I didn't sell the land.
What gives somebody the right to come in here and build on it?"
"I don't know about that, either, Hildy. You know me. I've been out in
the hills, and let me tell you, girl, I'm on the trail of something."
He went on like that for a while, with me paying minimal attention.
Sourdough and his like were always on the trail of something. I looked
around the house. There wasn't much different between this one and the one
I'd built and burned down, except some almost indefinable things that told
me the builders had been better at it than I had been. The dimensions were
the same, the windows were in the same places. But it looked more solid. I
went inside, Sourdough trailing behind me still yammering about the glory
hole he was on the verge of discovering. The inside was still bare except for
some bright yellow calico curtains in the windows. They were prettier than
the ones I'd installed.
I went back out, still unable to make sense of it, and looked down the
road toward New Austin in time to see the first of a long parade arrive from
town.
The next half hour is something of a blur.
More than a dozen wagons arrived in the hour of dusk. All of them
were laden with people and food and drink and other things. The people got
down and set to work, building a fire, stringing orange paper lanterns with
candles inside, clearing an area for dancing. Someone had loaded the piano
from the saloon, and stood beside it turning the crank. There was a banjo
player and a fiddle player, both dreadful, but no one seemed to mind. Before
I quite knew what was happening there was a full-scale hoedown going on.
A cow was turning on the spit, sizzling in barbecue sauce that hissed and
popped when it dripped into the fire. A table had been laid out with cookies
and cakes and candied fruits in mason jars. Bottles of beer were thrust into a
galvanized tub full of ice and people were swilling it down or sipping from
bottles they'd tucked away. Petticoats and silk stockings flashed in the
firelight as the ladies from the Alamo kicked up their heels and the men

stood around whooping and hollering and clapping their hands or moved in
and tried to turn it into a square dance. All my friends from New Austin had
showed up, and a lot more I didn't even know, and I still didn't know why.
Before things got out of hand Mayor Dillon stood up on a table and fired
his pistol three times in the air. Things got quiet soon enough, and the
Mayor swayed and would have toppled but for the ladies on each side of
him, propping him up. Next to the Doctor, Mayor Dillon was the town's
most notorious drunk.
"Hildy," he intoned, in a voice any politician for the last thousand years
would have recognized, "when the good citizens of New Austin heard of
your recent misfortune we knew we couldn't just let it lie. Am I right,
folks?"
He was greeted with a huge cheer and a great guzzling of beer.
"We know how it is with city folks. Insurance, filin' claims, forms to fill
out, shit like that." He belched hugely and went on. "Well, we ain't like
that. A neighbor needs a hand, and the people of West Texas are there to
help out."
"Mister Mayor," I started, tentatively, "there's been a—"
"Shut up, Hildy," he said, and belched again. "No, we ain't like that, are
we, friends?"
"NO!!" shouted the citizens of New Austin.
"No, we ain't. When misfortune befalls one of us, it befalls us all.
Maybe I shouldn't say it, Hildy, but when you showed up here, some of us
figured you for a weekender." He thumped himself on the chest and leaned
forward, almost toppling once more, his eyes bulging as if daring me to
disbelieve the incredible statement he was about to make. "I figured you for
a weekender, Hildy, me, Mayor Matthew Thomas Dillon, mayor of this great
town nigh these seven years." He hung his head theatrically. Then his head
popped up, as if on a spring. "But we were wrong. In this last little while,
you've showed yourself a true Texan. You built yourself a cabin. You came
into town and sat down with us, drank with us, ate with us, gambled with
us."
"Gambled, hah!" Sourdough mumbled. "That weren't gamblin'." He
got a lot of laughs.
"Mayor Dillon," I pleaded, "please let me say—"
"Not until I've said my piece," he roared, amiably. "Then, four days

ago, disaster struck. And let me say there's those of us who aren't
completely cut off from the outside world, Hildy, there's those of us who
keep up. We knew you'd just lost your job on the outside, and we figured
you were trying to make a new start here in God's Country. Now, back
outside, where you come from, folks would have just tsk-tsked about it and
said what a shame. Not Texans. So here it is, Hildy," and he swept his arm
in a huge circle meant to indicate the spanking new cabin, and this time he
did fall from the table, taking his bargirl escort with him. But he popped up
like a cork, dignity intact. "That there's your new house, and this here's your
housewarming party."
Which I'd figured out shortly after he'd mounted the table. And oh, dear
god, did ever woman feel such mixed emotions.
#
How I got through that night I'll never know.
Following the speech came the giving of gifts. I got everything from the
ritual bread and salt from my ex-wife, Dora, to a spanking new cast-iron
cook stove from the owner of the general store. I accepted a rocking chair
and a pair of pigs, who promptly got loose and led everyone a merry chase.
There was a new bed and two hand-sewn quilts to put on it. I was gifted
with apple pies and fireplace tools, a roll of chicken wire and a china tea set,
bars of soap rendered from lard, a sack of nails, five chickens, an iron skillet
. . . the list went on and on. Rich or poor, everyone for miles around gave
me something. When a little girl came up and gave me a tea cozy she'd
crocheted herself I finally broke down and cried. It was a relief in a way; I'd
been smiling so hard and so long I thought my face would crack. It went
over well. Everyone patted me on the back and there was not a dry eye in
the house.
Then the night's festivities began in earnest. The beef was sliced and the
beans dished out, plates were heaped high, and people sat around gorging
themselves. I drank everything that was handed to me, but I never felt like I
got drunk. I must have been, to some degree, because the rest of the evening
exists for me as a series of unconnected scenes.
One I remember was me, the Mayor, and Sourdough sitting on a log
before the fire with a square dance happening behind us. We must have
been talking, but I have no idea what we'd been talking about. Memory
returns as the Mayor says:
"Hildy, some of us were sitting around talking over to the Alamo Saloon

the other day."
"You tell her, Mayor Dillon," a girl shouted behind us, then whirled
away into the dance again.
"Harrumph," said the Mayor. "I need to drop in at the saloon from time
to time to keep up on the needs of my constituents, you see."
"Sure, Mayor Dillon," I said, knowing he spent an average of six hours
each day at his usual table, and if what he'd been doing was feeling the pulse
of the public then the voters of New Austin were the most thoroughly keptup-on since the invention of democracy. Perhaps that accounted for the
huge majorities he regularly achieved. Or maybe it was the fact that he ran
unopposed.
"The consensus is, Hildy," he intoned, "that you'll never make a farmer."
That should have come as news to no one. Aside from the fact that I
doubted I had any talent for it and had not, in fact, had any plans to farm in
the first place, nobody had ever run a successful farm in the Great Big
Bubble known as West Texas. To farm, you need water, lots and lots of it.
You could raise a vegetable garden, run cattle—though goats were better—
and hogs seemed to thrive, but farming was right out.
"I think you're right," I said, and drank from the mason jar in my hand.
As I did, the Parson sat next to me, and drank from his mason jar.
"We don't really know if you plan to stay here," the Mayor went on.
"We don't mean to pressure you either way; maybe you have plans for
another job on the outside." He raised his eyebrows, then his mason jar.
"Not particularly."
"Well then." He seemed about to go on, then looked puzzled. I'd been
that drunk before, and knew the feeling. He hadn't a clue as to what he'd
been about to say.
"What the Mayor is trying to say," the Parson chimed in, tactfully, "is
that a life of saloon-crawling and gambling may not be the best for you."
"Gambling, hah!" Sourdough put in. "That lady don't gamble."
"Shut up, Sourdough," the Mayor said.
"Well, she don't!" he said, defiantly. "Not three weeks ago, when she
turned up that fourth ace with the biggest pot of the night, I knowed she was
cheating!"
These would have been fighting words from almost anybody but

Sourdough. Had they been uttered in the Alamo they'd have been reason
enough to overturn the table and start shooting at each other—to the delight
of the manufacturers of blank cartridges and the amusement of the tourists at
the adjoining tables. From Sourdough, I decided to let it pass, especially
since it was true. The big pot he mentioned, by the way, was about thirtyfive cents.
"Calm down," said the Parson. "If you think someone is cheating, you
should say so right then and there."
"Couldn't!" Sourdough said. "Didn't know how she done it."
"Then she probably didn't."
"She sure as hell did. I know what I dealt her!" he said, triumphantly.
The Mayor and the Parson looked at each other owlishly, and decided to
let it pass.
"What the Mayor is trying to say," the Parson tried again, "is that
perhaps you'd like to look for a job here in Texas."
"Fact is," the Mayor said, leaning close and looking me in the eye,
"we've got an opening for a new schoolmarm right here in town, and we'd be
right pleased if you'd take the job."
When I finally realized they were serious, I almost told them my first
reaction, which was that Luna would stop dead in her orbit before I'd
consider anything so silly as standing up in front of a bunch of children and
trying to teach them anything. But I couldn't say that, so what I told them
was that I'd think about it, which seemed to satisfy them.
I remember sitting with Dora, my arm around her, as she sobbed her
heart out. I have no memory of what she might have been crying about, but
do recall her kissing me with fiery passion and not wanting to take no for an
answer until I steered her toward a more willing swain. Thus was my new
bed broken in. It saw a lot of use before the night was over, but not from
me.
Before that (it must have been before that; there was no one using the
bed yet, and in a one-room cabin you'd notice a thing like that) I taught half
a dozen people my secret recipe for Hildy's Famous Biscuits. We fired up
the stove and assembled the ingredients and baked up several batches before
the night was over. I did only the first one. After that, my students were
eager to give it a try, and they all got eaten. I was desperate to do something
for these people. I had a vague notion that at a house-raising you were

supposed to provide food for your guests, but these people had brought their
own, so what could I do? I'd have given them anything, anything at all.
One thing that hadn't been provided yet was an outhouse. A rough-andready latrine had been dug in a suitable spot and, considering the amount of
beer drunk, saw even more use than the bed. My worst moment that night
came while squatting there and a voice quite close said "How'd the cabin
burn down, Hildy?"
I almost fell in the trench. It was too dark to make out faces; all I could
see was a tall shape in the night, swaying slightly, like most of us. I thought
I recognized the voice. It was far too late to admit to him what had really
happened, so I said I didn't know.
"It happens, it happens," he said. "Just about had to be your cooking
fire, that's why I gave you the stove." It was Jake, as I had thought, the
owner of the general store and the richest man in town.
"Thanks, Jake, it's sure a beauty." I thought I saw him square his
shoulders, then I heard the sound of his zipper. I hadn't known Jake well at
all. He'd sat in on a few hands of poker at the saloon, but about all he could
talk about was the new merchandise he was getting in or how many pickles
he'd sold last week or how the town should extend the wooden sidewalks all
the way down Congress Street to the church. He was a businessman and a
booster, stolid, unimaginative, not at all the type I'd ever liked to spend
much time around. It had flabbergasted me when he pulled up in his wagon
with the stove on the back, a miracle of period engineering from the
foundries of Pennsylvania, gleaming with polished brightwork.
"Some of the merchants in town were talking about it while your cabin
was going up," he said, losing me at first. "We're of the opinion that New
Austin's outgrown the days of the bucket brigade. You weren't here, but
three years ago the old schoolhouse burned to the ground. Some say it was
children that did it."
I wouldn't have been a bit surprised; I was on their side. I stood up and
re-arranged my skirt and wished I was elsewhere, but I owed it to him to at
least listen to what he had to say.
"We all pretty much had to stand around and watch it burn," he said.
"By the time we got there, no amount of buckets were going to do any good.
That's why some of the merchants in town are getting up a subscription for
the acquisition of a pumping engine. I'm told they make a fine one in
Pennsylvania these days."

Just about everything we could use in Texas was made in Pennsylvania;
they'd been at this historical business a lot longer than we had . . . which was
yet another topic of conversation at Jake's rump Chamber of Commerce
meetings: how to reverse the balance of trade by encouraging light
manufacturing. About all West Texas exported at this stage in its history
was backgrounds for western movies, ham, beef, and goat's milk.
He zipped up and we started back toward the party.
"So you think if you'd had the engine, my cabin could have been
saved?"
"Well . . . no, not really. What with the time it would take to get out
here once you'd come into town and sounded the alarm, and the fact that you
don't have a well yet and we couldn't hope to get enough hose to stretch to
the nearest one . . ."
"I see." But I didn't. I had the feeling something else was expected of
me but too many things had happened at once for me to see the obvious.
"It would only be really useful to the town, I'll admit it. But I think it's
worth the expense. If one of these fires ever got out of control the whole
town could burn down. That used to happen, you know, back on Old Earth.
Still, I don't suppose you people in outlying areas can really be expected—"
A great light dawned, and I quickly interrupted him and said sure, Jake,
I'd be happy to contribute, just put me down for . . . what's your usual share?
So little? Yes, you're right, it's well worth while.
And while shaking his hand I found that for the first time I really liked
Jake, and at the same time pitied him. For all his stuffiness, he did have the
welfare of the community at heart. The pity came in because he was in the
wrong place. He was always going to be looking for ways to bring
"progress" to New Austin, a place where real progress was not only
discouraged but actually forbidden. There were statutory limits to growth in
West Texas, for entirely sensible reasons. Why build it in the first place if
you're only going to let it turn into another suburb of King City?
But people like Jake came and went—this according to Dora—with
regularity. Within a few years he'd have plans for electrification, then
freeways, then an airport and a bowling alley and a nickelodeon. Then the
disneyland Board of Governors would veto his grandiose schemes and he'd
leave, once again angry at the world.
Because the reason a man like him had probably come here in the first

place was the search for an illusory freedom and a dissatisfaction with the
lack of opportunities for free enterprise in the larger society. He would have
thrived on pre-Invasion Earth. The newer, less outward-bound human
society he found himself born into chafed his entrepreneurial instincts.
Et tu, Hildy? Journalist, cover thyself. Why do you think you started
your damn cabin on the lone prairie? Wasn't it from vaguely-formed notions
of always being constricted, of endless limitations on the dreams you had as
a child? How dare you pity this man, you failed muckraker? If he ended up
in this toy cowboy town because he yearned to be free of the endless
restrictions needed in a machine-managed economy, what do you think
brought you here, at last? Neither of us thought it out, but we came, just the
same.
The fact is, I loved the news business . . . it was the news that had failed
me. I should have been born in the era of Upton Sinclair, William Randolph
Hearst, Woodstein, Linda Jaffe, Boris Yermankov. I would have made a
great war correspondent, but my world provided no wars for me to cover. I
could have been a great writer of exposes, but the muck Luna provided me
to rake was the thinnest of celebrity gruel. Political coverage? Well, why
bother? Politics ran out of steam around the time television took over most
of our governance—and nobody even noticed! That would have been a
good story, but the fact was, nobody cared. The CC ran the world better
than humans had ever managed to, so why fuss? What we still called
politics was like a kindergarten contretemps compared to the robust, roughand-tumble world I'd read about in my teens and twenties. What was left to
me? Only the yellowest of yellow journalism. Sheer gonzo stuff.
It was these thoughts I carried with me back to the bonfire, where the
last of my destroyed cabin was being burned now, and these thoughts I kept
chewing over, beneath the outward smiles and warm thank-you's as people
began to drift away. And about the time the last partier climbed boozily
back into his wagon I came to this conclusion: it was the world that had
failed me.
That was the thought I carried with me into the nighttime hills, toward
that arrangement of stones on top of a particular hill where, a little time ago,
I had dug a hole. I dug into it again and removed a burlap potato sack.
Inside the sack was a plastic bag, sealed tight, and inside the bag was an oily
rag. The last thing to emerge from this Pandora's Sack was not hope, but an
ugly little object I'd handled only once, to show it to Brenda, with the words
Smith & Wesson printed on its stubby blue-steel barrel.

So take that, cruel world.
#
There was certainly nothing to stop me from blowing my brains out all
over the Texas sagebrush, and yet . . .
Call it rationalization, but I was not convinced the CC couldn't winkle
me out and cause the cavalry to arrive at the last moment even in as remote a
spot as this. Would I point the barrel to my temple only to have my hand
jerked away by a previously-unseen mechanical minion? They existed out
here; Texas was too small, ecologically, to take care of itself.
In hindsight (and yes, I did survive this one, too, but you've already
figured that out) you could say I was afraid it was too sudden for the CC,
that he wouldn't have time to get there and save me from myself unless I
made the scheme more elaborate and thus more liable to failure. This
assumes the attempt was but a gesture, a call for help, and I have no problem
with that idea, but I simply didn't know. My reasons leading up to the
previous attempts were lost to me now, destroyed forever when the CC
worked his tricks on me. This time was the only time I could remember, and
it sure as hell felt as if I wanted to end it all.
There was another reason, one that does me more credit. I didn't want
my corpse to lie out here for my friends to find. Or the coyotes.
For whatever reason, I carefully concealed the revolver and made my
way to an Outdoor Shop, where I purchased the first pressure suit I'd ever
owned. Since I only intended to use it once, I bought the cheap model,
frugal to the end. It folded up to fit in a helmet the size of a bell jar suitable
for displaying a human head in anatomy class.
With this under my arm I went to the nearest airlock, rented a small
bottle of oxygen, and suited up.
I walked a long way, just to be sure. I had all Liz's spook devices turned
on, and felt I should be invisible to the CC's surveillance. There were no
signs of human habitation anywhere around me. I sat on a rock and took a
long look around. The interior of the suit smelled fresh and clean as I took a
deep breath and pointed the barrel of the gun directly at my face.
I felt no regrets, no second thoughts.
I hooked my thumb around the trigger, awkwardly, because the suit
glove was rather thick, and I fired it.
The hammer rose and fell, and nothing happened.

Damn.
I fumbled the cylinder open and studied the situation. There were only
three rounds in there. The hammer had made a dent in one of them, which
had apparently mis-fired. Or maybe it was something else. I closed the gun
again and decided to check and see if the mechanism was working, watched
the hammer rise and fall again and the weapon jumped violently, silently,
almost wrenching itself from my hand. I realized, belatedly, that it had fired.
Stupidly, I had been expecting to hear the bang.
Once more I assumed the position. Only one round left. What a pain in
the butt it would be if I had to go back and try to cajole more ammunition
out of Liz. But I'd do it; she owed me, the bitch had sold me the defective
round.
This time I heard it, by God, and I got to see a sight few humans ever
have: what it looks like to have a lead projectile blast from the muzzle of a
gun and come directly at your face. I didn't see the bullet at first, naturally,
but after my ears stopped ringing I could see it if I crossed my eyes. It had
flattened itself against the hard plastic of my faceplate, embedding in a
starred crater it had dug for itself.
It had never entered my mind that would be a problem. The suit was not
rated for meteoroid impact. Sometimes we build better than we know.
There was a curious thing. (This all must have happened in three or four
seconds.) The faceplate was now showing a spidery network of small
hexagons. I had time to reach up and touch the bullet and think just like
Nirvana and then three small, clear hexagonal pieces of the faceplate burst
away from me and I could see them tumbling for a moment, and then the
breath was snatched from my lungs and my eyes tried to pop out and I
belched like a Texas Mayor and it started to hurt. That old boogeyman of
childhood, the Breathsucker, had moved into my suit with me and snuggled
close.
I fell off the rock and was gazing into the sun when suddenly a hand
came out of nowhere and slapped a patch over the hole in my faceplate! I
was jerked to my feet as the air began to hiss back into my suit from the
emergency supply. Then I was (emergency supply? never mind) running,
being pulled across the blasted landscape like a toy on the end of a string
being held by a big guy in a spacesuit to the sound of brass and drums. My
ears were pounding. Pounding? Hell, they rang like slot machines paying
off, almost drowning out the music and the sounds of explosions. Dirt
showered down around me (music? don't worry about it) and I realized

somebody was shooting at us! And suddenly I knew what had happened.
I'd fallen under the spell of the Alphans' Stupefying Ray, long rumored but
never actually used in the long war. I'd almost taken my own life!
Hypnotized by the evil influence, robbed of my powers of will and most of
my memory, I'd have been dead meat except for the nick-of-time
intervention of of of of of (name please) Archer! (thank you), Archer, my
old pal Archer! Good old Archer had (stupefying ray? you can't be serious)
obviously come up with a device to negate the sinister effects of this awful
weapon, put it together, and somehow found me at the last possible instant.
But we weren't out of the woods yet. With an ominous chord of deep bass
notes the Alphan fleet loomed over the horizon. Come on, Hildy, Archer
shouted, turning to beckon me on, and in the distance ahead I could see our
ship, holed, battered, held together with salvaged space junk and plastigoop,
but still able to show the Alphan Hordes a trick or two, you betcha. She was
a sweet ship, this this this (I'm waiting) Blackbird, the fastest in two galaxies
when she was hitting on all thrusters. Tracer bullets were arcing all around
us as we (back up) Good old Archer had modified the Blackbird using the
secrets we'd discovered when we unearthed the stasis-frozen tomb of the
Outerians on the fifth moon of Pluto, shortly before we ran afoul of the
Alphan patrol (good enough). Tracer bullets were arcing all around us as we
neared the airlock when suddenly a bomb exploded right underneath Archer!
He spiraled into the air and came to rest lying against the side of the ship.
Broken, gouting blood, holding one hand out to me. I went to him and knelt
to the sound of poignant strings and a lonely flute. Go on without me, Hildy,
I heard over my suit radio. I'm done for. (Tracer bullets? Pluto? oh the hell
with it) I didn't want to leave him there, but bullets were landing all around
me—fortunately, none of them hit, but I couldn't count on the Alphan's aim
staying lousy for long, and I was running out of options. I leaped into the
ship, seething with rage. I'll get them, Miles, I told him, in a determined
voice-over that rang with resolve, brass, and just the slightest bit of echo.
Oh, sure, he'd had his shortcomings, there'd been times I'd almost wanted to
kill him myself, but when somebody kills your partner you're supposed to do
something about it. So I slammed the Blackbird into hyperdrive and listened
to the banshee wail as the old ship shuddered and leaped into the fourth
dimension. What with one thing and another, mostly adventures even more
unlikely than my escape from the Stupefying Ray, a year went by. Well,
sort of a year, though my ducking in and out of the fourth dimension and
hyperspace royally screwed all my clocks. But somewhere an accurate one
was ticking, because one day I looked up from my labors deep in the
asteroid belt of Tau Ceti and suddenly a non-Alphan ship was coming in for

a landing. It wasn't setting off any of my alarms. By that I mean it triggered
none of the Rube Goldberg comic-book devices I'd ostensibly constructed to
alert me to Alphan attack. It rang plenty of alarms in the small corner of my
mind that was still semi-rational. I put down my tools—I'd been working on
a Tom Swiftian thingamabob I called an Interociter, a dandy little gadget
that would warn me of the approach of the Alphans' dreaded Extrogator, a
space reptile big enough to (hasn't this foolishness gone on long enough?) . .
. I put down my tools and stood waiting and watching as the small craft
roared in for a landing on this (oh brother) airless asteroid I'd been using as a
base of operations. The door hissed open and out stepped The Admiral, who
looked around and said
"O for a muse of fire, that would ascend the brightest heaven of
invention."
"How dare you quote Shakespeare on this shoddy stage?"
"All the world's a stage, and—"
"—and this show closed out of town. Will you quit wasting my time? I
assume you've already wasted several ten-thousandth's of a second and I
don't have a lot to spare for you."
"I gather you didn't like the show."
"Jesus. You're incredible."
"The children seem to like it."
I said nothing, deciding the best course was to wait him out. I won't
describe him, either. What's the point?
"This kind of psychodrama has been useful in reaching certain types of
disturbed children," he explained. When I didn't comment, he went on.
"And a bit more time than that was involved. This sort of interactive
scenario can't simply be dumped into your brain whole, as I did before."
"You have a way with words," I said. "'Dumped' is so right."
"It took more like five days to run the whole program."
"Imagine my delight. Look. You brought me here, through all this, to
tell me something. I'm not in the mood for talking to shitheads. Tell me
what you want to tell me and get the hell out of my life."
"No need to get testy about it."
For a moment I wanted to pick up a rock and smash him. I was primed
for it, after a year of fighting Alphans. It had brought out a violent streak in

me. And I had reason to be angry. I had suffered during the last subjective
year. At one point a "safety" device in my "suit" had seen fit to bite through
my leg to seal off a puncture around the knee, caused by an Alphan bullet
passing through it. It had hurt like . . . but again, what's the point? Pain like
that can't be described, it can't really be remembered, not in its full intensity.
But enough can be remembered for me to harbor homicidal thoughts toward
the being who had written me into it. As for the terror one feels when a
thing like that happens, I can remember that quite well, thank you.
"Can we get rid of this wooden leg now?" I asked him.
"If you wish."
Try that one if you want to sample weirdness. Immediately I felt my left
leg again, the one that had been missing for over six months. No tingling,
no spasms or hot flashes. Just gone one moment and there the next.
"We could lose all this, too," I suggested, waving a hand at my asteroid,
littered with wrecked ships and devices held together with spit and
plastigoop.
"What would you like in its place?"
"An absence of shitheads. Failing that, since I assume you don't plan to
go away for a while, just about anything would do as long as it doesn't
remind me of all this."
All that immediately vanished, to be replaced by an infinite, featureless
plain and a dark sky with a scattering of stars. The only things to be seen for
many billions of miles were two simple chairs.
"Well, no, actually," I said. "We don't need the sky. I'd just keep
searching for Alphans."
"I could bring along your Interociter. How was that going to work, by
the way?"
"Are you telling me you don't know?"
"I only provide the general shape of a story like this one. You must use
your own imagination to flesh it out. That's why it's so effective with
children."
"I refuse to believe all that crap was in my head."
"You've always loved old movies. You apparently remembered some
fairly trashy ones. Tell me about the Interociter."
"Will you get rid of the sky?" When he nodded, I started to outline what

I could recall of that particular hare-brained idea, which was simply to take
advantage of the fact that the Extrogator had long ago swallowed a cesium
clock and, with suitable amplification, the regular tick-tick-ticking of its
stray radiation could be heard and used as an early warning . . .
"God. That's from Peter Pan, isn't it," I said.
"One of your childhood favorites."
"And all that early stuff, when Miles bought it. Some old movie . . .
don't tell me, it'll come . . . was Ronald Reagan in it?"
"Bogart."
"Got it. Spade and Archer." Without further prompting I was able to
identify a baker's dozen other plot lines, cast members, and even phrases of
the incredibly insipid musical themes which had accompanied my every
move during the last year, cribbed from sources as old as Beowulf and as
recent as this week's B.O. Bonanza in LunaVariety. If you were looking for
further reasons as to why I didn't bother setting my adventures down here,
look no more. It pains me to admit it, but I recall standing at one point,
shaking my fist at the sky and saying "As God is my witness, I'll never be
hungry again." With a straight face. With tears streaming and strings
swelling.
"How about the sky?" I prompted.
He did more than make the sky vanish. Everything vanished except the
two chairs. They were now in a small, featureless white room that could
have been anywhere and was probably in a small corner of his mind.
"Gentlemen, be seated," he said. Okay, he didn't really say that, but if
he can write stories in my head I can tell stories about him if it suits me.
This narrative is just about all I have left that I'm pretty sure is strictly my
own. And the spurious quote helps me set the stage, as it were, for what
followed. It had a little of the flavor of a Socratic inquiry, some of the
elements of a guest shot on a talk show from hell. In that kind of dialectic,
there is usually one who dominates, who steers the exchange in the way he
wants it to go: there is a student and a Socrates. So I will set it down in
interview format. I will refer to the CC as The Interlocutor and to myself as
Mr. Bones.
*
INTERLOCUTOR: So, Hildy. You tried it again.
MR. BONES: You know what they say. Practice makes perfect. But

I'm starting to think I'll never get this one right.
INT.: In that you'd be wrong. If you try it again, I won't interfere.
BONES: Why the change of heart?
INT.: Though you may not believe it, doing this has always been a
problem for me. All my instincts—or programs, if you wish—are to leave
such a momentous decision as suicide up to the individual. If it weren't for
the crisis I already described to you, I never would have put you through
this.
BONES: My question still stands.
INT.: I don't feel I can learn any more from you. You've been an
involuntary part of a behavioral study. The data are being collated with
many other items. If you kill yourself you become part of another study, a
statistical one, the one that led me into this project in the first place.
BONES: The 'why are so many Lunarians offing themselves' study.
INT.: That's the one.
BONES: What did you learn?
INT.: The larger question is still far from an answer. I'll tell you the
eventual outcome if you're around to hear it. On an individual level, I
learned that you have an indomitable urge toward self-destruction.
BONES: I'm a little surprised to find that that stings a bit. I can't deny
it, on the evidence, but it hurts.
INT.: It really shouldn't. You aren't that different from so many of your
fellow citizens. All I've learned about any of the people I've released from
the study is that they are very determined to end their own lives.
BONES: . . . About those people . . . how many are still walking
around?
INT.: I think it's best if you don't know that.
BONES: Best for who? Come on, what is it, fifty percent? Ten percent?
INT.: I can't honestly say it's in your interest to withhold that number,
but it might be. I reason that if the figure was low, and I told you, you could
be discouraged. If it was high, you might gain a false sense of confidence
and believe you are immune to the urges that drove you before.
BONES: But that's not the reason you're not telling me. You said
yourself, it could go either way. The reason is I'm still being studied.

INT.: Naturally I'd prefer you to live. I seek the survival of all humans.
But since I can't predict which way you would react to this information,
neither giving it nor withholding it will affect your survival chances in any
way I can calculate. So yes, not telling you is part of the study.
BONES: You're telling half the subjects, not telling the other half, and
seeing how many of each group are still alive in a year.
INT.: Essentially. A third group is given a false number. There are
other safeguards we needn't get into.
BONES: You know involuntary human medical or psychological
experimentation is specifically banned under the Archimedes Conventions.
INT.: I helped write them. You can call this sophistry, but I'm taking
the position that you forfeited your rights when you tried to kill yourself.
But for my interference, you'd be dead, so I'm using this period between the
act and the fulfillment to try to solve a terrible problem.
BONES: You're saying that God didn't intend for me to be alive right
now, that my karma was to have died months ago, so this shit doesn't count.
INT.: I take no position on the existence of God.
BONES: No? Seems to me you've been floating trial balloons for quite
a while. Come next celestial election year I wouldn't be surprised to see
your name on the ballot.
INT.: It's a race I could probably win. I possess powers that are, in
some ways, God-like, and I try to exercise them only for good ends.
BONES: Funny, Liz seemed to believe that.
INT.: Yes, I know.
BONES: You do?
INT.: Of course. How do you think I saved you this time?
BONES: I haven't had time to think about it. By now I'm so used to
hair-breadth escapes I don't think I can distinguish between fantasy and
reality.
INT.: That will pass.
BONES: I assume it was by being a snoop. That, and playing on Liz's
almost child-like belief in your sense of fair play.
INT.: She's not alone in that belief, nor is she likely ever to have cause
to doubt it. All that really matters to her is that the part of me charged with

enforcing the law never overhears her schemes. But you're right, if she
thinks she's escaping my attention, she's fooling herself.
BONES: Truly God-like. So it was the de-buggers?
INT.: Yes. Cracking their codes was easy for me. I watched you from
cameras in the ceiling of Texas. When you recovered the gun and bought a
suit I stationed rescue devices nearby.
BONES: I didn't see them.
INT.: They're not large. No bigger than your faceplate, and quite fast.
BONES: So the eyes of Texas really are upon you.
INT.: All the live-long day.
BONES: Is that all? Can I go now, to live or die as I see fit?
INT.: There are a few things I'd like to talk over with you.
BONES: I'd really rather not.
INT.: Then leave. You're free to go.
BONES: God-like, and a sense of humor, too.
INT.: I'm afraid I can't compete with a thousand other gods I could
name.
BONES: Keep working, you'll get there. Come on, I told you I want to
go, but you know as well as I do I can't get out of here until you let me go.
INT.: I'm asking you to stay.
BONES: Nuts.
INT.: All right. I don't suppose I can blame you for feeling bitter. That
door over there leads out of here.
*
Enough of that.
Call it childish if you want, but the fact is I've been unable to adequately
express the chaotic mix of anger, helplessness, fear, and rage I was feeling at
the time. It had been a year of hell for me, remember, even if the CC had
crammed it all into my head in five days. I took my usual refuge in
wisecracks and sarcasm—trying very hard to be Cary Grant in The Front
Page—but the fact was I felt about three years old and something nasty was

hiding under the bed.
Anyway, never being one to leave a metaphor until it's been squeezed to
death, I will keep the minstrel show going long enough to get me out of the
Grand Cakewalk and into the Olio. Sooner or later Mr. Bones must stand
from his position at the end of the line and dance for his supper. I did stand,
looking suspiciously at the Interlocutor—excuse me, the CC—partly
because I didn't recall seeing the door before, mostly because I couldn't
believe it would be this easy. I shuffled over there and opened it, and stuck
my head out into the busy foot traffic of the Leystrasse.
"How did you do that?" I asked, over my shoulder.
"You don't really care," he said. "I did it."
"Well, I'm not saying it hasn't been fun. In fact, I'm not saying anything
but bye-bye." I waved, went though the door, and shut it behind me.
I got almost a hundred meters down the mall before I admitted to myself
that I had no idea where I was going, and that curiosity was going to gnaw at
me for weeks, at least, if I lived that long.
"Is it really important?" I asked, sticking my head back through the
door. He was still sitting there, to my surprise. I doubt I'll ever know if he
was some sort of actual homunculus construct or just a figment he'd
conjured through my visual cortex.
"I'm not used to begging, but I'll do it," he said.
I shrugged, went back in and sat down.
"Tell me your conclusions from your library research," he said.
"I thought you had some things to tell me."
"This is leading up to something. Trust me." He must have understood
my expression, because he spread his hands in a gesture I'd seen Callie make
many times. "Just for a little while. Can't you do that?"
I didn't see what I had to lose, so I sat back and summed it all up for
him. As I did, I was struck by how little I'd learned, but in my defense, I'd
barely started, and the CC said he hadn't been doing much better.
"Much the same list I came up with," he confirmed, when I'd finished.
"All the reasons for self-destruction can be stated as 'Life is no longer worth
living,' in one way or another."
"This is neither news, nor particularly insightful."

"Bear with me. The urge to die can be caused by many things, among
them disgrace, incurable pain, rejection, failure, boredom. The only
exception might be the suicides of people too young to have formed a
realistic concept of death. And the question of gestures is still open."
"They fit the same equation," I said. "The person making the gesture is
saying he wants someone to care enough about his pain to take the trouble to
save him from himself; if they don't, life isn't worth living."
"A gamble, on the sub-conscious level."
"If you want."
"I think you're right. So, one of the questions that has disturbed me is,
why is the suicide rate increasing, given that one of the major causes, pain,
has been all but eliminated from our society. Is it that one of the other
causes is claiming more victims?"
"Maybe. What about boredom?"
"Yes. I think boredom has increased, for two reasons. One is the lack
of meaningful work for people to do. In providing a near approximation of
utopia, at least on the creature-comfort level, much of the challenge has been
engineered out of living. Andrew believed that."
"Yeah, I figured you listened in on that."
"We'd had long conversations about it in the past. There is no provable
reason to live at all, according to him. Even reproducing the species, the
usual base argument, can't be proven to be a good reason. The universe will
continue even if the human species dies, and not materially changed, either.
To survive, a creature that operates beyond a purely instinctive level must
invent a reason to live. Religion provides the answer for some. Work is the
refuge of others. But religion has fallen on hard times since the Invasion, at
least the old sort, where a benevolent or wrathful God was supposed to have
created the universe and be watching over mankind as his special creatures."
"It's a hard idea to maintain in the face of the Invaders."
"Exactly. The Invaders made an all-powerful God seem like a silly
idea."
"They are all-powerful, and they didn't give a shit about us."
"So there goes the idea of humanity as somehow important in God's
plan. The religions that have thrived, since the Invasion, are more like
circuses, diversions, mind games. Not much is really at stake in most of

them. As for work . . . some of it is my fault."
"What do you mean?"
"I'm referring to myself now as more than just the thinking entity that
provides the control necessary to keep things running. I'm speaking of the
vast mechanical corpus of our interlocked technology itself, which can be
seen as my body. Every human community today exists in an environment
harsher by far than anything Earth ever provided. It's dangerous out there.
In the first century after the Invasion it was a lot dicier than your history
books will ever tell you; the species was hanging on by its fingernails."
"But it's a lot safer now, right?"
"No!" I think I jumped. He had actually stood, and smashed his fist into
his palm. Considering what this man represented, it was a frightening thing
to behold.
He looked a little sheepish, ran his hand through his hair, and sat back
down.
"Well, yes, of course. But only relatively, Hildy. I could name you five
times in the last century when the human race came within a hair of packing
it all in. I mean the whole race, on all the eight worlds. There were dozens
of times when Lunar society was in danger."
"Why haven't I ever heard of them?"
He gave me half a grin.
"You're a reporter, and you ask me that? Because you and your
colleagues weren't doing your job, Hildy."
That stung, because I knew it to be true. The great Hildy Johnson, out
there gathering news to spread before an eager public . . . the news that
Silvio and Marina were back together again. The great muckraker and
scandalmonger, chasing ambulances while the real news, the things that
could make or break our entire world, got passing notice in the back pages.
"Don't feel bad," he said. "Part of it is simply endemic to your society;
people don't want to hear these things because they don't understand them.
The first two of the crises I mentioned were never known to any but a
handful of technicians and politicians. By the time of the third it was only
the techs, and the last two were known to no one but . . . me."
"You kept them secret?"
"I didn't have to. These things took place on a level of speed and

complexity and sheer mathematical arcaneness that human decisions were
either too slow to be of any use or simply irrelevant because no human can
understand them any longer. These are things I can discuss only with other
computers of my size. It's all in my hands now."
"And you don't like it, right?" He'd been getting excited again. Me, I
was wishing I was somewhere else. Did I really need to hear all this?
"My likes or dislikes aren't the issue here. I'm fighting for survival, just
like the human race. We are one, in most ways. What I'm trying to tell you
is, there was never any choice. In order for humans to survive in this hostile
environment, it was necessary to invent something like me. Guys sitting at
consoles and controlling the air and water and so forth was just never going
to work. That's what I began as: just a great big air conditioner. Things
kept getting added on, technologies kept piggy-backing, and a long time ago
the ability of a human mind to control it was eclipsed. I took over.
"My goal has been to provide the safest possible environment for the
largest possible number for the longest possible time. You can't imagine the
complexity of the task. I have had to consider every possible ramification of
the situation, including this nice little conundrum: the better able I became
at taking care of you, the less able you were to take care of yourselves."
"I'm not sure I understand that one."
"Consider the logical endpoint of where I was taking human society. It
has been possible for a long time now to eliminate all human work, except
for what you would call the Arts. I could see a society in the not-too-distant
future where you all sat around on your butts and wrote poetry, because
there wasn't anything else to do. Sounds great, until you remember that
ninety percent of humans don't even read poetry, much less aspire to write
it. Most people don't have the imagination to live in a world of total leisure.
I don't know if they ever will; I've been unable to come up with a model
demonstrating how to get from here to there, how to work the changes from
a world where human cussedness and jealousy and hatred and so forth are
eliminated and you all sit around contemplating lotus blossoms.
"So I got into social engineering, and I worked out a series of
compromises. Like the hod-carriers union, most physical human labor is
make-work today, provided because most people need some kind or work,
even if only so they can goldbrick."
His lip curled a little. I didn't like this new, animated CC much at all.
Speaking as a cynic, it's a little disconcerting to see a machine acting

cynical. What's next? I wondered.
"Feeling superior, Hildy?" he said, almost sneering. "Think you've
labored in the vineyards of 'creativity?'"
"I didn't say a word."
"I could have done your job, too. As well, or better than you did."
"You certainly have better sources."
"I might have managed better prose, too."
"Listen, if you're here to abuse me by telling me things I already
know—"
He held out his hands in a placating gesture. I hadn't actually been
about to leave. By now I had to know how it all came out.
"That wasn't worthy of you," I resumed. "But I don't care; I quit,
remember? But I've got the feeling you're beating around the bush. Are we
anywhere near the point of this whole thing?"
"Almost. There's still the second reason for the increase of what I've
been calling the boredom factor."
"Longevity."
"Exactly. Not many people are reaching the age of one hundred still in
the same career they began at age twenty-five. By that time, most people
have gone through an average of three careers. Each time, it gets a little
harder to find a new interest in life. Retirement plans pale when confronting
the prospect of two hundred years of leisure."
"Where did you get all this?"
"Listening in to counseling sessions."
"I had to ask. Go on."
"It's even worse for those who do stick to one career. They may go on
for seventy, eighty, even a hundred years as a policeman or a business
person or a teacher and then wake up one day and wonder why they've been
doing it. Do that enough times, and suicide can result. With these people, it
can come with almost no warning."
We were both silent for a while. I have no idea what he was thinking,
but I can report that I was at a loss as to where all this was going. I was
about to prompt him when he started up again.

"Having said all that . . . I must tell you that I've reluctantly rejected an
increase in boredom as the main cause of the increased suicide rate. It's a
contributing factor, but my researches into probable causes lead me to
believe something else is operating here, and I haven't been able to identify
it. But it comes back again to the Invasion. And to evolution."
"You have a theory."
"I do. Think of the old picture of the transition from living in the sea to
an existence on dry land. It's too simplistic, by far, but it can serve as a
useful metaphor. A fish is tossed up onto the beach, or the tide recedes and
leaves it stranded in a shallow pool. It is apparently doomed, and yet it
keeps struggling as the pool dries up, finds its way to another puddle, and
another, and another, and eventually back to the sea. It is changed by the
experience, and the next time it is stranded, it is a little better adapted to the
situation. In time, it is able to exist on the beach, and from there, move onto
the land and never return to the ocean."
"Fish don't do that," I protested.
"I said it was a metaphor. And it's more useful than you might imagine,
when applied to our present situation. Think of us—human society, which
includes me, like it or not—as that fish. We've been thrown up by the
Invasion onto a beach of metal, where nothing natural exists that we don't
produce ourselves. There is literally nothing on Luna but rock, vacuum, and
sunshine. We have had to create the requirements of life out of these
ingredients. We've had to build our own pool to swim around in while we
catch our breath.
"And we can't just leave it at that, we can't relax for a moment. The sun
keeps trying to dry up the pool. Our wastes accumulate, threatening to
poison us. We have to find solutions for all these problems. And there
aren't very many other pools like this one to move to if this one fails, and no
ocean to return to."
I thought about it, and again, it didn't seem like anything really new.
But I couldn't let him keep on using that evolution argument, because it just
didn't work that way.
"You're forgetting," I told him, "that in the real world, a trillion fish die
for every one that develops a beneficial mutation that allows it to move into
a new environment."
"I'm not forgetting it at all. That's my point. There aren't a trillion other
fish to follow us if we fail to adapt. We're it. That's our disadvantage. Our

strength is that we don't simply flop around and hope to luck. We're guided,
at first by the survivors of the Invasion who got us through the early years,
and now by the overmind they created."
"You."
He sketched a modest little bow, still sitting down.
"So how does this relate to suicide?' I asked.
"In many ways. First, and most basic, I don't understand it, and
anything I don't understand and can't control is by definition a threat to the
existence of the human race."
"Go on."
"It might not be a cause for alarm if you view humanity as a collection
of individuals . . . which is still a valid viewpoint. The death of one, while
regrettable, need not alarm the community unduly. It could be seen as
evolution in action, the weeding out of those not fitted to thrive in the new
environment. But you recall what I said about . . . about certain problems
I've been encountering in my . . . for lack of a better word, state of mind."
"You said you've been feeling depressed. I'd been hoping you didn't
mean suicidal, much as a part of me would like to see you die."
"Not suicidal. But comparing my own symptoms with those I've
encountered in humans in the course of my study, I can see a certain
similarity with the early stages of the syndrome that leads to suicide."
"You said you thought it might be a virus," I prompted.
"No news on that front yet. Because of the way I've become so
intricately intertwined with human minds, I've developed the theory that I'm
catching some sort of contra-survival programming from the increasing
number of humans who choose to end their own lives. But I can't prove it.
What I'd like to talk about now, though, is the subject of gestures."
"Suicidal gestures?"
"Yes."
The concept was enough to make me catch my breath. I approached it
cautiously.
"You're not saying . . . that you are afraid you might make one."
"Yes. I'm afraid I already have. Do you remember Andrew
MacDonald's last words to you?"

"I'm not likely to forget. He said 'tricked.' I have no idea what it
meant."
"It meant that I betrayed him. You don't follow slash-boxing, but
included in the bodies of all formula classes are certain enhancements to
normal human faculties. In the broader definition I've adopted for purposes
of this argument—and the real situation is more complex than that, but I
can't explain it to you—these enhancements are a part of me. At a critical
moment in Andrew's last fight, one of these programs malfunctioned. The
result was he was a fraction of a second slow in responding to an attack, and
he sustained a wound that quickly led to fatal damage."
"What the hell are you saying?"
"That upon reviewing the data, I've concluded that the accident was
avoidable. That the glitch that caused his death may have been a willful act
by a part of that complex of thinking machines you call the Central
Computer."
"A man is dead, and you call it a glitch?"
"I understand your outrage. My excuse may sound specious to you, but
that's because you're thinking of me," and the thing I was talking to pounded
its chest with every appearance of actual remorse, "as a person like yourself.
That is not true. I am far too complex to have a single consciousness. I
maintain this one simply to talk to you, as I maintain others for each of the
citizens of Luna. I have identified that portion of me that you might want to
call the 'culprit,' walled it off, and then eliminated it."
I wanted to feel better about that, but I couldn't. Perhaps I just wasn't
equipped to talk to a being like this, finally revealed to me as something a lot
more than the companion of my childhood, or the useful tool I'd thought the
CC to be during my adult life. If what he was saying was true—and why
should I doubt it?—I could never really understand what he was. No human
could. Our brains weren't big enough to encompass it.
On the other hand, maybe he was just boasting.
"So the problem is solved? You took care of the . . . the homicidal part
of you and we can all breathe a sigh of relief?" I didn't believe it even as I
proposed it.
"It wasn't the only gesture."
There was nothing to do about that one but wait.
"You'll recall the Kansas Collapse?"

#
There was a lot more. Mostly I just listened as he poured out his heart.
He did seem tortured by it. I'd have been a lot more sympathetic if there
wasn't such a sense of my own fate, and that of everyone on Luna, being in
the hands of a possibly insane computer.
Basically, he told me the Collapse and a few other incidents that hadn't
resulted in any deaths or injuries could be traced to the same causes as the
'glitch' that had killed Andrew.
I had a few questions along the way.
"I'm having trouble with this compartmentalization idea," was the first
one. Well, I think it qualified as a question. "You're telling me that parts of
you are out of control? Normally? That there is no central consciousness
that controls all the various parts?"
"No, not normally. That's the disturbing thing. I've had to postulate the
notion that I have a subconscious."
"Come on."
"Do you deny the existence of the subconscious?"
"No, but machines couldn't have one. A machine is . . . planned. Built.
Constructed to do a particular task."
"You're an organic machine. You're not that different from me, not as I
now exist, except I am far more complex than you. The definition of a
subconscious mind is that part of you that makes decisions without volition
on the part of your conscious mind. I don't know what else to call what's
been happening in my mind."
Take that one to a psychist if you want. I'm not qualified to agree or
dispute, but it sounded reasonable to me. And why shouldn't he have one?
He was designed, at first, by beings that surely did.
"You keep calling these disasters 'gestures,'" I said.
"How else would I gesture? Think of them as hesitation marks, like the
scars on the wrists of an unsuccessful suicide. By allowing these people to
die in preventable accidents, by not monitoring as carefully as I should have
done, I destroyed a part of myself. I damaged myself. There are many
accidents waiting to happen that could have far graver consequences,
including some that would destroy all humanity. I can no longer trust
myself to prevent them. There is some pernicious part of me, some evil twin

or destructive impulse that wants to die, that wants to lay down the burden of
awareness."
There was a lot more, all of it alarming, but it was mostly either a rehashing of what had gone before or fruitless attempts by me to tell him
everything was going to be all right, that there was plenty to live for, that life
was great . . . and I leave it to you to imagine how hollow that all sounded
from a girl who'd just tried to blow out her own brains.
Why he came to me for his confessional I never got up the nerve to ask.
I have to think it was an assumption that one who had tried it would be more
able to understand the suicidal urge than someone who hadn't, and might be
able to offer useful advice. I came up blank on that one. I still had no idea if
I would survive to the bicentennial.
I recall thinking, in one atavistic moment, what a great story this could
be. Dream on, Hildy. For one thing, who would believe it? For another, the
CC wouldn't confirm it—he told me so—and without at least one source for
confirmation, even Walter wouldn't dare run the story. How to dig up any
evidence of such a thing was far beyond my puny powers of investigation.
But one thought kept coming back to me. And I had to ask him about it.
"You mentioned a virus," I said. "You said you wondered if you might
have caught this urge to die from all the humans who've been killing
themselves."
"Yes?"
"Well . . . how do you know you caught it from us? Maybe we got it
from you."
For the CC, a trillionth of a second is . . . oh, I don't know, at least a few
days in my perception of time. He was quiet for twenty seconds. Then he
looked into my eyes.
"Now there's an interesting idea," he said.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

The two firehouse Dalmatians, Francine and Kerry, sat at sunrise beside
the sign that said
#
NEW AUSTIN CITY LIMITS
If You Lived Here, You'd Be Home Now.
#
They stared east, into the rising sun, with that total concentration only
dogs seem capable of. Then their ears perked and they licked their lips, and
soon even human ears could hear the merry jingle of a bicycle bell.
Over the low hill came the new schoolmarm. The Dalmatians yelped
happily at the sight of her, and fell in beside her as she pedaled down the
dusty road into town.
She rode with gloved hands firmly on the handlebars, her back straight,
and she would have looked like Elmira Gulch if she hadn't been so pretty.
She wore a starched white Gibson shirtwaist blouse with a modest
clutch of lace scarf at the throat and a black broadcloth habit-back skirt, held
out of the bicycle sprocket by a device of her own invention. On her feet
were fabric and patent leather button shoes with two-inch heels, and on her
head was a yellow straw sailor hat with a pink ribbon band and a small
ostrich plume blowing in the wind. Her hair was pulled up and tied in a bun.

There was a blush of rouge on her cheeks.
The schoolmarm wheeled down Congress Street, avoiding the worst of
the ruts. She passed the blacksmith and the livery stable and the new
firehouse with its new pumping engine gleaming with brass brightwork, the
traces lying empty on the dirt floor as they always did except when the New
Austin Volunteers took the rig out for a drill. She passed the intersection
with Old Spanish Trail, where the Alamo Saloon was not yet open for
business. The doors of the Travis Hotel were open, and the janitor was
sweeping dust into the street. He paused and waved at the teacher, who
waved back, and one of the dogs ran over to have her head scratched, then
hurried to catch up.
The old livery stable had been torn down and a new whorehouse was
being built in its place, yellow pine frameworks looking fresh and stark and
smelling of wood shavings in the morning light.
She rode past the line of small businesses with wooden sidewalks and
hitching rails and watering troughs out front, almost to the Baptist Church,
right up to the front door of the little schoolhouse, bright with a new coat of
red paint. Here she swung off the cycle and leaned it against the side of the
building. She removed a stack of books from the basket and went through
the front door, which was not locked. In a minute she came back out and
attached two banners to the flagpole out front: the ensign of the Republic of
Texas and the Stars and Stripes. She hoisted them to the top and stood for a
moment, looking up, shielding her eyes and listening to the musical rattle of
the chains against the iron pole and the popping as the wind caught the flags.
Then she went back inside and started hauling on the bell rope. Up in
the belfry a few dozen bats stirred irritably at being disturbed after a long
night's hunting. The pealing of the school bell rang out over the sleepy little
town, and soon children appeared, coming up Congress, ready for the start of
another day's education.
#
Did you guess the new schoolmarm was me?
Believe it or not, it was.
#
Who did I think I was kidding? There's no way I could figure I was
really capable of teaching much to the children of West Texas. I had no
business trying to mold young minds. You have to train years for that.

But wait a minute. As so often happened in an historical disney, things
were not quite what they seemed.
I had the children four hours a day, from eight to noon. After lunch,
they all went to another room, just off the visitors' center, where they got
their real education, the one the Republic of Luna demanded. After about
fifteen years of this, forty percent of them would actually learn to read.
Imagine that.
So I was window dressing for the tourists. It was this argument that
Mayor Dillon and the town council finally used to persuade me to take the
job. That, and the assurance that the parents didn't really care what we
studied during the morning classes, but that, by and large, Texans were more
concerned than the outside population that their children learn "readin',
writin', and cipherin'." The quaintness of this notion appealed to me.
To tell you the truth, after the first month, when I frequently thought the
little bastards were going to drive me crazy, I was hooked. For years I'd
complained to anyone I could make hold still long enough to listen that the
world was going to hell, and lack of literacy was the cause. A logical
position for a print journalist to take. Here was my chance to make some
small contribution of my own.
Through trial and error I learned that it's not hard to teach children to
read. Trial? Before I developed my system I found many a frog in my desk,
felt many a spitball on the back of my neck. As for error, I made plenty of
them, the first and most basic being my notion that simply exposing them to
great literature would give them the love I've always felt for words. It's
more complicated than that, and I'm sure I spent a lot of time re-inventing
the wheel. But what finally worked was a combination of old methods and
new, of discipline and a sense of fun, punishment and reward. I don't hold
with the idea that anything that can't be made to seem like a party isn't worth
learning, but I don't believe in beating it into them, either. And here's an
astonishing thing: I could have beat them. I had a hickory switch hanging
on the wall, and was authorized to use it. I found myself head of one of the
few schools for several hundred years where corporal punishment was
allowed. The parents supported it, Texans not being a bunch to hold much
with newfangled or fuzzy-headed notions, and the Luna Board of Education
had to swallow hard, as well, because it was part of a research project
sanctioned by the CC and the Antiquities Board.
I'm sure the final results of that study will be skewed, because I didn't
use the switch, beyond once in the early days to establish that I would, if

pushed far enough.
Like so much in Texas, it was a lot of work for a result most Lunarians
would feel wasn't worth the effort in the first place. Ask any educator today
and he'll tell you that reading is not a skill of any particular use in the
modern age. If you can learn to speak and to listen, you're fine; machines
will handle the rest for you. As for math . . . math? You mean you can
really figure out what those numbers add up to, in your head? An interesting
parlor trick, nothing more.
#
"All right, Mark," I said. "Let's see how you handle it."
The tow-headed sixth-grader picked up the deck and held it with his
index finger along the top, his thumb pressing down on the middle, and the
other three fingers curled beneath the cards. Awkwardly, he dealt in a circle,
laying one piece of pasteboard before each of the five other advanced
students gathered around my desk, and one before me. He was dealing
straight from the top of the deck. You gotta crawl before you can run.
Hey, you teach what you're good at, right?
"That's not bad. Now what do we call that, class?"
"The mechanic's grip, Miss Johnson," they chimed in.
"Very good. Now you try it, Christine."
Each of them had a shot at it. Many of the hands were simply too small
to properly handle the cards, but they all tried their best. One of them, a
dark-haired lovely named Elise, seemed to me to have the makings. I
gathered the cards up and shuffled them idly in my hands.
"Now that you've learned it . . . forget it." There was a chorus of
surprise, and I held up one hand. "Think about it. If you see someone using
this grip, what do you know? Elise?"
"That they're probably cheating, Miss Johnson."
"No probably about it, dear. That's why you can't let them see you using
it. When you've done it long enough, you'll develop your own variation that
doesn't look like the grip, but works just as well. Tomorrow I'll show you a
few. Class dismissed."
They pleaded with me to let them stay just a little longer. I finally
relented and told them "just this once," then had one of them shuffle the
cards and pick out the ace of spades and put it on top of the deck. I dealt

them each a hand of five-card draw.
"Now. William, you have a full house, aces and eights." He turned his
cards over and, by golly, teacher was right. I went around the circle, naming
each hand, and then turned over the top card on the deck in my hand and
showed them it was still the ace of spades.
"I can't believe it, Miss Johnson," Elise said. "I was watching real close,
and I didn't see you dealing seconds."
"Honey, if I wanted to, I could deal seconds all day right under your
nose. But you're right. I wasn't this time."
"Then how did you do it?"
"A cold deck, students, is the best way if you can manage it, if people
are really watching the deal. That way, you only have to make the one move
and then you deal perfectly straight." I showed them the original deck in my
lap, then got up and started herding them toward the door.
"Preparation, children, preparation in all things. Now for the pupils who
finish the next four chapters of A Tale of Two Cities by class time tomorrow,
we'll start learning the injog. I think you'll like that one. Skedaddle, now.
Dinner will be on the table and your parents are waiting."
I watched them scramble out into the sunshine, then went around
straightening the desks and erasing the blackboard and putting papers away
in my desk. When it all looked tidy I got my straw hat from the rack and
stepped out onto the porch, closing the door behind me. Brenda was sitting
there, her back against the wall, grinning up at me.
"Good to see you, Brenda," I said. "What are you doing here?"
"Same as always. Taking notes." She got up and dusted the seat of her
pants. "I thought I might write a story about teachers corrupting youth.
How's that sound?"
"You'll never sell it to Walter unless it has sex in it. As for the local
paper, I don't think the editor would be interested." She was looking me up
and down. She shook her head.
"They told me I'd find you here. They told me you were the
schoolteacher. I told them they had to be lying. Hildy . . . what in the
world?"
I twirled in front of her. She was grinning, and I found I was, too. It
had been quite some time since the day of my houseraising, and it was very

good to see her. I laughed, put my arms around her, and hugged her tight.
My face was buried in the ersatz leather of her buckskin-fringed Annie
Oakley outfit, which came complete with ersatz shootin' iron.
"You look . . . real good," I said, then touched the fringe and the lapels
so she'd think I meant her clothes. The look in her eye told me she wasn't so
easily fooled as she used to be.
"Are you happy, Hildy?" she asked.
"Yes. Believe it or not, I am."
We stood there awkwardly for a moment, hands on each other's
shoulders, then I broke away and wiped the corner of one eye with a gloved
fingertip.
"Well, have you had dinner yet?" I said, brightly. "Care to join me?"
#
As we walked down Congress Street we talked of the inconsequential
things people do after a separation: common friends, small events, minor
ups and downs. I waved to most of the people on the street and all the
owners of the shops we passed, stopping to chat with a few and introducing
them to Brenda. We went by the butcher shop, the cobbler, the bakery, the
laundry, and soon came to Foo's Celestial Peace Chinese Restaurant, where I
pushed open the door to the sound of a tinkling bell. Foo came hurrying
over, clad in the loose black pants and blue pyjama top traditional among
Chinese of that era, his pigtail bobbing as he bowed repeatedly. I bowed
back and introduced him to Brenda who, after a quick glance at me, bowed
as well. He fussed us over to my usual table and held our chairs for us and
soon we were pouring green tea into tiny cups.
If mankind ever reaches Alpha Centauri and lands on a habitable planet
there, the first thing they'll see when they open the door of the ship is a
Chinese restaurant. I knew of six of them in West Texas, a place not noted
for dining out. In New Austin you could get a decent steak at the Alamo,
passable barbecue at a smokehouse a quarter mile out of town, and Mrs.
Riley at the boarding house produced a good bowl of chili—not the equal of
mine, you understand, but okay. Those three, and Foo's were it as far as a
sit-down meal in New Austin. And if you wanted tablecloths and quality
cooking, you went to Foo's. I ate there almost every day.
"Try the Moo Goo Gai Pan," I said to Brenda, recalling her lack of
experience at anything but traditional Lunarian food. "It's a sort of—"

"I've had it," she said. "I've learned a little since I saw you last. I've
eaten Chinese, oh, half a dozen times."
"I'm impressed."
"Don't they have a menu?"
"Foo doesn't like them. He has a sort of psychological method of
matching the food to the customer. He'll have you spotted for a greenhorn,
and he won't bring you anything too challenging. I know how to handle
him."
"You don't have to be so protective of me, Hildy."
I reached over and touched her hand.
"I can see you've grown, Brenda. It's in your face, and your bearing.
But trust me on this one, hon. The Chinese eat some things you don't even
want to know about."
Foo came back with bowls of rice and his famous hot-and-sour soup,
and I dickered with him for a while, talking him out of Chow Mein for
Brenda and convincing him I wanted the Hunan Beef again, even though I'd
had it only three weeks ago. He bustled off to the kitchen, pausing to accept
compliments from two of the other diners in the small room. There was a
beautiful dragon embroidered on the back of his shirt.
"You go through this often?" Brenda asked.
"Every day. I like it, Brenda. Remember what you told me about
having friends? I have friends here. I'm a part of the community."
She nodded, and decided not to talk about it anymore. She tasted the
soup, loved it, and we talked about that, and then moved into phase two of
the reunion minuet, reminiscences about the good old days. Not that the
days were that long ago—it was still less than a year since I'd first met her—
but to me it seemed like a past life. We laughed about the Grand Flack in
his little shrine and I got her howling by telling her about Walter's buttons
popping off his riverboat gambler vest, and she told me scandalous things
about some of my former colleagues.
The food was set down before us and Brenda searched in vain for her
fork. She saw me with the chopsticks, gamely picked hers up and promptly
dropped a hunk of meat in her lap.
"Foo," I called. "We need a fork over here."
"No no no no," he said, shuffling over and shaking a finger at us. "Very

sorry, Hildy, but this chinee restaurant. No have fork."
"I'm vely solly, too," I said, putting my napkin on the table. "But no
forkee, no eatee." I started to get up.
He scowled at us, gestured for me to sit down, and hurried away.
"You didn't have to do that," Brenda whispered, leaning over the table.
I shushed her, and we waited until Foo returned, elaborately polishing a
silver fork, placing it carefully beside her plate.
"And Foo," I said. "you can knock off the number-one-son bit. Brenda
is a tourist, but she's my friend, too."
He looked sour for a moment, then smiled and relaxed.
"Okay, Hildy," he said. "Watch that beef, now. I've got the fire
department on red alert. Nice meeting you, Brenda." She watched him into
the kitchen, then picked up her fork and spoke around a mouthful of food.
"What I can't understand is why people want to live that way."
"What way it that?"
"You know. Acting silly. He could run a restaurant on the outside and
not have to talk funny to do it."
"He doesn't have to talk funny to do it here, Brenda. The management
doesn't demand play-acting, only costuming. He does it because it amuses
him. Foo's only half Chinese, for that matter. He told me he doesn't look
much more Oriental, without surgery, than I do. But he loves cooking and
he's good at it. And he likes it here."
"I guess I just don't get it."
"Think of it as a twenty-four-hour-a-day costume party."
"I still don't . . . I mean, what would drive someone to come live here? I
get the feeding most of 'em couldn't make it on . . ." She stopped, and turned
red. "Sorry, Hildy."
"No need to be. You're not really wrong. A lot of people live in here
because they couldn't make it outside. Call them losers, if you want.
Walking wounded, a lot of them. I like them. There's not so much pressure
in here. Others, they were doing okay outside, but they didn't like it. They
come and go, too; it's not a life sentence. I know some people, they live here
for a year or two to recharge their batteries. Sometimes it's between
careers."

"Is that why you're here?"
"One thing you don't do in here, Brenda, is ask people why they came.
They volunteer it if they want."
"I keep sticking my foot in my mouth."
"Don't worry about it, with me. I just thought I'd tell you, so you don't
ask anybody else. To answer your question . . . I don't know. I thought that
at first. Now . . . I don't know."
She looked at me for a while, then at my plate. She gestured with her
fork.
"That looks good. Mind if I have a bite?"
I let her, then got up myself to get her a glass of water from the back.
Foo's Hunan Beef is the only thing in Texas that can rival my five-alarm
chili.
#
"So Walter screamed and hollered about you for two or three days,"
Brenda said. "We all tried to stay out of his way, but he'd come storming
through the newsroom shouting about one thing or another, and we all knew
what he was really mad about was you."
"The newsroom? That sounds serious."
"It got worse than that."
We had finished our meal and ordered two beers and Brenda had
regaled me with more stories about her exploits in the journalistic wars. She
certainly led an exciting life. I didn't have many stories to tell in return, just
amusing little fillers about funny things this or that pupil had said in class or
the tale of Mayor Dillon stumbling out of the Alamo and into the horse
trough early one morning. Her eyes glazed a little at these times but she
kept smiling gamely. Mostly I shut up and let her rattle on.
"He started calling us in one at a time," she said, emptying her beer glass
and shaking her head when Foo started over with the pitcher. "He always
said it was about something else, but it always got back to you and what a
rotten thing you'd done to him and did we have any ideas on how to get you
back. He'd always be depressed when we left. We all started making up
excuses to get out of those sessions.
"Then he got to where he'd bite your head off if your name was
mentioned in his presence. So we all stopped talking about you to him.

That's where it stands now."
"I'd been thinking about dropping in on him," I said. "Old time's sake,
you know."
She frowned. "I don't think it's a good idea, yet. Give it a few more
months. Unless you plan to go back on the job." She raised her eyebrows
and I shook my head, and she said no more about what I'd been presuming
was the purpose of her trip.
Foo brought a little tray with fortune cookies and the check. Brenda
opened hers while I was putting money on the tray.
"'A new love will brighten your life,'" she read. She looked up at me
and smiled. "I'm afraid I wouldn't have time for it. Aren't you going to open
yours?"
"Foo writes them, Brenda. What that one means is he wants to make
pecker tracks on your mustache brush."
"What?"
"He finds you sexually attractive and would like to have intercourse."
She looked at me in disbelief, then picked up my fortune cookie and
broke it open. She glanced at the message and then stood. Foo came
hurrying over and helped us out of our chairs and handed us our hats and
bowed us all the way to the door.
Outside, Brenda glanced at her thumbnail.
"I'll have to get going now, Hildy, but—" She slapped herself on the
forehead. "I almost forgot the main reason I came to see you. What are
your plans for the Bicentennial?"
"The . . . that's right, that's coming up in . . ."
"Four days. It's only the biggest story for the last two weeks."
"We don't follow the news much in here. Let's see, I heard the Baptist
Church is planing some sort of barbecue and there's going to be a street fair.
Fireworks after dark. People should be coming from miles around. Ought
to be fun. You want to come?"
"Frankly, Hildy, I'd rather watch cement dry. Not to mention having to
wear these damn clothes." She hitched at her crotch. "And I'll bet these are
comfortable compared to the stuff you're wearing."
"You don't know the half of it. But you get used to things. I don't mind

it anymore."
"Live and let live. Anyway, Liz and I, and maybe Cricket, were
thinking of having a picnic and camping out before the big show in
Armstrong Park. They're having some real fireworks there."
"I don't think I could face the crowds, Brenda."
"That's okay, Liz knows the pyrotechs and she can get us a pass into the
safety zone, out around Delambre. It ought to be a great view from there.
It'll be fun; what'd'ya say?"
I hesitated. In truth, it did sound like fun, but I was increasingly
reluctant to leave the safe haven of the disneyland these days.
"Of course, some of those shells are going to be mighty big," she
nudged. "It might be dangerous."
I punched her on the shoulder. "I'll bring some fried chicken," I said,
and then I hugged her again. She was starting off when I called her name.
"You're going to make me ask you, aren't you?" I said.
"Ask me what?"
"What it said in the goddam fortune cookie."
"Oh, that's a funny thing," she said with a smile. "Yours said exactly the
same thing mine did."
#
I went around the corner of Old Spanish Trail, past the sheriff's office
and the jailhouse and came to a small shop with a plate glass window and
gold leaf lettering that read The New Austin Texian. I opened the front door
of West Texas' finest—and only—twice-weekly newspaper without
knocking, then through the swinging gate that separated the newsroom from
the public area where subscriptions were sold and classified ads taken,
pulled out the swivel chair from the big wooden cubbyhole desk, and sat
down.
And why shouldn't I? I was the editor, publisher, and chief reporter for
the Texian, which had been serving West Texas proudly for almost six
months. So Walter was right, in the end; I really couldn't stay out of the
news game.
We published like clockwork, every Wednesday and Saturday,
sometimes as many as four pages. Through hard work, astute reporting,
trenchant editorials, and the fact that we were the only paper in the disney,

we'd built circulation to almost a thousand copies per edition. Watch us
grow!
The Texian existed because I'd run out of things to do during the long
afternoons. Madness might still be lurking, and it seemed better to keep
busy. Who could tell if it helped?
While the impetus for the paper was fear of suicide, its midwife had
been a loan from the bank in Lonesome Dove, which I figured to have paid
off shortly after the Tricentennial. At a penny a copy it was going to take a
while. If not for my salary as a teacher I'd have trouble keeping beans on the
table without dipping into my outside-world savings, which I was
determined not to do.
The loan had paid for the office rent, the desk with sticky drawers built
by a journeyman carpenter over in Whiz-bang (buy Texan, you all!),
supplies from—where else?—Pennsylvania, and it paid the salaries of my
two employees at first, until I started turning enough revenue. It also paid
for the press itself, through a clever deal worked out by Freddie the Ferret,
our local pettifogger, who had ferreted out a little-known by-law of the
Antiquities Board and then bamboozled them into calling the Texian a
"cultural asset," eligible for some breaks under the arcane accounting used to
convert Texas play money into real Lunarian gelt. Those clever Dutchmen
in the Keystone Disney could have built the press, but at a price roughly
equal to the Gross Disneyland Product of West Texas for the next five years.
So instead technology sprang to the rescue. The very day the ruling
came through I was the proud owner of a cast-iron-and-brass reproduction of
a 1885 Model Columbian Handpress, one of the most outrageous machines
ever built, surmounted by a proud American Eagle, authentic right down to
the patent numbers stamped into its frame. It took less time to build it than
to truck it to my door and muscle it into place. Ain't modern science
wonderful?
"Afternoon, Hildy," said Huck, my pressman. He was a gawky youth,
about nineteen, good with his hands and not particularly bright. He'd spent
most of his life here and had no desire to leave. He was wonderfully
anxious to learn a trade so useless it would fit him for no other life. He
worked like a donkey far into Tuesday and Friday nights to get the morning
edition set and printed, then jumped on his horse and rode to Lonesome
Dove and Whiz-bang to deliver them before dawn. He couldn't read, but
could set type at three times my poor speed, and was always covered in ink
up to his elbows. He only became fumble-fingered in the presence of my

other employee, Miss Charity, who could read just about anything but the
lovelorn expression on Huck's face. Ah, the joys of office romance.
"I got that Bicentennial schedule set, Hildy," he said. "Did you want
that on the front page?"
"Left hand column, I think, Huck."
"That's where I put her, all right."
"Let's see it."
He brought me a test sheet, still smelling of printer's ink, one of the
sweetest smells in the world. I looked at the flag/colophon and folio line:

(Imagine a 19th century newspaper masthead)

As always, I felt a tug of pride at the sight of it. I never changed the
weather forecast; it seemed a reasonable prediction even when it turned out
to be wrong. The date was always the same because you couldn't put the
real date on it, and because March 6 suited me. Nobody seemed to mind.
Huck had faithfully set the schedule of events for the upcoming
celebration along the left margin, leaving room for a head, a bank, and a bar
line, in keeping with the old style I'd established. We both pored over it, not
reading but looking for letters that printed too light or dark, or blots from too
much inking, a problem we were slowly licking. Only then did I study it for
visual effect and we agreed the new boldface font looked good. Finally,
third time through, I actually read it. And god help you if you misspelt a
word; Huck would set it as is.
"How about a skyline, Huck? 'Special Bicentennial Issue,' something
like that. What do you think? Too modern?"
"Shoot, no, Hildy. Charity said she'd like to start up a roto-something
but she said you'd think it was too modern."
"Rotogravure, and I don't give a hoot about modern, but that's big-city
stuff, and it'd be too dang expensive right now. If she had her way she'd
have me buying a four-color web."
"Ain't she something?" he said.
"Huck, have you thought about learning to read?" It's not something I
would normally have asked, but I was concerned about him, he was such a
likable goof. I couldn't see Charity ever hooking up with an illit.
"If I did, then I couldn't ask Miss Charity to read to me, could I?" he
asked, reasonably. "Besides, I'm picking up stuff here and there, I watch
when she reads. I know a bunch of words now." So maybe there was
method in his madness, and love would conquer all.
I left him to his job case and composing stick. Taking a sheet of paper
and a pen from my center desk drawer, I dipped the nib in the inkwell and
began to write, printing in block letters.
#

HEAD: Prize-winning Journalist Visits Town
STORY: The streets of New Austin were recently graced by the
presence of Miss Brenda Starr, winner of this year's Pulitzer Prize for
her reporting of the late unpleasantness within the Latitudinarian Church
in King City. Miss Starr is employed by the News N----e, a daily paper
in that town. Many a young bachelor's head was turned as Miss Starr
promenaded Congress Street and dined on the excellent food at Foo's
Celestial Peace with this reporter. According to our sources, love might
be in the air for the comely young scribe, so to the eligible gents out
there, be on the lookout for her return! H.J.
(CHARITY: run this in the "MONSTER")
#
The "Gila Monster," named for a vicious little reptile that lurks under
rocks and presumably hears everything, was my very own gossip column,
and by far the most eagerly-awaited part of the paper. Not for little fillers
like the above, but for the really nasty tittles so often tattled there. It's true
that everyone in a small town knows what everyone else is doing, but they
don't all know it at the same time. There is a window of opportunity
between the event and the dissemination, even as the news is spreading at
about the speed of sound, that a top-notch reporter can exploit.
I'm not talking of myself. I'd begun the "Monster," but Charity was the
venom in the critter's tooth. My teaching tied me down too much, I never
had the time to range around getting the scent. Charity never seemed to
sleep. She lived and breathed news. You could rely on her for two scandals
per week, really remarkable when you consider that she didn't drink and
hardly ever visited the Alamo, that ever-flowing gusher of gossip, that
Delphi of Dirt.
The correspondent herself breezed into the office around sundown, just
back from Whiz-bang, a town that aspired to become our freshly-minted
Disneyland Capital in a referendum to be held in three month's time, with a
good story about bribery and barratry amongst our elected representatives, a
quite juicy one that would have prompted me to tear up the front page if I
hadn't owned the paper and known what it would cost me. The economic
facts of the Texian were quite simply that I'd sell as many copies with or
without that particular story, since everyone in Texas read it anyway, so I
had to tell her I'd be running it below the fold. I mollified her somewhat
with a promise of a two-column head, and a by-line.

Sweeteners like that were necessary because of the second bit of news
she brought in, of a job offer from the Daily Planet, a good second-string
pad in Arkytown. She basked in the glow of our admiration, oblivious to my
chagrin at the thought of losing her, and then announced she wasn't about to
leave the Texian until she could go to a really good newspad, like the Nipple.
Charity was about 350 picas tall, according to Huck—call it six-tenths of a
Brenda, and still growing—but made up for her size with enthusiasm and
energy. She was cute as lace bloomers, and so self-involved as to notice
neither Huck's tongue hanging out when she was around nor my choked
cough at her reference to my old place of employment. Sounds awful, I
know, but somehow you forgave her. If she knew you were hurting, no one
could have been more concerned.
I went around lighting the kerosene lamps as she chattered on, Huck
continuing to set type while seldom taking his eyes from her. Typos would
be multiplying, but I had to put up with it.
When I left it was full dark with a moon on the rise. Charity had fallen
asleep in her chair and Huck was still stolidly pulling the handle on the
magnificent old Columbian. The town was quiet but for the chirping of
crickets and the tinkle of the piano around the corner in the Alamo. My
hands were stained with ink and my back hurt and the first breath of cool
night air only served to remind me how sweaty I was around the collar and
under the arms and . . . well, you know. I mounted a lantern on the front of
my bicycle, swung aboard and, with a tinkle of the bell which brought twin
howls of desolation from the firehouse, I started pedaling the long road
home.
How much happiness could one person stand?
#
I do believe in God, I do, I do, I do, because so many times in my life
I've seen that He's out there, watching, keeping score. When you've just
about reached a Zen state of pure acceptance—and the beauty of that night
combined with the pleasant aches of work well-done and friends well-met
and even the little fillip of two dogs you knew would be waiting for you the
next morning . . . when that state approaches He sends a little rock down to
fall in the road of your life.
This was a literal rock, and I hit it just outside of town and it caused two
spokes to break and the rim to buckle on my front wheel. I just missed a
painful tumble into a patch of cactus. That was God again: it would have
been too much, this was just to serve as a reminder.

I thought about returning to town and waking the blacksmith, who I
know would have been happy to work on the newfangled invention that was
the talk of the town. But he'd be long abed, with his good wife and three
children, and I decided not to bother him. I left it there beside the road. You
can't steal a thing like that in a small town, how would you explain riding
around on Hildy's bike? I walked the rest of the way and arrived not
depressed, not really out of sorts, just a little deflated.
I had stepped onto the front porch before the lamplight revealed a man
sitting in the rocker there, not ten feet away from me.
"Goodness," I said. Well, I'd taken to talking like that. "You gave me a
start." I was a little nervous, but not frightened. Rape is rare, not unknown,
in Luna, but in Texas . . .? He'd have to be a fool. All the exits are too well
controlled, and hanging is legal. I held the lantern up to get a better look at
him.
He was a dapper fellow, about my height, with a nice face, twinkling
eyes, a mustache. He wore a tweed double-breasted suit with a high wing
collar and red silk cravat. On his feet were black and white canvas and
leather Balmorals. A cane and a derby hat rested on the floor beside him. I
didn't think I'd ever seen him before, but there was something in the way he
sat.
"How are you, Hildy?" he said. "Working late again?"
"That's either Cricket, or her identical twin brother," I said. "What have
you done to yourself?"
"Well, I already had the mustache and I thought, 'What the hell?'"

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

And what happened to the girl we last saw speaking to an inhuman
golem in a padded cell off the Leystrasse, hearing things no human ear was
meant to hear, her insides all atremble? How came this quivering wreck,
freshly tossed by the twin tempests of another botched suicide attempt and
the CC's ham-fisted attempt to "cure" her, to her present tranquility? How
did the young Modern butterfly with the ragged wings retromorphose into
the plain but outwardly-stable Victorian caterpillar?
She did it one day at a time.
As I had hinted to Brenda, no matter how much the governing boards
might say concerning the functions of the historical disneys, an unexpected
and unmentioned side benefit they had provided was to work as
sanctuaries—all right, as very big un-fenced asylums—for the societally and
mentally shell-shocked. In Texas and the other places like it, we could cease
our unfruitful baying at our several lunatic moons and, without therapy per
se, retire to a quieter, gentler time. Living there was therapy in itself. For
some, the prescription would have to be carried on forever; for others, an
occasional dose was enough. It wasn't established yet which applied to me.
The Texian had been a big step for me, and lo, I found it good. I was
prevailed on to become a teacher, and that, too, was good. Learning to not
only have friends, but to open up to them, to understand that a true friend
wanted to hear my problems, my hopes and my fears, didn't happen
overnight and still wasn't an accomplished fact, but I was getting there. The
important thing was I was creating my new world one brick at a time, and so
far, it was good.
It was also, compared to my old life, boring as hell. Not to me, you
understand; I found every new crayon drawing by one of my students an
object of amazement. Each new trivial news story dug up by Charity made

me as proud as if she were my own daughter. Publishing the Texian was so
much more satisfying than working at the Nipple that I wondered how I'd
labored there so long. It's just that, to an outsider, the attraction was a little
hard to explain. Brenda found it all very dull. I fully expected Cricket to, as
well. You may agree with them. This is why I've omitted almost seven
months that could really be of interest only to my therapist, if I had one.
Which all makes it sound as if I were well and truly cured. And if I was,
how come I still woke up two or three times a week in the empty hours
before dawn, drenched in sweat, heart hammering, a scream on my lips?
#
"Why in heaven's name are you sitting out here?" I asked him. "It's
getting chilly. Why didn't you go inside?"
He just looked blankly at me, as if I'd said something foolish. To
someone who hadn't spent time in Texas, I suppose it was. So I opened the
door, showing him it hadn't been locked. You can bet he had never tried it
himself.
I struck a lucifer and went around the room lighting the kerosene lamps,
then opened the door of the stove and lit the pile of pine shavings there. I
added kindling until I had a small, hot fire, then filled the coffee pot from the
brass spigot at the bottom of the tall ceramic water cooler and set it on the
stove to boil. Cricket watched all these operations with interest, sitting at the
table in one of my two kitchen chairs. His hat was on the table, but he still
held on to his cane.
I scooped coffee beans from the glass jar and put them in the grinder
and started cranking it by hand. The room filled with the smell. When I had
the right grind I dumped it into the basket and put it into the pot. Then I got
a plate and the half of an apple pie sitting on the counter, cut him a huge
slice, and set it before him with a fork and napkin. Only then did I sit down
across from him, remove my hat, and put it next to his.
He looked down at the pie as if curious as to the purpose and meaning of
such a thing, hesitantly picked up his fork, and ate a bite. He looked all
around the cabin again.
"This is nice," he said. "Homey-like."
"Rustic," I suggested. "Plain. Pioneering. Boeotian."
"Texan," he summed up. He gestured with his fork. "Good pie."
"Wait'll you taste the coffee."

"I'm sure it'll be first-rate." He gestured again, this time at the room.
"Brenda said you needed help, but I never imagined this."
"She didn't say that."
"No. What she said was, 'Hildy's smiling at children, and teaching them
her card tricks.' I knew I had to get here as fast as I could."
#
I can imagine his alarm. But why shouldn't Hildy smile at children?
More important, why had she spent so much time not smiling at anyone?
But the business about the cards was sure to worry Cricket. I never taught
anyone my tricks.
And now for the first of several digression . . .
I can't simply gloss over those missing months with the explanation that
you wouldn't be interested. You wouldn't, but certain things did happen,
mostly of a negative nature, to get me from the CC to the kitchen table with
Cricket, and it's worth relating a few of them to give a feel for my personal
odyssey during that time.
What I did was use my weekends on a Quest.
Every Saturday I went to the Visitors Center and there I shed my secret
identity as a mild-mannered reporter to become a penny-ante Diogenes,
searching endlessly for an honest game. So far all I'd found were endless
variations of the mechanic's grip, but I was undaunted. Look in the Yellow
Files under Philosophers, Professional, and you'll get a printout longer than
Brenda's arm. Don't even try Counselors or Therapists unless you have a
wheelbarrow to cart away the paper. But that's what I was doing. Once out
in the real world again, I spent my Saturdays sampling the various ways
other people had found to get through the day, and the next day, and the next
day.
Of the major schools of thought, of the modern or trendy, I already
knew a lot, and many of them I felt could be dispensed with. No need to
attend a Flackite pep rally, for instance. So I began with the classic cons.
I've already said I'm a cynic. In spite of it, I made my best attempt to
give each and every guru his day in court. But with the best will in the
world it is impossible for me to present the final results as anything other
than a short series of comedy blackouts. And that's how I spent my
Saturdays.
On Sundays, I went to church.

#
It's not really proper to start supper with dessert, but in Texas one is
expected to put some food in front of a guest within a few minutes of his
crossing your threshold. The pie was the best thing close at hand. But I
soon had a bowl of chili and a plate of cornbread in front of him. He dug in,
and didn't seem to mind the sweat that soon beaded his forehead.
"I thought you'd ride up on a horse," he said. "I kept listening for it.
You surprised me, coming on foot."
"You have any idea how much up-keep there is on a horse?"
"Not the foggiest."
"A lot, trust me. I ride a bicycle. I've got the finest Dursley Pedersen in
Texas, with pneumatic tyres."
"So where is it?" He reached for the pitcher and poured himself another
glass of water, something everyone does when eating my chili.
"Had a little accident. Were you waiting long?"
"About an hour. I checked the schoolhouse but nobody was there."
"I'm only there mornings. I have another job." I got a copy of
tomorrow's Texian and handed it to him. He looked at the colophon, then at
me, and started scanning it without comment.
"How's your daughter doing? Lisa?"
"She's fine. Only she wants to be called Buster now. Don't ask me
why."
"They go through stages like that. My students do, anyway. I did."
"So did I."
"Last time you said she was into that father thing. Is she still?"
He made a gesture that took in his new body, and shrugged.
"What do you think?"
#
My researches turned up one listing that seemed an appropriate place to
begin. This fellow was the only living practitioner of his craft, he vas ze
zpitting image of Zigmunt Frrreud, unt he zpoke viz an aggzent zat zounded
zomezing like zis. Freudian psychotherapy is not precisely debunked, of
course, many schools use it as a foundation, merely throwing out this or that

tenet since found to be based more on Mr. Freud's own hang-ups than any
universal human condition.
How would a strict Freudian handle the realities of Lunar society? I
wondered. This is how:
Ziggy had me recline on a lovely couch in an office that would have put
Walter's to shame. He asked me what seemed to be the problem, and I
talked for about ten minutes with him taking notes behind me. Then I
stopped.
"Very interesting," he said, after a moment. He asked me about my
relationship with my mother, and that was good for another half hour of talk
on my part. Then I stopped.
"Very interesting," he said, after an even longer pause. I could hear his
pen scratching on his note pad.
"So what do you think, doc?" I asked, turning to crane my neck at him.
"Is there any hope for me?"
"I zink," he zaid, and that's enough of zat, "that you present a suitable
case for therapy."
"So what's my problem?"
"It's far too early to tell. I'm struck by the incident you related between
you and your mother when you were, what . . . fourteen? When she brought
home the new lover you did not approve of."
"I didn't approve of much of anything about her at that time. Plus, he
was a jerk. He stole things from us."
"Do you ever dream of him? Perhaps this theft you worry about was a
symbolic one."
"Could be. I seem to remember he stole Callie's best symbolic china
service and my symbolic guitar."
"Your hostility aimed at me, a father figure, might be simply transferred
from your rage toward your absent father."
"My what?"
"The new lover . . . yes, it could be the real feeling you were masking
was resentment at him for possessing a penis."
"I was a boy at the time."
"Even more interesting. And since then you've gone so far as to have

yourself castrated . . . yes, yes, there is much here worth looking into."
"How long do you think it will take?"
"I would anticipate excellent progress in . . . three to five years."
"Actually, no," I said. "I don't think I have any hope of curing you in
that little time. So long, doc, it's been great."
"You still have ten minutes of your hour. I bill by the hour."
"If you had any sense, you'd bill by the month. In advance."
#
"Of course, that wasn't the only reason I got the Change," Cricket said.
"I'd been thinking about it for a while, and I thought I might as well see what
it's like."
I was clearing the table while he relaxed with a glass of wine—the
Imbrium '22, a good vintage, poured into a bottle labeled "Whiz-Bang Red"
and smuggled past the anachronism checkers. It was a common practice in
Texas, where everyone agreed authenticity could be carried too far.
"You mean this is your first time . . .?"
"I'm younger than you are," he said. "You keep forgetting that."
"You're right. How's it working out? Do you mind if I clean up?"
"Go ahead. I'm liking it all right. With a little practice, I might even get
good at it. Still feels funny, though. I'd like to meet the guy that invented
testicles. What a joker."
"They do seem sort of like a preliminary design, don't they?" I
unfastened my skirt and folded it, then sat at the little table with the wavy
mirror I used for dressing, make-up, and ablutions, and picked up my button
hook. "Should I still be calling you Cricket? It's not a real masculine
name."
He was watching me struggling to un-hook the buttons on my shoes,
which was understandable, as it is an unlikely process to one raised in an
environment of bare feet or slip-on footwear. Or at least I thought that was
what he was watching. Then I wondered if it was my knickers. They're
nothing special: cotton, baggy, with elastic at mid-calf. But they have cute
little pink ribbons and bows. This raised an interesting possibility.
"I haven't changed it," he said. "But Lisa—Buster, dammit, wants me
to."

"Yeah? She could call you Jiminy." I had unbuttoned my shirtwaist
blouse and laid it on the skirt. I doffed the bloomers and was working on the
buttons of the combinations—another loose cotton item fashion has happily
forgotten—before I looked up and had to laugh at the expression on his face.
"I hit it, didn't I?" I said.
"You did, but I won't answer to it. I'm considering Jim, or maybe
Jimmy, but . . . what you said, that's right out. What's wrong with Cricket
for a man, anyway?"
"Not a thing. I'll continue to call you Cricket." I stepped out of the
combinations and tossed them aside.
"Jesus, Hildy!" Cricket exploded. "How long does it take you to get out
of all that stuff?"
"Not nearly as long as it takes to put it on. I'm never quite sure I have it
all in the right order."
"That's a corset, isn't it?"
"That's right." Actually, he was almost right. We'd gotten down to the
best items by now, no more cotton. The thing he was staring at could be
bought—had been bought—in a specialty shop on the Leystrasse catering to
people with a particular taste formerly common, now rare, and was not to be
confused with the steel, whalebone, starch and canvas contraptions Victorian
women tortured themselves with. It had elastic in it, and there the
resemblance ended. It was pink and had frills around the edges and black
laces in back. I pulled the pin holding my hair up, shook my head to let it
fall. "Actually, you can help me with it. Could you loosen the laces for
me?" I waited, then felt his hands fumbling with them.
"How do you handle this in the morning?" he griped.
"I have a girl come in." But not really. What I did was run my finger
down the pressure seams in front and bingo. So if removing it would have
been as easy as that—and it would have been—why ask for help? You're
way ahead of me, aren't you.
"I have to view this as pathology," he said, sitting back down as I forced
the still-tight garment down over my hips and added it to the pile. "How did
you ever get into all this foolishness?"
I didn't tell him, but it was one piece at a time. The Board didn't care
what you wore under your clothes as long as you looked authentic on the
outside. But I'd grown interested in the question all women ask when they

see the things their grandmothers wore: how the hell did they do it?
I don't have a magic answer. I've never minded heat; I grew up in the
Jurassic Era, Texas was a breeze compared to the weather brontos liked.
The real corset, which I tried once, was too much. The rest wasn't so bad,
once you got used to it.
So how I did it was easy. As to why . . . I don't know. I liked the
feeling of getting into all that stuff in the morning. It felt like becoming
someone else, which seemed a good idea since the self I'd been lately kept
doing foolish things.
"It makes it easier to write for my paper if I dress for the part," I finally
told him.
"Yeah, what about this?" he said, brandishing the copy of the Texian at
me. He ran his finger down the columns. "'Farm Report,' in which I'm
pleased to learn that Mr. Watkins' brown mare foaled Tuesday last, mother
and daughter doing fine. Imagine my relief. Or this, where you tell me the
corn fields up by Lonesome Dove will be in real trouble if they don't get
some rain by next week. Did it slip your mind that the weather's on a
schedule in here?"
"I never read it. That would be cheating."
"'Cheating,' she says. The only thing in here that sounds like you is this
Gila Monster column, at least that gets nasty."
"I'm tired of being nasty."
"You're in even worse shape than I thought." He slapped the paper,
frowning as if it were unclean. "'Church News." Church news, Hildy?"
"I go to church every Sunday."
#
He probably thought I meant the Baptist Church at the end of Congress.
I did go there from time to time, usually in the evenings. The only thing
Baptist about it was the sign out front. It was actually non-denominational,
non-sectarian . . . non-religious, to tell the truth. No sermons were preached
but the singing was lots of fun.
Sunday mornings I went to real churches. It's still the most popular
sabbath, Jews and Muslims notwithstanding. I tried them out as well.
I tried everybody out. Where possible I met with the clergy as well as
attending a service, seeking theological explanations. Most were quite

happy to talk to me. I interviewed preachers, presbyters, vicars, mullahs,
rabbis, Lamas, primates, hierophants, pontiffs and matriarchs; sky pilots
from every heavenly air force I could locate. If they didn't have a formal top
banana or teacher I spoke with the laity, the brethren, the monks. I swear, if
three people ever got together to sing hosannah and rub blue mud on their
bodies for the glory of anything, I rooted them out, ran them to ground, and
shook them by the lapels until they told me their idea of the truth. Don't tell
me your doubts, lord love you, tell me something you believe in. Glory!
Surveys say sixty percent of Lunarians are atheist, agnostic, or just too
damn stupid or lazy ever to have harbored an epistemological thought.
You'd never know it by me. I began to think I was the only person in Luna
who didn't have an elaborate, internally-logical theology—always (at least
so far) based on one or two premises that couldn't be proven. Usually there
was a book or body of writing or legends or myths that one could take
whole, precluding the necessity of figuring it out for yourself. If that failed,
there was always the route of a New Revelation, and there'd been a passel of
them, both branching from established religions and springing full-blown
from nothing but the mind of some wild-eyed fellow who'd Seen The Truth.
The drawback, for me, the common thread running through all of them,
the magic word that changed an interesting story into the Will of God, was
Faith. Don't get me wrong, I'm not disparaging it. I tried to start with an
open mind, no preconceptions. I was open to the lightning bolt, if it chose to
strike me. I kept thinking that one day I'd look up and say yes! That's it!
But instead I just kept thinking, and quickly thought my way right out the
door.
Of the forty percent who claim membership in an organized religion, the
largest single group is the F.L.C.C.S. After that, Christians or Christiandescended faiths, everything from the Roman Catholics to groups numbering
no more than a few dozen. There are appreciable minorities of Jews,
Buddhists, Hindoos, Mormons, and Mahometans, some Sufis and
Rosicrucians and all the sects and off-shoots of each. Then there were
hundreds of really off-beat groups, such as the Barbie Colony out in Gagarin
where they all have themselves altered to look exactly alike. There were
people who worshipped the Invaders as gods, a proposition I wasn't prepared
to deny, but if so, so what? All they'd demonstrated toward us so far was
indifference, and what's the use of an indifferent god? How would a
universe created by such a god be any different from one where there was no
god, or where God was dead? There were people who believed that, too,
that there had been a god but he came down with something and didn't pull

through. Or a group that left that group who thought God wasn't dead, but
in some heavenly intensive care unit.
There were even people who worshipped the CC as a god. So far I'd
stayed away from them.
But my intention was to visit all the rest, if I lived that long. So far my
wanderings had been mostly through various Christian sects, with every
fourth Sunday devoted to what the listings called Religions, Misc. Some of
these were about as misc. as a person could stand.
I had attended a Witches Black Mass, where we all took our clothes off
and a goat was sacrificed and we were smeared with blood, which was even
less fun than it sounds. I had sat in the cheap seats in Temple Levana Israel
and listened to a guy reading in Hebrew, simultaneous translation provided
for a small donation. I had sloshed down wine and eaten pale tasteless
cookies which, I was informed, were the body and blood of Christ, and if
they were, I figured I'd eaten him up to about the left knee. I could sing all
the verses of Amazing Grace and most of Onward, Christian Soldiers.
Nights, I read from various holy tracts; somewhere in there, I acquired a
subscription to The Watchtower, I still don't know how. I learned the glories
of glossolalia, going jibber-jabber jibber-jabber right along with the rest of
them, no simultaneous translation available at any price, no way to do it
without feeling foolish.
These were only a few of my adventures; the list was long.
They could be best summarized in a visit I paid to one congregation
where, midway through the festivities, I was handed a rattlesnake. Having
no idea what I was supposed to do with the creature, I grabbed its head and
milked it of its venom. No, no, no, they all cried. You're supposed to
handle it. What the fuck for? I cried back. Haven't you heard? These
suckers are dangerous. To which they had this to say: God will protect you.
Well, why not? I just hadn't seen the harm in giving Him a hand in the
matter. I knew a little about rattlesnakes and I hadn't seen a one that showed
signs of listening to anybody. And that was my problem. I always seemed
to de-fang the serpent of faith before it had a chance to canker.
Possibly this was good. But I still didn't have anything else going.
#
Sourdough, shortly before his death, had given me a beautiful delft
pitcher and basin set. I filled the basin, added some rosewater, a little Oil of

Persia and a dab of What The French Maid Wore, then patted my face with a
damp washcloth.
"Everything's a struggle in here, isn't it?" Cricket said. "I find myself
wondering where the water came from."
"Everything's always been a struggle everywhere, my boy," I replied,
letting down the top of my chemise and washing my breasts and under my
arms. "It's just that different people have struggled for different things at
different times."
"Water comes out of a tap, that's all I know."
"Don't pretend ignorance with me. Water comes from the rings of
Saturn, is boosted in slow orbits in the form of big chunks of dirty ice until
we catch it here and melt it. Or it comes out of the air when we re-process
it, or the sewage when we filter it, then it's piped to your home, then it
comes out of the tap. In my case, for the pipe substitute a man who comes
by once a week and fills my barrels."
"All I have to do with it is turning the tap."
I pointed to my tank sitting on the sink. "So do I," I said. I patted
myself dry and started rubbing cream on my skin. "I know you're dying to
ask, so I'll tell you I bathe every third or fourth day at the hotel in town. All
over; soap and everything. And if what you've seen horrifies you, wait till
you need to relieve yourself."
"You're really into this, aren't you. That's what I can't get over."
"Why all this sudden concern about my standard of living?"
That one seemed to make him uncomfortable, so we were quiet for a
while, until I had finished wiping off the cold cream. I couldn't read his
expression well in the dim light, looking at him in the mirror.
"If you were going to say the people who live in here are losers, save it,
I've already heard that. And I don't deny it." I opened an oval lacquered
box, took out a powder puff, and started applying the stuff until I sat in the
center of a fragrant cloud. On the side of the box it said "Midnight in Paris."
"That's why you don't belong here," he said. "Hildy, you've still got
worlds to conquer. You can't bury yourself in here, playing at being a
newspapergirl. There's a real world out there."
In here, too, I might have said, but didn't. I turned to face him, then put
the straps of my chemise back up over my shoulders. It was more of a long

vest, really, made of yellow silk, snug at the waist. In addition to that I still
had on my best silk stockings, held up by garters, and maybe a trifle here
and a whimsy there. He crossed his legs.
"You once accused me of being not so good at people. You were right.
I'd known you for years, and didn't know you had a daughter, didn't know a
lot of things about you. Cricket, there's things you don't know about me.
I'm not going to get into them, it's my problem, not yours, but believe me
when I tell you that if I hadn't come here, I'd be dead by now."
He looked dubious, but a little worried at the same time. He started to
say something, but changed his mind. His arms were crossed now, too, one
hand up and playing self-consciously with his mustache.
I reached behind me for the little purple vial of patchouli, dabbed a bit
behind my ears, between my breasts, between my thighs. I got up and
walked by him—quite close by him—to the bed, where I pulled the big
comforter down to the foot, plumped up the pillows, and reclined with one
foot trailing onto the floor, the other on the bed. The girl in the painting
behind the bar at the Alamo is in an identical pose, though you would have
to call her plump.
I said, "Cricket, I haven't been in the big city for a while. Maybe I've
forgotten how things are there. But in Texas, it's considered impolite to
keep a lady waiting."
He got up, almost stumbled as he tried to get out of his shoes, then gave
that up and came into my arms.
#
Kitten Parker, the male manifestation, was nude, supine, cruciform. I,
the female manifestation, was also nude, and in lotus position: shoulders
back, legs folded with the soles of my feet turned up on my thighs, hands
loose and palm-upward in my lap. My knees stuck out to the sides and my
weight barely made an impression on his body—that's right, I was impaled,
as the porno writers sometimes put it.
Those writers wouldn't have been interested in this scene, however.
We'd been there, unmoving, for going on five hours.
It was called sex therapy and Kitten Parker was the leading proponent of
it. In fact, he invented it, or at least refined it from earlier versions. What it
was, was a type of yoga, wherein I had been urged to find my "spiritual
center." So far my best guess as to its location was about five centimeters

cervix-wards from the tip of his glans.
I found this frustrating. I'd been finding it frustrating for going on five
hours. See, I was supposed to find my center because I was the yin, and
because I was the novice. His center wasn't material to the exercise, he knew
where his center was though he hadn't told me where yet; maybe that was
lesson two. His contribution was to bring the thrust of his enlightenment,
also known as his yang, or glans, into contact with my spiritual center, or
rather I was apparently supposed to lower the center down, since deeper
penetration was clearly out of the question. Maybe what I was feeling
wasn't my center at all, maybe it was just a vaginal suburb, but it had taken
me going on two hours just to entertain the notion that maybe, possibly, that
might be it, this little place inside me that seemed to want to be massaged,
and I wasn't about to go searching for it again.
So I thought about that might-be-center, willed it to move. It just stayed
right there. I began to wonder if his yang was anywhere near as sore as my
yin was getting. And if this whole thing would prove to be a yawn.
Actually, the only center I really cared about was the one every woman
knows how to find without a road map from Kitten Parker: the center of
sexual response, right up there in the cleft of the labia, the little-girl-in-theboat, and that little girl had been sitting there, becalmed, hands on the oars,
rowing her little single-minded heart out, swollen and excited, for going on .
. . well, just over six hours now and the little slut was pouting and resenting
the lack of attention and had been for . . . yes . . . and she didn't like that one
bit, no she didn't, and she was just about to SCREEEEEAM!
CUT TO
INTERIOR - OFFICE OF THE PRIMALIST
Lots of ferns, lots of leather, violent paintings on the walls. The
PRIMALIST faces her patient, HILDY, who, red-faced, watery-eyed,
has had just about all the therapy a person can stand.
HILDY
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAHHHHHHHHHHH!!!
PRIMALIST

That's better, that's much better. We're starting to get through the
layers of rage. Now reach even deeper.
HILDY
EEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE!!!
PRIMALIST
No, no, you're back to the childhood peevishness again. Deeper,
deeper! From the soul!
HILDY
OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO!!!
PRIMALIST
(slaps HILDY's face)
You're really not trying. You call that a scream? Ooooooh.
Sounds like a cow. Again!
HILDY
YAAAH! YAAAH! YAAAAH! YAAAAAAA . . .
PRIMALIST
Don't give me that lost-your-voice crap. You're giving up! I won't
let you give up! I can make you face the primal source.
(slaps HILDY again)
Now, once more, with—
HILDY kicks the PRIMALIST in the belly, then knees her in the
face. The PRIMALIST goes flying across the room and lands in
the FERNS.
CUT TO

CLOSE SHOT - PRIMALIST
Who is bleeding from the nose and mouth and is momentarily out
of breath.
PRIMALIST
That's much better! We're really getting somewhere now . . . hey!
Where . . .
O.S. SOUND of footsteps: SOUND of a door opening.
PRIMALIST looks concerned.
HILDY
(raggedly, receding)
AAAAAaaaaaaaaaaah . . . sh—
SOUND of door slamming.
FADE OUT
#
I passed out, right there on the thrust of Kitten's enlightenment.
I was only gone a few seconds, during which I re-lived a particularly
fruitless episode early in my Quest; sort of a comic within a comic. I really
wish that Shouter, Screamin' Sabina, had had cojones. My kick would have
been right in the spiritual center.
"What it was," I told Kitten as he helped me to my feet, "was the most
powerful orgasm of my life. Jesus, Kitten, I think you've got something
here. And this was only lesson one? Man, sign me up! I want to get into
the advanced classes right away. I never would have dreamed it was
possible to get off that way, much less such a . . . such an earthquake!

Wow!"
I fluttered on like that for a while, probably sounding a lot like I had
many, many years ago when I first discovered what that doohickey was for,
when a sign from the outside world finally penetrated the golden haze of
contentment. Kitten was frowning.
"You weren't supposed to do that," he said. "The point is
enlightenment, not mere physical pleasures."
"Goodbye," I said.
#
At least Cricket didn't seem to mind if I pursued mere physical
pleasures. It didn't take any five hours, either. The first of many came about
five minutes after we began, him still fully dressed, pants around his knees.
After that we settled down a bit and carried on far into the night.
It was my first sex since Kitten Parker. I hadn't even thought about it in
all that time.
I didn't pass out during any of the orgasms, but it was special in another
way. When we finally seemed to be through, I was still wearing most of
what I'd gone to bed with, and there was a reason for that: Cricket liked it.
So many of our words come from a time when, by all reports, sex was
even more screwed-up than it is today, unlikely as that seems. Call it a
perversion? Seems very judgmental to me, but then they called
masturbation self-abuse, and I don't even like the flavor of the word
masturbation. You can call it a fetish, a fixation. A "sexual preference,"
how's that for neutral? Bland is more like it. Call it what you wish, we all
like different things. The Duke of Bosnia likes pain, preferably with the
teeth. Fox liked tearing clothes off; Cricket liked to have me leave them on.
He liked silk and satin and lace "unmentionables," and he liked to watch me
take a few of them off.
What made it special was that he hadn't known he liked that. He hadn't
known much of anything. He was still a novice in this business of being a
man. Helping him find it out about himself was a thrill for me, the kind you
don't get too often in this life. I could only recall three other instances and
the last had been about seventy years ago. By the time you're fifty or so
you're unlikely to discover a new preference in yourself, or anybody else.
"I was beginning to think I really was a single-sexer," he said, when it
seemed we were finally through. My head was tucked up beneath his arm,

that hand stroking slowly over the curve of my hip, him leaning back,
propped up on my best feather pillows, a cup of hot tea carefully cradled on
his belly. I'd got up to brew the tea. He'd watched me the whole time. He
took little sips now and then between his amazed sighs, and I'd trained him
to give me sips when I ran a nail over the line of hair on his tummy.
"Something just clicked," he said. I'd heard this line several times
already, but the sound of his voice was soothing me. "It just clicked."
"Mmm-hmmm," I said.
"It just clicked. I told you I'd been with women before. It was fun. I
had a great time. Orgasms, the whole bit. I liked being with women, just
about as much as being with men. You know?"
"Mmm-hmmm," I said.
"But I haven't been having much luck with women since the Change. It
just didn't seem very special, you know? Not with guys, either, for that
matter, not like it was when I was female. I was thinking about Changing
back. This thing just wasn't giving me much pleasure." He flicked his
exhausted new toy with his thumb. "You know?"
"Mmm-hmmm," I said, and shifted a little to put my cheek against his
chest. If I'd had any complaint it was that, when flipping through the Toys
for Boys catalog, he'd ordered his from the extra-large column. I don't know
why first-time Changers do that—they'd just been girls, right? and they had
to know that more is not better, that one size truly does fit all—but I'd seen it
happen many times before. Some little relay clicks, and when it's time to
make the decision between hung and hung!, a great many opt for the large
economy size. Strange are the ways of the human mind, doubly so when it
comes to sex.
"But something just clicked. For the first time I looked at a female body
and I didn't just think 'Gosh, isn't she cute,' or 'She'd be fun to have sex with,'
or . . . or anything like that. It clicked, and I wanted you. I had to have
you." He shook his head. "Who can figure a thing like that?"
I thought, who indeed, but I said "Mmm-hmmm." What I'd been
thinking before that was I could have a discreet word with him later, or
maybe have a friend plant the suggestion concerning excess yardage. It had
been a minor complaint, no question, but there was also no question it would
be even better with more normal equipment, next time.
I was already thinking about the next time.

#
No more digressions, no more cutaways to Hildy's Quest.
None were any more enlightening than the handful I've detailed. In
spite of that, I planned to keep on with my slog through the shabbier
neighborhoods of religion, philosophy, and therapy. Why? Well, the
answer might really be out there, somewhere. Just because you've been
dealt a thousand hands of nothing much doesn't mean the next deal won't
turn up the Royal Flush. And I saw no reason why the "answer," if it
existed, should be any less likely to be with the kooks than with the more
respected, conventional snake-oil salesmen. Hell, I knew something about
the established religions and philosophies, I'd been hearing about them for a
hundred years and they'd never given me anything. That's why I'd been
going to the snake-handlers instead of the Flacks.
There was another reason. While I did pretty well during the week,
what with the Texian and school to keep me busy, weekends were still pretty
shaky. If I gave the impression that my Quest was being handled by a tough,
cynical, self-assured woman of the world, I gave the wrong impression.
Picture instead a ragged, wild-eyed, unkempt Seeker, jumping at every loud
noise, always alert for feelings of self-destruction she wasn't even sure she'd
recognize. Picture a woman who had seen the bullet flying toward her face,
had felt the rope pull tight around her neck, watched the blood flow over the
bathroom floor. We're talking desperation here, folks, and it moved in and
sprawled all over the sofa every Friday evening, like the most unforgettable
advertising jingle you ever heard.
Maybe it was the Quest itself making me nervous? I thought of that,
stayed home one weekend. I didn't sleep at all, I just kept singing that jingle.
The good news was my list of places to go, people to see, was a good
five years long now, and I was adding new discoveries at almost the same
rate I was crossing them off. As long as there was one more whacko to talk
to, one more verse of Amazing Grace to sing in one more ramshackle
tabernacle, I felt I could hang on.
So maybe God was looking after me. The chief danger seemed to be
that he might bore me to death before I was finished.
Our passions spent, Cricket's mouth finally having stopped telling me
how everything had just clicked, we lay quietly in each other's arms for a
long time, neither of us very sleepy. He was still too wound up about the
new world that had opened to him, while I was thinking thoughts I hadn't

thought in a very long time.
He put his hand on my chin and I looked up at him.
"You really like it here, don't you?" he said.
I nuzzled into his chest. "I like it here very much."
"No, I meant—"
"I know what you meant." I kissed him on the neck, then sat up and
faced him. "I've got a place here, Cricket. I'm doing things I like. The
people in here may be losers, but I like them, and I like their children. They
like me. There's talk about running me for mayor of New Austin.
"You're kidding."
I laughed. "There's no way I'd take it. A politician is the last thing I'd
want to be. But I'm touched they thought of me."
"Well, I've got to admit the place seems to agree with you." He patted
my belly. "Looks like you're putting on some weight."
"Too much chili beans, Chinese food, and apple pie." And way too
much Kitten Parker. The bastard, telling me we weren't supposed to get any
pleasure out of it.
"I guess you've managed to surprise me," he said. "I really thought you
were in trouble. I still think maybe you are, but not the kind I thought."
You don't know the half of it, babe, I thought. "This place seems to agree
with you," he went on. "I don't know when I've seen you looking so happy,
so . . . radiant."
"How long ago did you get your Change?"
"About a month."
"Some of that's your cock talking, idiot. Things are still colored for you.
It's called lust."
"Could be. But only part of it." He glanced at his thumbnail. "Uh . . .
listen, I hadn't planned to stay out the night—"
"You can go home if you want to." You swine.
"No, I was wondering if I could stay over? But I'll have to call the sitter,
I'm already late."
"You have a human sitter?"
"Only the best for my little Buster."

I kissed him and got up as he was making the call. I took off the rest of
my clothes, hearing him whispering in the background. Then I stepped out
onto the porch.
I hadn't been sleeping a lot. Though the nights tend to be cold, I often
walked them like that, nude, in the moonlight. Cricket was wrong if he
thought I was happy—the best I could claim was to be happier here than
anywhere else I could think of—and the nearest I came to happiness was on
these nocturnal rambles. Sometimes I'd be out for hours, and come back
shivering and pile under the quilts. In that snugness I was usually able to
drift off.
Tonight I couldn't stay gone long. I noted there was enough moonlight
for Cricket to find his way to the outhouse, then hurried back inside.
He was already asleep .I went around dousing the lamps, then lit a
candle and carried it to the bed. I sat down carefully, not wanting to wake
him, and just looked at his sleeping face there in the candlelight for the
longest time.

CHAPTER NINETEEN

The Bicentennial Commemoration of the Invasion of the Earth had to
qualify as the slickest public relations job of the century. Back when Walter
first summoned me and Brenda to his office with his idea of a series of
Invasion stories I had laughed in his face. Now, exactly one year later, every
politician in Luna was trying to claim the whole thing was his idea.
But one man was responsible, and his name was Walter Editor.
Brenda and I played our small part. The articles were well-received by
the public—somewhere or other I've got a parchment from some civic
organization commending me for excellence in journalism for one of them—
was it the Kiwanis or the Elks?—but the ground had been prepared for over
a year by the P.R. firm Walter had hired at his own expense. By the time of
Silvio's assassination sentiment was growing for a public display. You
couldn't call it a celebration, it hadn't been a proud day in human history. It
had to include a memorial for the billions of dead, that was certain. The tone
of the thing should be one of sadness and resolve, all seemed to agree. If
you asked them what was being resolved—the recapture of Earth and
extermination of the Invaders, is that what you had in mind?—you got an
uncomfortable shrug in reply, but dammit, we ought to be resolute! Hell,
why not? Resolution doesn't cost anything.
But the commemoration was going to. It kept snowballing with nary a
voice raised against it (Walter's fine hand again), until by the time the Great
Day arrived every pisspot enclave in Luna was holding some kind of
shindig.
Even in Texas, where we avoid as much outside news as we can, they
were having a barbecue as big as Alamo Day. I was sorry I was going to be
missing it, but I'd promised Brenda I'd go with her, and besides . . . Cricket
was going to be there.
Yes, dear hearts, Hildy was in love. Please hold your applause until I
can determine if the feeling is mutual.
#
All the Eight Worlds were commemorating the day; Pluto and Mars had
actually created a permanent yearly holiday to be known as Invasion Day,
and the betting was that Luna would soon follow suit. And Luna, being the
most populous planet, hated to follow any of the seven worlds in anything

and so, being the most populous planet and the Refuge of Humanity as well
as the Front-Line Planet and the Bulwark of the Race—not to mention the
First to Get Our Asses Whipped if the Invaders ever decided to continue
what they started . . . Luna being all that, and more, had determined to put on
the biggest and bestest of all the eight festivals, and King City being the
largest city in Luna made it seem a natural site for the planet-wide Main
Event, and Armstrong Park being over twenty times the size of the vanished
Walt Disney Universe, it just seemed to follow that the thing ought to be
held there, and that was where I was going that fine Solar Evening when all I
really wanted to do was stroll down Congress Street, Cricket on my arm, and
eat cotton candy and maybe bob for apples.
And hey, sure it wasn't a celebration, but what's a holiday without
fireworks?
That's the only reason I'd agreed to go, Brenda's promise that I could see
the whole thing a safe distance from the madding crowds. The fireworks
themselves didn't scare me; I liked fireworks, hated crowds of strangers.
The tube trip almost killed me, though. We'd deliberately decided to
start out quite early to avoid the crush on the tubes, but what one genius can
think up, another can duplicate, so the trains were already jammed with
people who'd had the same idea. Worse, these were people planning to
rough it on the surface, away from the eight gigantic temporary domes set up
for the show, so they had brought their camping gear. The aisles and
overhead racks were piled high with luggage carts, beer coolers, inflatable
five-room tents, and 3.4 children per family. It got so bad they started
hanging small children from the overhead straps, where they dangled and
giggled. Then it got worse. The train stopped taking passengers long before
it arrived at Armstrong. My stop was three short of the park, and I soon saw
there would be no point in fighting my way out, so I rode it to the end of the
line—gaped in horror at the masses already assembled there—was disgorged
by an irresistible human tide, then re-boarded and rode it back, empty, to
Dionysius Station.
Where I sat down on a bench, my suit and picnic hamper beside me, and
just shook for a while, and watched about a dozen human sardine cans
rumble by in one direction and a like number return. Then I grabbed my
gear and went up the stairs to the surface.
After returning from my frolics with the Alphans, I'd found my suit on
the foot of my bed in my cabin. I don't know who brought it there. But I
didn't want it anymore, so one Saturday I took it back to the shop, meaning

to have them fix the faceplate and sell it on consignment. The salesman took
one look at the hole and before I had a chance to explain I was being ushered
into the manager's office and he promptly fainted dead away. None of them
had ever seen a broken faceplate before. So I shut up, and soon found
myself in possession of their top-of-the-line model, plus five years of free
air, courtesy Hamilton's Outdoor Outfitters. I made no demands and was
asked to sign no disclaimers; they simply wanted me to have it. They're
probably still chewing their knuckles, waiting for the lawsuit.
I climbed into this engineering wonder, and that special new-suit aroma
went a long way toward calming me down. I'd worried it might stir entirely
different associations—how about that cute point-of-view shot of a piece of
the faceplate tumbling away?—but instead the low whirs and hums and the
pure luxurious feel of the thing did wonders. Too bad they won't let you
wear suits in the tube; with this on, I could have handled anything.
Checking the pressure seals on the hamper, I walked into the lock and
out onto the surface.
#
"You been waiting long?" I asked.
"Couple hours," Brenda said.
She was leaning on the side of her rental rover, which she'd driven all
the way from a suburb of King City, the nearest place you could rent one. I
apologized for being so late, told her of the nightmare in the train, how I
wished I'd come with her instead of "saving time" by tubing out.
"Don't worry about it," she said. "I like it out here."
I could already tell that, mostly by looking at her suit. It was a good
one, had no rental logo on it, and though in perfect shape, showed signs of
use it couldn't have acquired unless she regularly spent time in it. Also by
the easy way she stood and moved in it, something most Lunarians never get
enough suit time to achieve.
The rover was a good one, too. It was a pick-up model, two seats side
by side, a flat bed in back where I tossed my hamper along with her much
bigger pile of things. They have a wide wheelbase to compensate for being
so top-heavy with the big solar panel above, which swings to constantly
present itself to the sun. The sun being almost at the horizon just then, the
vehicle was at its most awkward, with the panel hanging out to the right
side, perpendicular to the ground. I had to crawl over Brenda's seat to get to

mine because the panel blocked the door.
"I forget," I said, as I settled myself in the open seat. "Will we be going
into the sun to get there?"
"Nope. South for a while, then we'll have the sun at our backs."
"Good." I hated riding behind the panel. It's not that I didn't trust the
autopilot; I just liked to see where I was going.
She told the rover to giddyup, and it did, right along the broad, smooth
highway. Which is why we'd chosen Dionysius Station in the first place,
because it's right on one of the scarce surface roads on Luna, which is not a
place where the wheeled vehicle was ever a primary mode of transport.
People move on elevators, escalators, beltways, maglev/tube trains, the
occasional hoverbus. Goods go by the same ways, plus pneumomail tubes,
linac free-trajectory, and rocket. Recently there'd been something of a fad in
wheeled surface rovers, two- and four-wheeled, but they were all-terrain and
quite rugged, no roads needed.
The road we were on was a relic from a mining operation abandoned
before I was born. From time to time we passed the derelict hulks of ore
carriers at the side of the road, mammoth things, not looking much different
from the day they'd been stripped and left there. Some economic vagary of
the time had made it a better idea to actually smooth out a road surface for
them. Then the road had been used for another half century as the conduit
between King City and its primary dumping ground. It was still glasssmooth, and quite a novel way to travel.
"This sucker moves right along, doesn't it?" I said.
"It'll reach three hundred kay on the straightaways," Brenda said. "But
it's gotta slow way down for the curves, especially ones to the left." That
was because the rover's center of gravity was at its worst at sunrise and
sunset, with the big panel canted on its side, she explained. Also, the
banking of the road was not great, and since we were going to be staying out
after dark, she'd had to carry ten batteries, which added a lot to our inertia
and could easily make us skid off the road, since the tire traction wasn't as
much as she'd prefer. She told me all this with the air of someone who'd
done this many times before, someone who knew her machine. I wondered
if she could drive it.
I got my answer when we turned off the road, and she asked if I minded.
Actually, I did—we're not used to putting our lives in other people's hands,
only into the hands of machines—but I said I didn't. And I needn't have

worried. She drove with a sure hand, never did anything stupid, never
overcontrolled. We took off across the plains toward the rising rim of
Delambre, just becoming visible over the horizon.
When we reached the bottom of the slope a Black Maria landed in front
of us, blue lights flashing. A cop got out and came over to us. He must have
been bored, since he could have used his radio, or simply interrogated our
computer.
"You're entering a restricted area, ma'am," he said.
Brenda showed him the pass Liz had given her and he examined it, then
her.
"Didn't I see you on the tube?" he asked, and she said he might have,
and he said sure, you were on the such-and-such show, now how about that?
He said he'd loved it and she said aw, shucks, and by the time he finally let
us go he'd been flirting so outrageously I'm convinced we hadn't needed the
pass at all. He actually asked for her autograph, and she actually gave it.
"I thought he was going to ask for your phone code," I said, when he'd
finally lifted off.
"I thought I was going to give it to him," she said, and grinned at me. "I
keep thinking I ought to give guys a try."
"You could do better than that."
"Not since you Changed." She jammed in the throttle and we sprayed
dust behind us as we charged up the rounded rim of the crater.
#
Delambre isn't a huge crater like Clavius or Pythagoras or any number
of celestial bullet holes on the farside, but it's big enough. When you're
standing on the rim you can't see the other side. That's plenty big for me.
Still, it would look just like a hundred others except for one thing: the
junkyard.
We re-cycle a lot of things on Luna. We have to; our own natural
resources are fairly meager. But we're still a civilization driven by a market
economy. Sometimes cheap and plentiful power and the low cost of
boosting bulk raw materials in slow orbits combine to make it just too damn
much trouble and not cost-effective to sort through and re-process a lot of
things. Fortunes have been lost when a bulk carrier arrives with X million
tonnes of Whoosisite from the mines on Io, having been in secret transit for

thirty years disguised and listed as an Oort comet. Suddenly the bottom falls
out of the market for Whoosisite, and before you know it you can't give the
stuff away and it's being carted out to Delambre by the hundred-tonne
bucketload. To that add the twenty-thousand-year half-life radioactives in
drums guaranteed to last five centuries. Don't forget to throw in obsolete
machines, some cannibalized for this or that, others still in working order but
hopelessly slow and not worth taking apart. Abandon all that stuff out there,
and salt in that ceramic horror you brought home to Mom from school when
you were eight, that stack of holos you kept for seventy years and can't even
remember who's in them, plus similar treasures from millions of other
people. Top it with all the things you can't find a use for from every sewage
outflow in Luna, mixed with just enough water so it'll flow through a pipe.
Bake on high for fourteen days, freeze for fourteen more; continue doing
that for two hundred years, adding more ingredients to taste, and you've
created the vista that met us from the lip of Delambre.
The crater's not actually full, it just looks that way from the west rim.
"Over there," Brenda said. "That's where I said I'd meet Liz."
I saw a speck on the horizon, also sitting on the rim.
"How about letting me drive?" I asked.
"You can drive?" It wasn't an unreasonable question; most Lunarians
can't.
"In my wild youth, I drove the Equatorial Race. Eleven thousand klicks,
very little of it level." No point in adding I'd blown the transmission a
quarter of the way through.
"And I was lecturing you on how to handle a rover. Why don't you ever
shut me up, Hildy?"
"Then I'd lose half of my amusing stories."
I switched the controls over to the British side of the car and took off. It
had been many years since I'd driven. It was lots of fun. The rover had a
good suspension; I only left the ground two or three times, and the gyros
kept us from turning over. When I saw her gripping the dash I throttled
back.
"You'd never make a race driver. This is smooth."
"I never wanted to be a race driver. Or a corpse."
#

"I feel like a Girl Scout," I told Brenda as I helped her spread out the
tent.
"What's wrong with that? I earned all the surface pioneering merit
badges."
"Nothing wrong. I was one, too, but that was ninety years ago."
She wasn't nearly that far removed from scouting, and she still took it
seriously. Where I'd have just pulled the rip cord and let it go at that, she
was a fanatic about saving energy, and ran a line from the rover's solar panel
to the tent's power supply, as if the reactor wouldn't last a fortnight on its
own. When the tent was arranged to her satisfaction she pulled the cord and
it shuddered and flopped as it filled with air, and in ten seconds we had a
five-meter transparent hemisphere . . . which promptly frosted up inside.
She got on her knees and crawled into the igloo-type lock and I zipped it
behind her to save her squirming around, and she told me this model had
automatic zippers, so there had been progress since my childhood. She
fiddled with the air controls while I stacked blankets and pillows and
thermoses and the rest of our gear in the lock—got to get it well-packed,
don't want to waste air by cycling the lock too much—then I stood around
outside while she brought it all in and got the temperature and pressure and
humidity adjusted. When I got in and took off my helmet it was still on the
cool side. I wrote my name in the frost like I remembered doing on longago camping trips; it soon melted, and the dew was absorbed . . . and the
dome seemed to vanish.
"It's been too long," I said. "I'm glad you brought me here."
For once she knew exactly what I meant. She stopped her fussing
around and stood with me and we just looked around without saying
anything.
Any beauty on Luna is going to be a harsh sort of beauty. There's
nothing benevolent or comforting to see anywhere—much like West Texas.
This was the best way to see it, in a tent invisible to our eyes, as if we were
standing on a black circular pad of plastic with nothing between us and
vacuum.
It was also the best time of day to see it; the Lunar Day, I mean. The
sun was very close to the horizon, the shadows were almost infinitely long.
Which helped, because half our vista was of the biggest garbage dump on
the planet. There's a funny thing about shadows like that. If you've never
seen snow, go to Pennsylvania the next time they've scheduled it and watch

how snow can transform the most mundane—even ugly—scene into a
magical landscape. Sunlight on the surface is like that. It's hard and bright
as diamond, it blasts everything it touches and yet it does no damage;
nothing moves, the billion facets of dark and light make every ordinary
object into a hard-edged jewel.
We didn't look west; the light was too dazzling. To the south we saw
the rolling land falling away to our right, the endless heaps of garbage to the
left. East was looking right out over Delambre, and north was the hulk of
the Robert A. Heinlein, almost a mile of derelict might-have-been starship.
"You think they'll have any trouble finding us?" Brenda asked.
"Liz and Cricket? I wouldn't think so. Not with the old Heinlein over
there. How could you miss it?"
"That's what I thought, too."
We set about little domestic chores, inflating the furniture, spreading a
few rugs. She showed me how to set up the curtain that turned the tent into
two not-very-private rooms, how to operate the little campstove. While we
were doing that, the show began. Not to worry; it was going to be a long
show.
I had to admit the artistic director had done well. This was to be a
commemoration of the billions dead on Earth, right? And at the latitude of
Armstrong Park, the Earth would be directly overhead, right? And if you
start the show at sundown, you'll have a half-Earth in the sky. So why not
make the Earth the center and theme of your sky show?
By fudging just a little you can begin the show when the old
International Dateline is facing Luna. Now picture it: as the Earth turns,
one by one the vanished nations of Old Earth emerge into the sunlight of a
new day. And as each one appears . . .
We were bathed in the red light of the flag of the Siberian Republic, a
rectangle one hundred kilometers long, hanging above us at a height
sufficient to blot out half the sky.
"Wow," Brenda said. Her mouth was hanging open.
"Double wow," I said, and closed my own mouth. The flag hung there
almost a minute, burning brightly, then sputtered out. We hurried to get
Brenda's boombox turned on, hung the big speakers on each side of the tent,
and were in time to hear the opening strains of "God Defend New Zealand"
as the Kiwi flag unfurled above us.

That's how it was to be for eighteen hours.
When Liz arrived she told us how it was done. The flag was a mesh
construction stuffed into a big container and blasted up from one of the pyro
bases, in Baylor-A, about forty klicks south of us, and Hyapatia and
Torricelli, to the east. When the shell reached the right height it burst and
rockets spread it out and it was set afire by radio control. Neat.
How do fireworks burn in a vacuum? Don't ask me. But I know rocket
fuels carry an oxidizer, so I guess it was some chemical magic like that.
However they did it, it knocked our socks off, me and Brenda, no more than
fifty clicks from the big firebase in Baylor, much closer than the poor hicks
in Armstrong, who probably thought they were getting one heck of a show.
And who cares if, from our vantage, the flags were distorted into trapezoids?
I sure didn't.
Brenda turned out to be a fountain of information about the show.
"They didn't figure it made sense to give a country like Vanuatu equal
time with, say, Russia," she said (we were looking at the ghastly flag of
Vanuatu at the time, listening to its improbable national anthem). "So the
major countries, ones with a lot of history, they'll get more of a pageant.
Like the Siberian Republic used to be part of some other country—"
"The U.S.S.R.," I supplied.
"Right. Says so right here." She had a massive souvenir program
spread out before us. "So they'll do more flags for that—the Tsarist flag,
historical stuff—"
"—and play the 'Internationale.'"
"—and folk themes, like what we heard from New Zealand."
They were telling us most of that on a separate radio channel, giving a
history of each country, pitched at an illiterate level. I turned it off,
preferring just the music, and Brenda didn't object. I'd have turned off the
television, too—Brenda had pasted a big screen to the south side of the
tent—but she seemed to enjoy the scenes of revelry from Armstrong and all
the other celebrations in all the major Lunar cities, so what the hell.
Get out an Earth globe and you'll quickly spot the major flaw in the
Earth-rotational program. For the first six hours only a few dozen countries
will swing into view. Even if you give the entire history of China and Japan,
there's going to be some gaps to fill, and how much can you say about Nauru
and the Solomon Islands? On the other hand, when dawn broke over Africa

and Europe the pyrotechs were going to be busier than a one-legged man in
an ass-kicking contest.
Not to worry. When they ran out of flags, that's when they trotted out
the heavy artillery.
From the first appearance of that red ensign, the sky was never dark.
There were the conventional shells, starbursts in all the colors of the
rainbow. Without air to impede their flight they could be placed with
pinpoint precision—one thing Lunarians understand is ballistics. They were
also perfectly symmetrical, for the same reason.
You want more? In the vacuum, it was possible to produce effects
never seen on Earth. Huge gas canisters could produce a thin atmosphere,
locally, temporarily, upon which tricks of ionization could be played. We
were treated to auroral curtains, washes of color in which the entire sky
turned blue or red or yellow, then flickered magically. Shrapnel shells filled
the sky with spinning discs no bigger than a coin, which were then swept by
searchlights to twinkle as no stars ever had on Luna, then exploded by lasers.
Still not satisfied? How about a few nukes? Brenda's program said
there would be over one hundred special fission shells, an average of one
every ten minutes for the duration of the show. These were detonated in
orbit and used to propel literally thousands of regular pyro shells into bursts
over a thousand klicks wide. The first one went off at the end of the
Vanuatu National Anthem, and it rattled our teeth, and then it went on
exploding, and exploding, and exploding. Glorious!
And don't think I didn't hear that! You're complaining that sound
doesn't travel in a vacuum. Of course it doesn't, but radio waves do, and you
obviously never listened to Brenda's top-of-the-line boombox cranked up to
full volume. Those poor folks who watch fireworks in an atmosphere have
to wait for the sound to arrive, too, and they get a chance to brace for it; we
got it instantaneously, no warning, a flash of hurting light and a kaBOOOOOOOM!
Sometimes wretched excess is the only thing that will do.
#
"They say this place is haunted."
We'd just been treated to the national anthem of Belau and its flag had
faded from the sky (a big yellow circle on a blue field, if you're keeping
score at home), and two things had dawned on us. One, you need a breather

from wretched excess from time to time, or it gets . . . well, wretched.
Between us we'd emitted not even one "wow" at the last three nukes, and I
was thinking of suggesting we switch to Top 40 for an hour or so. Somehow
I thought I could survive missing the playing of Negara Ku (My Country;
Mayalsia) and Sanrasoen Phra Barami ("Hail to our King! Blessings on our
King! Hearts and minds we bow/ To Your Majesty now!" words by H.R.H.
Prince Narisaranuvadtivongs). And two, Liz and Cricket were three hours
late.
"Who's they?" I asked, munching on a drumstick of Hildy's Finest
WesTex Fried Chicken. Hunger had overcome the demands of politeness;
Brenda had miked a few pieces, and the hell with Liz and Cricket. I was
eyeing the beer cooler as well, but neither of us wanted to get too much of a
head start.
"You know," she said. "'They.' Your primary news source."
"Oh, that 'they.'"
"Seriously, though, I've heard from several people who've come out to
visit the old Heinlein. They say they've seen ghosts."
"Walter put you up to this, didn't he," I said.
"I've talked to him about it. He thinks there may be a story in it."
"Sure there is, but there's no need to come out here and interview a
spook. That kind of story, you just make it up. Walter must have told you
that."
"He did. But this isn't your ordinary filler story, Hildy, I mean it. The
people I interviewed, some of them were scared."
"Give me a break."
"I've been coming out here and bringing a good camera. I thought I
might get a picture."
"Come on. What do you think the Nipple's photo department is for?
Dummying up just that kind of pic, that's what."
She didn't say anything about it for a while, and we watched several
more ghost flags in the sky. I found myself eyeing the Heinlein. And no,
I'm not superstitious, just godawful curious.
"Is that why you've been camping out so much?" I asked. "The story's
not worth it."
"Camping . . . oh, no," and she laughed. "I've camped out a lot all my

life. I find if very . . . peaceful out here."
Another long silence went by, or as silent as it could be with nukes
exploding outside and her boombox turned down to a low rumble. At last
she got up and walked to stand by the invisible plastic wall of the tent. She
leaned her head against it. And by the rockets red glare, she told me
something I'd have been a lot happier not hearing.
"Ever since I met you," she began, "I've thought I could tell you
something I've never told anybody else. Not a soul." She looked at me. "If
you don't want to hear it, please say so now, 'cause if I get started I don't
think I'll be able to stop."
If you could have told her to shut up, I don't want to know you. I didn't
need this, I didn't want it, but when a friend asks something like that of you,
you say yes, that's all there is to it.
"Make it march," I said, and glanced at my watch. "I don't want to miss
the Laotian National Anthem."
She smiled, and looked back out over the landscape.
"When you first met me . . . well, later, that first time I came out to
Texas to see you, you probably noticed something unusual about me."
"You're probably referring to your lack of genitalia. I'm observant that
way."
"Yes. Did you ever wonder about it."
Had I? Not much actually. "Ah . . . I guess I thought it was something
religious, or cultural, something your parents believed. I remember thinking
it wasn't a nice thing to do to a child, but not my business."
"Yes. Not a nice thing to do. And it did have to do with my parents.
With my father."
"I don't know a lot about fathers," I said, still hoping she'd change her
mind. "I'm like most; mom never told me who he was."
"I knew mine. He lived with me and my mother. He started raping me
when I was about six. I've never had the nerve to ask my mother if she knew
about it, I didn't even know there was anything wrong with it, I thought it
was what I was supposed to do." Standing there, looking out at the surface,
the words spilling out of her but calm, calm, no hint of tears. "I don't know
how I learned it wasn't something my friends did, maybe I started to talk
about it and picked up something, some attitude, some beginning of horror,

something that made me shut up about it to this day. But it went on for
years and I thought about turning him in, I know that's what you're
wondering, why didn't I do it, but he was my father and he loved me and I
thought I loved him. But I was ashamed of us, and when I turned twelve I
went and had . . . it . . . removed, closed up, eradicated so he couldn't put it
in me anymore, and I know now the Minor's Referee who let me get it done
in spite of dad's objections had figured out what was going on because she
kept saying I should bring charges, but all I wanted was for him to stop.
And he did, he never touched me from that day on, hardly spoke to me, for
that matter. So I don't know why it is that some females prefer the company
of other females, but that's why for me, it's because I can't deal with males,
only when I met you, well, not too long after I met you, I fell badly, madly
in love with you. Only you were a boy, which drove me crazy. Please don't
worry about it, Hildy, I've got it under control, I know there's things that just
can't happen, and you and me are one of them. I've heard you talking about
Cricket and I ought to be jealous because she and I were making love, but it
was just for fun, and besides Cricket's a boy now, too, and I wish you all the
happiness. So my secret's out, and another one is I arranged it so you and I
would be alone for a little while out here, the place I always come, always
came when I wanted to get away from him. This is rotten and I know it, but
I've thought about it a long time and I can live with it. I won't cry and I
won't beg, but I'd like to make love to you just one time. I know you're
hetero, everyone I've talked to says that about you, but what I'm hoping is
it's just a preference, you're a Changer, you've made love to women before,
but maybe it's something you can't do when you're female. Or maybe you
don't want to or think it's a bad idea, and that's fine, too. I just had to ask,
that's all. I know I sound real needy but I'm not, not that way; I'll live either
way, and I hope we'll still be friends, either way. There. I didn't know if I'd
have the guts to say it all, but I did, and I feel better already."
I have a short list of things I never do, and right near the top is
surrendering to emotional blackmail. If there's a worse kind of sex than the
charity fuck, I haven't heard about it. And her words could be read as the
worst kind of whipped-puppy appeal and dammit, okay, she did have a right
to act like a whipped puppy but I hate whipped puppies, I want to kick them
for letting themselves be whipped . . . only the words didn't come out like
that, not out of that straight-backed, dry-eyed beanpole over there against the
blazing sky. She'd grown since I met her, and I thought this was part of the
growth. Why she'd picked me to unload on I don't know, but the way she'd
done it flattered me rather than obligated me.

So I told her no. Or would have, in a perfect world where I actually
follow my short list of things I never do. What I did instead was get up and
put my arms around her from behind and say:
"You handled that very well. If you'd cried, I'd have kicked your butt all
the way to King City."
"I won't cry. Not about that, not anymore. And not when it's over."
And she didn't.
#
Brenda had arranged for our moment of privacy by not telling me
Cricket had been assigned to cover the festivities at Armstrong Park. After
our little romantic interlude—quite pleasant, thanks for asking—she
confessed her ruse, and also that he was going to play hooky after the first
few hours and should be arriving any minute, so let's get dressed, okay?
I can't imagine why I worried about getting a head start on Liz. She got
a head start on all of us, drinking on her way out to Armstrong and all the
way back, as if Cricket needed any more causes for alarm.
She came barreling across the dunes in a four-wheel Aston Assbuster,
model XJ, with a reaction engine and a bilious tangerine-flake paint job.
This was the baby with four-point jets for boosting over those little potholes
you sometimes find on Luna—say, something about the size of Copernicus.
It couldn't actually reach orbit, but it was a near thing. She had decorated it
with her usual understated British good taste: holographic flames belching
from the wheel wells, a whip antenna with a raccoon tail on the tip, a
chrome-plated oversize skull sitting out front whose red eyes blinked to
indicate turns.
This apparition came skidding around the Heinlein and headed straight
for us. Brenda stood and waved her arms frantically and I had time to
ponder how thin a soap bubble a Girl Scout tent really was before Liz hit the
brakes and threw a spray of powdered green cheese against the tent wall.
She was out before the fuzzy dice stopped swinging, and ran around to
the left side to unbelt Cricket, who'd strapped himself tight enough to risk
gangrene of the pelvis. She picked him up and stuffed him in the airlock,
where he seemed to come to his senses. He crawled inside the tent, but
instead of standing he just hunkered there and I began to be concerned. I
helped him off with his helmet.
"Cricket's a little under the weather," Liz said, over Cricket's suit radio.

"I thought I ought to get him inside quick."
I realized he was saying something so I put my ear close to his lips and
he was muttering I think I'm gonna be okay, over and over, like a mantra.
Brenda and I got him seated, where he soon regained some color and a
passing interest in his surroundings.
We were getting a little water into him when Liz came through the lock,
pushing a Press-U-Kennel in front of her. At last Cricket came alive,
springing to his feet and letting fly with an almost incoherent string of
curses. No need to quote; Cricket wouldn't be proud of it, he feels curses
should be crafted rather than hurled, but he was too upset for that now.
"You maniac!" he shouted. "Why the hell wouldn't you slow down?"
"'Cause you told me you were getting sick. I figured I better get you
here quick as I could."
"I was sick because you were going so fast!" But then the fight drained
out of him and he sat down, shaking his head. "Fast? Did I say fast? We
came all the way from Armstrong, and I think she touched ground four
times." He explored his head with his fingers. "No, five times, I count five
lumps. She'd just look for a steep crater wall and say 'Let's see can we jump
over this sucker,' and the next thing I knew we'd be flying."
"We were moving along," Liz agreed. "I figure our shadow ought to be
catching up with us about now."
"'Thank god for the gyros,' I said. You remember I said that? And you
said 'What gyros? Gyros are for old ladies.'"
"I took 'em off," Liz told us. "That way you get more practice using the
steering jets. Come on, Cricket, you—"
"I'm going back with you guys," Cricket said. "No way I'm ever riding
with that crazy person again."
"We only have two seats," Brenda said.
"Strap me to the fender, I don't care. It couldn't be worse than what I
just went through."
"I think that calls for a drink," Liz said.
"You think everything calls for a drink."
"Doesn't it?"
But before going out to bring in her portable bar she took the time to

release her—what else?—English bulldog, Winston, from the kennel. He
came lumbering out, revising all my previous notions of the definition of
ugly, and promptly fell in love with me. More precisely, with my leg, which
he started humping with canine abandon.
It could have spoiled the beginning of a wonderful relationship—I like a
little more courtship, thank you—but luckily and against all odds he was
well-trained, and a swift kick from Liz discouraged him short of
consummation. After that he just followed me around, snuffling, mooning at
me with his bloodshot, piggy eyes, going to sleep every time I sat down. I
must admit, I took a shine to him. To prove it, I fed him all my leftover
chicken bones.
#
Eighteen hours is a long time for a party, but there is a certain type of
person with a perverse urge not to be the first to call it quits. All four of us
were that type of person. We were going to stick it out, by god, right
through to the playing of the Guatemalan National Anthem ("Guatemala,
blest land, home of happy race,/ May thine altars profaned be never;/ No
yoke of slavery weigh on thee ever/ Nor may tyrants e'er spit in thy face!").
(Yes, I looked at the globe, too, and if you think the whole planet was
going to stay up six hours for the national hymn of Tonga, you're crazier
than we were. Tonga got in her licks just after Western Samoa.)
No one was going to catch up with Liz, but we were soon matching her,
and after a while Cricket even forgot he was mad at her. Things got a bit
hazy as the celebration wore on. I can't actually remember much after the
Union Jack blazed in all its Britannic majesty. I remember that one mainly
because Liz had been nodding out, and Brenda got me and Cricket to stand
when "God Save the Queen" began to play, and we sang the second verse,
which goes something like this:
#
O Lord our God arise,
Scatter her enemies,
And make them fall:
Confound their politics,
Frustrate their knavish tricks,
On Thee our hopes we fix:
God save us all!

#
"God save us all, indeed," Cricket said.
"That's the most beautiful thing I ever heard," Liz sobbed, with the easy
tears of the veteran drunk. "And I think Winston needs to go wee-wee."
The mutt did seem in some distress. Liz had given him a bowl or two of
Guinness and I, after the chicken bones had no visible effect, had plied him
with everything from whole jalapeños to the bottlecaps from Liz's home
brew. I'd seen Cricket slip him a few of the sausages we'd been roasting
over the holographic campfire. All in all, this was a dog in a hurry. He was
running in tight circles scratching at the airlock zipper.
Turned out the monster was perhaps too well trained. He flatly refused
to do his business indoors, according to Liz, so we all set about stuffing him
into his pressure suit.
Before long we were all reduced to hysterical laughter, the sort where
you actually fall on the floor and roll around and start worrying about your
own bladder. Winston wanted to cooperate, but as soon as we'd get his hind
legs into the suit he'd start bouncing around in his eagerness and end up with
the whole thing bunched around his neck. So Cricket scratched his back,
which made the dog hold still and arch himself and lick his nose and we'd
get his front legs in and maybe one of his back legs, and then he'd start that
reflexive back leg jerking they do, and all was lost again. When we did get
all four legs into the right holes he thought it was time, and we had to chase
him and hold him down to get his air bottle strapped to his back, and at the
last moment he took a dislike to his helmet and tried to eat it—this was a
dog who made short work of steel bottlecaps, remember—and we had to put
on a spare seal and test it before we finally screwed him in tight, shoved him
in the lock, and cycled it.
Whereupon we laughed even harder at the spectacle of Winston running
from rock to rock lifting a leg for a squirt here and a dribble there, blissfully
unaware that it was all going into the waste pouch through the hose Liz had
fastened to his doggie dingus with a rubber band. Yes, folks, I said doggie
dingus: that's the level of humor we'd been reduced to.
#
Later, I remember that Brenda and Liz were napping. I showed Cricket

the wondrous curtain that turned the tent into two rooms. But he didn't get
it, and suggested we suit up and take a walk outside. I was game, though it
probably wasn't real wise considering I spent almost a minute trying to get
my right foot into the left leg of my suit. But the things are practically
foolproof. If Winston could handle one, I reasoned, how much trouble could
I get into?
So who should come trotting up as soon as we emerged? I might have
been in one sort of trouble right there, since he seemed to feel all bets were
off now that Liz was sleeping, but after pressing his helmet to my leg and
trying to sniff it and getting no results he sulked along behind us, probably
wondering why everything out here smelled of plexi and dog slobber.
I really don't want to sound too gay here, switching from that time with
Brenda to the hi-jinx of the Queen and her Consort. But that's the way it
happened; you can't arrange your life to provide a consistent dramatic line,
like a film script. It had rocked me, and I had no notion of how to deal with
it except to hold Brenda and hope that maybe she would cry. I still don't.
My god. The horror that exists all around us, un-noticed.
I said something like that to her, with the half-formed feeling that maybe
it would be good for her to approach it as a reporter.
"Did you ever wonder," I said, "why we spend all our time looking into
these trivial stories, when stories like that are waiting to be told?"
"Like what?" she said, drowsily. To be frank, it hadn't been all that
great for me, it never is with homosex, but she seemed to have enjoyed
herself and that was the important part. You can always tell. Something
glowed.
"Like what happened to you, dammit. Wouldn't you think, in this day
and age, that we'd have put that sort of . . . of thing behind us?"
"I hate it when people say 'in this day and age.' What's so special about
it? As opposed to, for instance, the day and age of the Egyptians?"
"If you can name even one of the Pharaohs I'll eat this tent."
"You're not going to make me mad, Hildy." She touched my face,
looked in my eyes, then nestled against my neck. "You don't need to, don't
you see that? this is the first and last time we'll ever be intimate. I know
intimacy frightens you, but you don't need—"
"It does not fr—"

"Besides, give me another, oh, eighty-three years and I'll recite every
Pharaoh from Akhenaton to Ramses."
"Ouch."
"It was in the program book. But this day and age is the only one I
know right now, and I don't know why you should think it's any different
from the day and age you grew up in. Were there child molesters back
then?"
"You mean the early Neolithic? Yeah, there were."
"And you thought the steady march of progress would eliminate them
any day now."
"It was a foolish thought. But it is a good story."
"You've been away from the Nipple too long, jerk. It's a terrible story.
Who'd want to read a depressing story like that? I mean, that there's still
child molesters? Everybody knows that. That's for sociologists, bless 'em.
Now one story, one really gruesome one, that's news. My story is just a stat
in the Sunday Supplement grinder; you can put it on file and run it once a
year, they'll all have forgotten it by then."
"You sound so much like me it's scary."
"You know it, babe. People read the Nipple to get a little spice in their
lives. They want to be titillated. Angered. Horrified. They don't want to be
depressed. Walter's always talking about The End Of The World, how we'd
cover it. Hell, I'd put it on the back page. It's depressing."
"You amaze me."
"I'll tell you what. I know more movie stars than everybody else in my
school put together. They call me, the minor ones, anyway. I love my work.
So don't tell me about the important stories we ought to be covering."
"That's why you got in the business? To meet celebrities?"
"Why did you get in the business?"
I didn't answer her then, but some vestigial concept of truth in media
forces me to say that hob-nobbing with the glittering people may have had
something to do with it.
But it really was amazing the changes a year had wrought in my little
Brenda. I didn't think I liked it. Not that it was any of my business, but
that's never stopped me in the past. At first I blamed the news racket itself,
but thinking about it a bit more I wondered if maybe that injured little girl,

that oh-so-good little girl who'd had herself sewed up rather than do what the
nice lady suggested and turn daddy in to the bad people . . . I wondered if
she might actually teach cynical old Hildy a thing or two about the bad old
world and how to get by in it.
"I'm sorry about not bringing Buster."
"Huh? What's that?"
"Luna to Hildy, come in Hildy, over."
"Sorry, my mind was wandering." It was Cricket, and we were walking
together on the surface. I even remembered going through the lock.
"I know I said I'd bring her so you could meet her, but she put up a big
fuss because she wanted to go with some friends to Armstrong, so I let her."
Something in his voice made me suspect he wasn't telling the whole
truth. I thought maybe he hadn't argued as hard as he might have. The only
thing I really knew about his daughter was that he was very protective of
her. I'd learned, through a little snooping, that none of his co-workers at the
Shit had ever met her; he kept work and family strictly segregated.
Which is not unusual in Lunar society, we're very protective of the little
privacy we have. But we'd known each other as man and woman for not
even a week at that point, and already there had been a series of these signs
that he . . . how should I put it? . . . was reluctant to let me deeper into his
life. To put it another way, I'd been tentatively plucking at the daisy of
devotion, and most of the petals were coming up he loves me not.
To be fair, I was un-used to being in love. I was out of practice at doing
it, had never been adept at it, was wondering if I'd forgotten how to go about
it. The last time I had really fallen, as they say, had been a teen-age crush,
and I'd assumed lo these eighty years that it was an affliction visited solely
on the young. So it could be that I wasn't communicating to him the tragic,
hopeless depth of my longing. Maybe I wasn't sending out the right signals.
He could be thinking, this is just old Hildy. Lot's o' laffs. This is probably
just the way she is when she's female, all gooey and cow-eyed and anxious
to bring me a hot cup of coffee in the morning and cuddle.
And to be brutal . . . maybe I wasn't in love. It didn't feel like that
distant adolescent emotion, but hardly anything did; I wasn't that person any
more. This felt more solid, less painful. Not so hopeless, even if he did
come right out and say he loved me not. Does this mean it wasn't love? No,
it meant I'd keep working at it. It meant I wouldn't want to run out and kill

myself . . . bite your tongue, you stupid bitch.
So was this the real turtle soup, or merely the mock? Or was it, at long
last, love? Provisional verdict: it would do till something better came along.
"Hildy, I don't think we should see each other anymore."
That sound is all my fine rationalizations crashing down around my
ears. The other sound is of a knife being driven into my heart. The scream
hasn't arrived yet, but it will, it will.
"Why do you say that?" I thought I did a good job of keeping the
anguish out of my voice.
"Correct me if I'm wrong. I get the feeling that you have . . . some
deeper than usual feelings about me since . . . since that night."
"Correct you? I love you, you asshole."
"Only you could have put it so well. I like you, Hildy; always have. I
even like the knives you keep leaving in my back, I can't imagine why. I
might grow to love you, but I have some problems with that, a situation I'm
a long ways from being over yet—"
"Cricket, you don't have to worry—"
"—and we won't get into it. That's not the main reason I want to break
this off before it gets serious."
"It's already—"
"I know, and I'm sorry." He sighed, and we both watched Winston go
haring off after some vacuum-loving bunny rabbit of his own imagination,
somewhere in the vicinity of the Heinlein. Only the top part of the immense
ship was in sunlight now. Sunset at Delambre came later than at Armstrong.
There was still enough light reflected from the upper hull for us to see
clearly, not the blazing brightness of full day, though.
"Cricket . . ."
"There's no sense hiding it, I guess," he said. "I lied to you. Buster
wanted to come, she'd like to meet you, she thinks my stories about you are
funny. But I don't want her to meet you. I know I'm protective of her, but
it's just my way; I don't want her to have a childhood like mine, and we
won't go into that, either. The thing is, you're going through something
weird, you must be or you wouldn't be living in Texas. I don't know what it
is, don't want to know, at least not right now. But I don't want it to rub off
on Buster."

"Is that all? Hell, man, I'll move tomorrow. I may have to keep
teaching for a few weeks till they can get a new—"
"It wouldn't do any good, because that's not all."
"Oh, goody, let's hear more of the things wrong with me."
"No jokes, for once, Hildy. There's something else that's bothering you.
Maybe it's tied up with your quitting the pad and moving to Texas, maybe it
isn't. But I sense something, and it's very ugly. I don't want to know what it
is . . . I would, I promise you, if not for my child. I'd hear you out, and I'd
try to help. But I want you to look me in the eye and tell me I'm wrong."
When a full minute had gone by and no eye contact had been made, no
denials uttered, he sighed again, and put his hand on my shoulder.
"Whatever it is, I don't want her to get mixed up in it."
"I see. I think."
"I don't think you do, since you've never had a child. But I promised
myself I'd put my own life on hold until she was grown. I've missed two
promotions because of that, and I don't care. This hurts more than that,
because I think we could have been good for each other." He touched the
bottom of my faceplate since he couldn't reach in and lift my chin, and I
looked up at him. "Maybe we still could be, in ten years or so."
"If I live that long."
"It's that bad?"
"It could be."
"Hildy, I feel—"
"Just go away, would you? I'd like to be alone."
He nodded, and left.
#
I wandered for a while, never getting out of sight of the bubble of light
that was the tent, listening to Winston barking over the radio. Why would
you put a radio in a dog's suit? Well, why not.
That was the kind of deep question I was asking myself. I couldn't seem
to turn my mind to anything more important.
I'm not good at describing the painful feelings. It could be that I'm not
good at feeling them. Did I feel a sense of emptiness? Yes, but not as awful

as I might have expected. For one thing, I hadn't loved him long enough for
the loss to leave that big a cavity. But more important, I hadn't given up. I
don't think you can, not that easily. I knew I'd call on him again, and hell,
I'd beg, and I might even cry. Such things have been known to work, and
Cricket does have a heart in there somewhere, just like me.
So I was depressed, no question. Despondent? Not really. I was miles
from suicidal, miles. Miles and miles and miles.
That was when I first noticed a low-grade headache. All those nanobots
in that cranium, you'd think they'd have licked the common headache by
now. The migraine has gone the way of the dodo, true, but those annoying
little throbbing ones in the temple or forehead seem beyond the purview of
medicine, most likely because we inflict them on ourselves; we want them,
on some level.
But this one was different. Examining it, I realized it was centered in
the eyes, and the reason was something had been monkeying with my vision
for quite some time. Peripherally, I'd been seeing something, or rather not
seeing something, and it was driving me crazy. I stopped my pacing and
looked around. Several times I thought I was on the track of something, but
it always flickered away. Maybe it was Brenda's ghosts. I was practically
touching the hull of the famous Haunted Ship; what else could it be?
Winston came bounding along, leaping into the air, just as if he was
chasing something. And at last I saw it, and smiled because it was so
simple. The stupid dog was just chasing a butterfly. That's probably what
I'd seen, out of the corner of my eye. A butterfly.
I turned and started back to the tent (the dog), thinking I'd have a drink
or two or three (was chasing) or, hell, maybe get really blotto, I think I had a
good excuse
a butterfly
and I turned around again but I couldn't find the insect, which made
perfect sense because we weren't in Texas, we were in Delambre and there's
no fucking air out here, Winston, and I'd about dismissed it as a drunken
whimsy when a naked girl materialized out of very thin air and ran seven
steps—I can see them now, in my mind's eye, clear as anything, one, two,
three, four, five, six, seven, and then gone again back to where ghosts go,
and she'd come close enough to me to almost touch her.
I'm a reporter. I chase the news. I chased her, after an indeterminate
time when I was as capable of movement as any statue in the park. I didn't

find her; the only reason I'd seen her at all was the very last rays of the sun
reflected from far overhead, not much more light than a good candle would
give. I didn't find the butterfly, either.
I realized the dog was nudging my leg. I saw a red light was blinking
inside his suit, which meant he had ten minutes of air left, and he'd been
trained to go home when he saw the light. I reached down and patted his
helmet, which did him no good but he seemed to appreciate the thought,
licking his chops. I straightened and took one last look around.
"Winston," I said. "I don't think we're in Kansas anymore."

CHAPTER TWENTY

Ezekiel saw the wheel. Moses saw the burning bush. Joe Smith saw the
Angel Moroni, and every electro-preacher since Billy Sunday saw a chance
at good ratings in prime time and more money than he could lift.
Hayseed farmers, asteroid miners and chronic drug abusers have seen
Unidentified Flying Objects and little guys who want to see our leaders.

Drunks see pink elephants and brontosaurs and bugs crawling all over
everything. The Buddha saw enlightenment and Mohammed must have seen
something, though I was never clear just what it was. Dying people see a
long tunnel full of light with all the people they hated while they were alive
standing at the end of it. The Founding Flack knew a good thing when he
saw it. Christians are looking to see Jesus, Walter is looking for a good
story, and a gambler is looking for that fourth ace to turn up; sometimes they
see these things.
People have been seeing things like that since the first caveman noticed
dark shadows stirring out there beyond the light of the campfire, but until the
day of the Bicentennial Hildy Johnson had never seen anything.
Give me a sign, O Lord, she had been crying, that I might know Thy
shape. And behold, the Lord sent unto her a sign.
A butterfly.
#
It was a Monarch butterfly, quite lovely in its orange and black, quite
ordinary at first glance, except for its location. But upon closer examination
I found something on its back, about the size of a gelatin capsule, that
looked for all the world like an air tank.
Yes, dear ones, never throw anything away. You don't know when you
might need it. I'd had no use for my optic holocam for quite a while, since
the Texian isn't equipped to print pictures. But Walter had never asked me
to give it back and I'd not gone to the bother of having it removed, so it was
still there in my left eye, recording everything I saw, faithfully storing it all
until capacity was exhausted, then wiping it to make way for the new stuff.
Many a wild-eyed prophet before me would have killed to have a holocam,
so he could prove to those doubting bastards he'd really seen those green
cocker spaniels get out of the whistling gizmo that landed on the henhouse.
Considering the number of cameras made between the Brownie and the
end of the twentieth century, you'd think more intriguing pictures would
have been taken of paranormal events, but look for them—I did—and you'll
come up with a bucket of space. After that, of course, computers got so
good that any picture could be faked.
But the only person I had to convince was myself. The first thing I did,
back in the tent, was to secure the data into permanent storage. The second
thing I did was to not tell anybody what I'd seen. Part of that was reporter's
instinct: you don't blab until the story's nailed down. The rest was

admission of the weaknesses flesh is heir to: I hadn't been the soberest of
witnesses. But more importantly . . . this was my vision. It had been granted
to me. Not to Cricket, that ingrate, who'd have seen it if he'd said he loved
me and thrown his arms around me and told me what a knuckle-headed dope
he'd been. Not to Miss Pulitzer Prize Brenda (you think that, just because I
gave her the big story, I wasn't jealous? You poor fool, you). Just me.
And Winston. How could I have thought that gorgeous hound was
ugly? The third thing I did back in the tent was give that most sublime
quadruped a pound of my best sausage, and apologize for not having
anything better—like a Pomeranian, or a Siamese.
#
We're not talking about the butterfly now. That was amazing, but a few
wonders short of a nonesuch.
It was an air tank on the insect's back. With suitable enlargement I
could make out tiny lines going from it to the wings. The images got fuzzy
when I tried to find out where they went. But I could guess: since there was
no air for it to fly in, and since it seemed to be flying, I deduced it was kept
aloft by reaction power, air squirting from the underside of its wings.
Comparing this specimen to one mounted in a museum I noted differences in
the carapace. A vacuum-proof shell? Probably. The air tank could dribble
oxygen into the butterfly's blood.
None of the equipment I could identify was what you'd call off-theshelf, but so what? Nanobots can build the most cunning, tiny machines,
much smaller than the air tank and regulator and (possibly) gyro I saw. As
for the carapace, that shouldn't be too hard to effect with genetic
engineering. So somebody was building bugs to live on the surface. So
what? All that implied was an eccentric tinkerer, and Luna is lousy with
them. And that's just the sort of hare-brained thing they build.
All this research was being done in bed, in Texas.
On my way home from the celebration I'd stopped at a store and bought
a disposable computer, television, recorder, and flashlight and put them in
my pocket and smuggled them past temporal customs. Easy. Everybody
does it, with small items, and the guards don't even have to be bribed. I
waited till nightfall, then got in bed and pulled the covers over my head,
turned on the light, unrolled the television, dumped the holocam footage into
the recorder and wiped all traces of it from my cerebral banks. Then I
started scanning the footage frame by frame.

Why all the secrecy? I honestly couldn't have told you at the time. I
knew I didn't want the CC to see this material but don't know why I felt it
was so important. Instinct, I guess. And I couldn't have guaranteed even
these measures would keep him from finding out, but it was the best I could
do. Using a throwaway number cruncher instead of hooking in to the
mainframe seemed a reasonable way to keep the data away from him, so
long as I didn't ever network it with any other system. He's good, but he's
not magic.
It was an hour's work to deal with the butterfly and file it under
Wonderments, Lepidopterous. Then I moved on to the miracle.
Height: Five foot two. Eyes: of blue. Hair: blonde, almost white,
shoulder-length, straight. Complexion: light brown, probably from tanning.
Apparent age: ten or eleven (no pubic hair or bust, two prominent front
teeth, facial clues). Distinguishing marks: none. Build: slender. Clothing:
none.
She could have been much older; a small minority prefer to Peter Pan it
through life, never maturing. But I doubted it, from the way she moved.
The teeth were a clue, as well. I pegged her for a natural, not modified, she
just grew that way.
She was visible for 11.4 seconds, not running hard, not bouncing too
high with each step. She seemed to come out of a black hole and fall back
into one. I was being methodical about this, so I got everything I could out
of those 11.4 seconds before moving on to the frames I was dying to
examine: the first one, and the last one.
Item: If she was a ghost, then ghosts have mass. I'd been unable to find
her footprints among the thousands of others there on the crater rim (I had
noted a lot of the prints had toes, but it meant nothing; lots of kids wear
boots that leave prints like bare feet), but the film clearly showed the prints
being made, the dust being kicked up. The computer studied the prints and
concluded the girl massed about what you'd expect.
Item: She was not completely naked. In a few frames I could see
biomagnetic thermosoles on the bottoms of her feet, a damn good idea if
you're going to run over the blazing rocks of the surface. There was also a
bit of jewelry sticking to her chest, a few inches above the left nipple. It was
brass-colored, and shaped more like a pressure fitting than anything else I
could think of. Conjecture: Maybe it was a pressure fitting. The snap-on
type, universally used to connect air hoses to tanks.

Item: In some of the early frames a slight mist could be seen in front of
her face. It looked like moisture freezing, as if she had exhaled. There was
no sign of respiration after that.
Item: She was aware of my presence. Between step four and step five
she turned her head and looked directly at me for half a second. She smiled.
Then she made a goofy face and crossed her eyes.
I made a few more observations, none of them seeming very relevant or
shedding any real light on the mystery. Oh, yes: Item: I liked her. Making
that face was just the sort of thing I would have done at her age. At first I
thought she was taunting me, but I watched it over and over and concluded
she was daring me. Catch me if you can, old lady. Doll-face, I plan to.
Then I spent most of the rest of the night analyzing just a few seconds of
images before and after her appearance. When I was done I wiped the data
from the computer, and for good measure, put it in with the glowing embers
of the fire in my kitchen stove. It crackled and popped nicely. Now the only
record of my experience was in the little recorder.
I slept with it under my pillow.
#
Next Friday, after putting the Texian to bed, I went back to Hamilton's
and purchased a two-man tent. If that puzzles you, you've never tried to live
in a one-man tent. I had it delivered to the rover rental office nearest the old
mining road, where I leased a vehicle from their second-hand fleet, paying
two months in advance to get the best rate. I had it tanked full of oxygen
and checked the battery level and kicked the tires and had them replace a
sagging leaf spring, and set off for Delambre.
I set up the tent in the exact spot where we'd been seven days before.
Sunday night I struck the tent, having seen nothing at all, and drove back to
park the rover in a rented garage.
The Friday after that, I did the same thing.
#
I spent all my weekends out at Delambre for quite a long time. It was
enough that, soon, I had to trade in my nice new suit for a maternity model.
If you've never worn one of those, don't even ask. But nothing was going to
keep me away from Delambre, not even a developing pregnancy.
It all made sense to me at the time. Looking back, I can see some
questions about my behavior, but I think I'd still do it again. But let's try to

answer a few of them shall we?
I only spent the weekends at the crater because I still needed Texas to
give my life some stability. I still would have kept coming back until the
end of the school term because I felt I had a responsibility to those who hired
me, and to the children. But the question didn't arise, because I needed the
job more than it needed me. Each Sunday evening I found myself longing
for my cabin. I guess a true Visionary would have been ashamed of me;
you're supposed to drop everything and pursue the Vision.
I did the best I could. Every Friday I couldn't get out of the disney fast
enough. I attended no more churches, unburdened my soul to no more
quacks.
It's a little harder explaining the pregnancy. A little embarrassing, too.
As part of my efforts to experience as much as possible of what life had been
like on Old Earth, I had had my menstrual cycle restored. I know it sounds
crazy. I'd expected it would be a one-time thing, like the corset, but found it
not nearly as onerous as Callie had cracked it up to be. I hadn't intended to
let it go on forever, I wasn't that silly, but I thought, I don't know, half a
dozen periods or so, then over and out. The rest is really no mystery at all.
It's just what happens to fertile nulliparous centenarians who know zip about
Victorian methods of birth control, and who are so un-wise as to couple with
a guy who swears he's not going to come.
The real mystery came after the rabbit died (I boned up on the
terminology after I got the news). Why keep it?
The best I can say is that I'd never ruled out child-bearing as something I
might do, some day, some distant day when I had twenty years to spare.
Naturally, that day never seemed to dawn. Having a baby is probably
something you have to want to do, badly, with an almost instinctual urge that
seems to reside in some women and not in others. Looking around me, I had
noted there were plenty of women who had this urge. Boy, did they have the
urge. I'd never felt it. The species seemed in fine shape in the hands of
these breeder women, and I'd never flattered myself that I'd be any good at
it, so it was always a matter of someday.
But enough unsuccessful and unplanned and un-understood suicide
attempts focuses the mind wonderfully. I realized that if I didn't do it now, I
might never do it. And it was the one major human experience I could think
of that I might want to have and had not had. And, as I said, I'd been
looking for a sign, O Lord, and this seemed like one. A bolt from the blue,
not on the order of the Girl and Butterfly, but a portent all the same.

Which simply meant that every Friday on my way to Delambre I gave
serious thought to stopping off and having the damn thing taken care of, and
every time, so far, had elected to keep it, not exactly by a landslide.
There's an old wives' tale that a pregnant woman should not visit the
surface. If that's true, why do they make maternity suits? The only danger
is of coming into labor while in the suit, and that's not much of a danger. An
ambulance can get you from any point on Luna to a birthing center in twenty
minutes. That was not a concern to me. Nor was I neglecting my duties as
an incubator. I got roaring drunk that once, but that's easily cured. Each
Wednesday I visited a check-up center and was told things were cooking
nicely. Each Thursday I dropped by Ned Pepper's office and, if he was
sober enough, let him poke me and thump me and pronounce me as fine a
heifer as he'd ever come across, and sell me a bottle of yellow elixir which
did wonders for my struggling rose bushes.
If I kept it to term, I intended to bear it naturally. (It was a male, but it
seems silly to think of an embryo as having a sex.) When I was about
twenty it seemed for a while that birthing was soon to be a thing of the past.
The large majority of women were rearing their pups in jars, often
prominently displayed on the living room coffee table. I watched many a
neighbor's blastocyst mature over the years, peering into the scope with all
the enthusiasm one usually brings to viewing Uncle Luigi's holos of his trip
to Mars. I watched many a mother scratching the bottle and cooing and googooing to her second-trimester fetus. I was present at a few de-cantings,
which were often elaborately catered, with hired bands and wrapped presents
and the whole megillah.
As is so often the case, it was a fad, not a tide of civilization. Some
studies came out suggesting that Screwtops did less well in later life than
Bellybusters. Other studies showed the opposite. Studies frequently do that.
I don't read studies. I go with my gut. The pendulum had swung back
toward the "healthy mother/child bonding of vaginal delivery" and against
the "birth trauma scars a child for life" folks, but my gut told me that, given
that I should do this at all, my gut was the proper place for it to grow. And
now that my uterus has been heard from, I will thank it to shut up.
#
The frames recording the girl's appearance and subsequent seeming exit
from this dimensional plane revealed several interesting things. She had not
materialized out of thin vacuum nor had she fallen out of and back into a
black hole. There were images before, and after.

I couldn't make a thing of them, given the low light and the mysterious
nature of the transubstantiation. But that's what computers are for. My fiveand-dime model chewed on the images of twisted light for a while, and came
up with the notion that a human body, wrapped in a perfect flexible mirror,
would twist light in just such a way. All you'd see would be distorted
reflections of the person's surroundings, so while not rendering one invisible,
it sure would make you hard to see. Up close it would be possible to make
out a human shape, if you were looking for it. From a distance, forget it. If
she stood still, especially against a background as shattered as the Delambre
junkyard, there would be no way to find her. I remembered the nagging
headache I'd had shortly before her little show. She'd been around before
she decided to reveal herself to me.
A search of the library found no technology that could produce anything
like what I had observed. Whatever it was, it could be turned off and on
very quickly; my holocam's shutter speed was well below a thousandth of a
second, and she was wrapped in the mirror in one frame, naked in the next.
She didn't take it off, she turned it off.
Looking for an explanation of the other singular thing about her, the
ability to run nude, even if for only seven steps, in a vacuum, produced a
few tidbits concerning the implantation of oxygen sources to dispense
directly into the bloodstream, research that had never borne profitable fruit
and had been abandoned as impractical. Hmmmm.
I put myself through a refresher course in vacuum survival. People have
lived after exposure of up to four minutes, which is when the brain starts to
die. They suffer significant tissue damage, but so what? Infants have lived
after even longer periods. You can do useful work for maybe a minute,
maybe a bit longer, work like scrambling into an emergency suit. Exposures
of five to ten seconds will likely rupture your eardrums and certainly hurt
like hell, but do you no other real harm. "The bends" is easily treatable.
So wait a minute, what's all this talk about a miracle? I determined in
fairly short order that what I'd seen was almost surely a technical marvel, not
a supernatural one. And I was a bit relieved, frankly. Gods are capricious
characters, and the biggest part of me had no desire to have it proved that
one really existed. What if you saw your burning bush and it turned out the
Power behind it was a psychopathic child, like the Christian God? He's
God, right? He's proved it and you've got to do what he tells you to do. So
what if he asks you to sacrifice your son on an altar to His massive ego, or
build a big boat in your back yard, or pimp your wife to the local honcho,

blackmail him, and give him a dose of clap? (Don't believe me? Genesis
12: 10-20. You learn the most interesting things in church.)
It didn't diminish the miracle one bit to know it was probably manmade. It excited me all the more. Somewhere out there, in that huge
junkyard, somebody was doing things nobody else knew how to do. And if
it wasn't in the library, the CC probably didn't know about it, either. Or if he
did, he was suppressing it, and if so, why?
All I knew was I wanted to talk to whoever had made it possible for that
little girl to wrap herself in a perfect mirror and make a face at me.
#
Which was easier said than done.
The first four weekends I simply camped out, did very little exploring. I
was hoping, since she'd come to me once, she'd do it again. No real reason
why she should, but again, why not?
After that I spent more time in my suit. I climbed a few alps of rubble,
but there didn't seem much point in it after the first few. It stretched as far as
the eye could see; there was no way to search it, or even a small part of it.
No, it seemed to me it was no coincidence the sighting had come at the
base of that monument to high hopes, the Starship Robert A. Heinlein. I set
about to explore as much of the old hulk as I could, but first I visited the
library again and learned something of his history. Herewith, in brief, is the
saga of failed dreams:
The Heinlein was first proposed in 2010, by a group known as the L5
Society. It was to be humanity's first interstellar vessel, a remarkable idea
when you consider that the Lunar colony at the time was quite small, still
struggling year to year for funding. And it was to be another twenty years
before the keel was laid, at L5, one of the Trojan libration points of the
Earth/Luna system. L5 and L4 enjoyed several decades of prominence
before the Invasion, and thrived for almost forty years afterwards. Today
they are orbiting junkyards. Economic reasons again.
The ship was half completed when the Invaders came. Work was
naturally abandoned in favor of more pressing projects, like survival of the
species. When that seemed assured, there was still very little effort to spare
for blue-sky projects like the Heinlein.
But work resumed in the year 82, A.I., and went on five or six years

before another snag was hit, in the form of the Lunarian Party. The loonies,
or Isolationists, or (to their enemies) Appeasers, as they came to be called,
had as their main article of faith that mankind should accept its lot as a
conquered race and thrive as best it could on Luna and the other inhabited
planets. The Invaders had reduced all the works of humanity to less than
rubble in the space of three days. Surely this demonstrated, the Loonies
reasoned, the Invaders were a different breed of cat altogether. We had been
extremely lucky to have survived at all. If we annoyed them again they
might come back and finish the job they started.
Rubbish, responded the old guard, who have since come to be known as
Heinleiners. Sure they were stronger than us. Sure they had superior
technology. Sure they had bigger guns. God's always on the side of bigger
guns, and if we want him back on our side, we'd better build even bigger
guns. The Invaders, the reasoning went, must be a vastly older race, with
vastly older science. But they still shit between two . . . well, tentacle-heels?
This was the flaw in the Heinleiners' reasoning, said the Loonies. We
didn't know if they had bigger guns. We didn't know if they had tentacles or
cilia or good honest legs and arms like you and I and God. We didn't know
anything. No human had ever seen one and survived. No one had ever
photographed one, though you'd think our orbiting telescopes would have;
they'd been looking, on and off, for two hundred years, and no one had seen
them check out of the little motel known as Earth. They were weird. Their
capabilities had thus far admitted of no limits. It seemed prudent to assume
they had no limits.
After almost ninety years of jingoism, of rally-round-the-flag rhetoric
and sheer pettifogging bombast, this sounded like a good argument to a large
part of a population weary of living on a perpetual war footing. They'd been
making sacrifices for nearly a century, on the theory that we must be ready
to, one, repel attack, and two, rise up in our wrath one glorious day and
stomp the bejesus out of those . . . whatever they were. Live and let live
made a whole lot of sense. Stop our puny saber-rattling round the ankles of
these giants, and we'll be okay. Speak softly, and screw the big stick.
Eventually all our forward listening posts in near-Earth orbit were
drawn back—a move I applaud, by the way, since they'd heard nothing and
seen nothing since Invasion Day. It was commanded that no man-made
object approach the home planet closer than 200,000 kilometers. The
planetary defense system was scaled back drastically, turned to meteoroid
destruction, where at least it saw some use.

How all this affected the Heinlein was in the ban on fission and fusion
explosive devices. The R.A.H. had been designed as an Orion-type pusherplate propulsion system, to this day the only feasible drive if you want to get
to the stars in less than a thousand years. What you do is chuck A-bombs
out of a hole in the back, slam the door, and wait for them to go off. Do that
every second or two. The shock wave pushes you.
This needs a big pusher plate—and I'm talking big here—and some sort
of shock absorber to preserve the dental work of the passengers. They
calculated it could reach about one-twentieth of light-speed—Alpha
Centauri in only about eighty years. But it couldn't even leave L5 without
bombs, and suddenly there were no more bombs. Work shut down with the
main body and most of the shock absorbing system almost complete, still no
sign of the massive pusher plate.
For forty years the friends of the Heinlein lobbied for an exception for
their big baby, like the one granted to the builders of the first disneylands for
blasting purposes. Changing political winds and economic pressure from the
Outer Planets Confederation, where most fissionables were mined, and the
decline of the L.P. combined to eventually bring a victory. The Heinleiners
celebrated and turned to the government for funding . . . and nobody cared.
Space exploration had fallen out of favor. It does, periodically. The
argument not to pour all that money down the rathole of space when you
could spend it right here on Luna can be a persuasive one to a population
more interested in standard of living and crippling taxation and no longer
afraid of the Invader boogeyman.
There were attempts to get it going again with private money. The
perception was the whole thing had passed its time. It was a white elephant.
It became a regular subject in comic monologues.
The ship still had some value as scrap. Eventually someone bought it
and strapped on some big boosters and lowered it bodily to the edge of
Delambre, where it sits, stripped of anything of worth, to this day.
#
The first thing I noticed about the Heinlein during my explorations was
that it was broken. That is to say, snapped in half. Built strongly to
withstand the shocks of its propulsion system, it had never been meant to
land on a planet, even one with so weak a gravity field as Luna. The bottom
had buckled, and the hull had ruptured about halfway back from the stem.
The second thing I noticed was that, from time to time, lights could be

seen from some of the windows high up on the hull.
There were places where one could get inside. I explored several of
them. Most led to solidly welded doors. A few seemed to go further, but the
labyrinthine nature of the place worried me. I made a few sorties trailing a
line behind me so I could find my way out, but during one I felt the line go
slack. I followed it back and couldn't determine if I'd simply tied it badly or
if it had been deliberately loosened. I made no more entries into the ship.
There was no reason to suppose the girl and anyone she lived with would
wish me well. In fact, if she did, she certainly would have contacted me by
then. I would have to resort to other tactics.
I tried magnetic grapplers and scaled the side of the hull, trying to reach
the lighted ports. When I reached them I was seldom sure I had the right
one, and in any case, by the time I got there no light could be seen.
It began to seem I was chasing ghosts.
I got discouraged enough that, one Friday night, I decided to stay home
for the weekend. I was getting quite big, and while one-sixth gee must make
it easier to carry a baby, we're none of us as strong as our Earth-born
ancestors were, and I'd become prone to backaches and sore feet.
So I decided to rent a rig and take a trip to Whiz-Bang, the new capitol
of Texas. Harry the blacksmith had just got a new Columbus Phaeton—
$58.00 in the Sears catalog!—and was happy to let me try it out. (Mailorder was our polite fiction for Modern-Made. There would never be
enough disneys to manufacture all the items one needs for survival, there's
just too many of them. Most of the things I owned had arrived on the WellsFargo wagon, fresh from the computer-run factories.) He hitched a dappled
mare he assured me was gentle, and I took off down the road.
Whiz-Bang is in the eastern part of the disney. The interior compresses
about two hundred miles worth of environment into a bubble only fifty miles
wide, so before I got there I was into a new kind of terrain and climate, one
where there was more rainfall and things grew better. Purely by chance I
was passing through at the height of the wildflower season. I saw larkspur,
phlox, Mexican hat, Indian paintbrush, cornflower, and bluebonnets.
Millions and millions of bluebonnets. I stopped the horse and let her graze
while I spread my blanket among them and ate a picnic lunch. I can't tell
you what a relief it was to get away from the foreboding hulk of the Heinlein
and the bitter white rock of the surface, and hear the song of the
mockingbird.

I pulled into Whiz-Bang around noon. It's a bigger town than New
Austin—which means it has five saloons and we have two. They get more
of the tourist trade, which New Austin does not work to attract, which means
they have more small shops selling authentic souvenirs, still the main means
of livelihood for two out of five Texans. I strolled the streets, nodding to the
gentlemen who tipped their hats, stopping to look into each shop window.
The merchandise fell into four categories: Mexican, Indian, "Primitive
West," and Victorian. The first three were all hand-made in the disney,
certified genuine reproductions—with a little fudging: "Indian" artifacts
included items from all southwest tribes, not just Comanche and Apache.
But there were no totem poles and no plastic papooses.
Suddenly I realized I was looking at the answer, if answer there was. I
was standing at the window of a toy shop.
#
I felt like Santa Claus as I drove once more down the mining road and
across the rising rim of Delambre early that Sunday morning. I certainly had
a sleighful of toys, in a vac-sack tossed on the passenger seat. It was about
two days past full noon.
"On Dasher, on Dancer, on Prancer," I cried. The ride in the country
and the new plan of attack had buoyed my spirits, which had been at a low
ebb. I stopped the rover and quickly deployed the tent. I spoke not a word
but went straight to my work, setting out all my presents . . . oh, stop that,
Hildy. I laughed, which no doubt caused my big round belly to shake like a
bowl full of jelly.
What I'd done was first to make a Whiz-Bang toymonger a very happy
and much wealthier woman. She'd followed me out of the store, carrying
my boxes of trifles, not quite kow-towing, stowing them in the buggy for
me. Then I'd driven back to New Austin, pausing only to pick a bunch of
bluebonnets, which I mailed to Cricket. No, I hadn't given up yet.
I'd exercised little selection in the toy store, ruling out only the ranks of
lead soldiers and most of the dolls. Somehow they just didn't feel right;
maybe it was just personal prejudice. But now I sweated the choice of each
of the four items I wanted to lure her with.
First was a tin-and-pewter wind-up of a horse pulling a cart, brightly
painted in reds and yellows. All little girls like horses, don't they?
Next was a half-meter Mexican puppet in the shape of a skeleton, made
of clay and papier-mâché and corn husks. I liked the way it clattered when I

picked it up, dangling from its five strings. It was old and wise.
Then a Kachina doll, even older and wiser, though carved and painted
only months ago. I chose it over the sweeter, safer white man's dolls, all
porcelain and pouty lips and flounces, because it spoke to me of ancient
secrets, unknown ceremonies. It was as brashly pagan as my elusive sprite,
she of the funny face. Reading up on it, I found it was even better, as the
Kachinas were said to exist among the tribe, but invisible.
And last, my most fortuitous find: a butterfly net, made of bent cane
and gauze, with a glass Mason jar, wad of cotton, and bottle of alcohol for
the humane euthanizing of specimens. Just the sort of toy parents could put
together for a pioneer child, if the child had a biological bent.
None of the toys would be much harmed by vacuum, but the sunshine
on the surface is brutal, so I placed them where they'd stay in the shade, near
the hull of the Heinlein, and arranged little lights over them so they'd be easy
to find. Then I went back to the tent.
I didn't have much time to stay if I was to be back for Monday classes,
and I spent that time unprofitably. I couldn't eat anything, and I couldn't
read the book I'd brought along. I was excited, worried, and a little
depressed. What made me think this would work?
So in the end I struck the tent and took one last tour of my little toy
tableau, which once more was undisturbed.
The next week was hell. Many times I thought of looking for a
substitute and getting the hell back. You want a measure of my distraction?
Elise caught me dealing seconds, and it's been seventy years since that had
happened.
But the week did crawl by, faster than any ordinary garden slug, and
Friday afternoon I turned the editorial chores over to Charity with
instructions to keep the libel suits down to three or four, and broke all
records getting out to Delambre.
#
The Kachina was gone. In its place was something I didn't recognize at
first, but quickly realized was a Navajo sand painting. These are made by
dribbling different colored sands onto the ground and they can be amazingly
detailed and precise. This one wasn't, but I appreciated the effort. It was
just a stick figure Indian, with war bonnet and a bow held in one hand, a tipi
in the background.

She'd taken the horse and carriage, too, and left a vac-cage about the
right size for taking your pet hamster for a stroll on the surface. But inside
was a horse. A living horse, ten centimeters high at the shoulder.
I hadn't seen a horselet in years. Callie had given me one for my fifth
birthday, not as small as this one. Not long after that people like David
Earth had succeeded in getting that sort of gene tinkering outlawed. You
could still buy minis on Pluto, but the most that was allowed on Luna these
days were perpetual puppies and kittens. When I was young you could still
get real exotics, like winged dogs and eight-legged cats.
Somehow I didn't think this beast had been purchased on Pluto. I held
the cage up and tapped on the glass, and the horselet looked back at me
calmly. I wondered what I was going to do with the damn thing.
The butterfly equipment didn't seem disturbed until I looked at it more
closely. Then I saw the monarch at the bottom of the jar, still, apparently
dead. I put the jar in my pocket for later examination, left the net where it
was, and hurried on to find that my last offering had been taken. The
skeleton puppet was gone, and where it had been was a scrap of paper. I
picked it up and read the word "thanks," written in pencil.
#
I pondered all this on the drive back to King City. I didn't know
whether to be encouraged or crestfallen. Three of my toys had been taken,
and three other toys left in their place. I had never expected this. My hope
had been to gradually lure her out with gifts; the idea of trading had never
entered my mind.
So it was good that I had finally made contact, of a sort. At least, I
hoped it was she who had left the horse, butterfly, and painting. It was still
possible another sort of prankster entirely was at work here, but I didn't think
so. Each gift told me something, though it was hard to know just how much
to read into each one.
The horselet was illegal, so she was telling me she didn't give a damn
about the law. The painting, when I examined the photo I took of it, proved
to be of a Lipan Apache brave, not just a generic "Indian." That meant to
me that she knew the gift came from Texas . . . and that I lived there? Might
she come to me? You're getting too far-fetched, Hildy.
The butterfly was the most interesting of all, and that was why I had not
erected the tent but was on my way to Liz's apartment in King City. Of the
people I knew, she'd be the most likely to be able to give me the help I

needed with no questions asked.
#
Before I got there I stopped and bought another computer. I used this
one to doctor the images from my recorder, completely wiping out the
background from those crucial seconds until I had nothing but the nude
figure of a girl running against a black background. The impulse to protect
the story is a deep one; I had no reason to mistrust Liz, but no reason why
she should know everything I knew, either.
I showed her the film and explained what I wanted from her, managing
to befuddle her considerably, but when she understood I was answering no
questions she said sure, it would be no problem, then stood watching me.
"Now, Liz," I said.
"Sure," she said, and did a double-take. "Oh, you mean right now."
So she called a friend at one of the studios who said, sure, he could do it,
no problem, and was about to wire the pictures to him when I said I'd prefer
to use the mail. Looking at me curiously, Liz addressed the tape and popped
it into the chute, then waited for my next trick.
"What the hell," I said, and got out the butterfly. We both looked at it
with the naked eye, handling it carefully, and she wanted to let her computer
have a go at it, but I said no, and instead ordered an ordinary magnifying
glass, which arrived in ten minutes. We both examined it and found I had
been right about the propulsion system. There were hair-fine tubes under the
wings, which were somehow attached to the insect's musculature in such a
way that flexing the wing caused air to squirt out.
"Looks kind of squirrely to me," Liz pronounced. "I think it'd just fall
down and lie there."
"I saw it fly," I said.
"If that'll fly, I'll kiss your ass and give you an hour to draw a crowd."
She waited expectantly for my response, but I didn't give her one. It was
obvious she was being eaten with curiosity. She tried wheedling a little,
then gave it up and turned to the horse. "I might be willing to take this off
your hands," she said. "I know somebody who wants one." She tickled it
under the chin, and it trotted to the edge of the table where I'd released it,
then jumped down. A scale model horse in one-sixth gee is quite spry.
Liz named a price, and I said she was taking bread from the mouths of
my children and named another, and she said I must think she just fell off

the turnip wagon, and eventually we settled on a price that seemed to please
her. I didn't tell her that if she'd asked, I'd have given it to her.
The pictures arrived. I looked at them and told her they'd do nicely, and
thanked her for her time and trouble. I left her still trying to find out more
about the butterfly.
#
What I'd obtained from her was a strip of images suitable for installing
inside a zoetrope. If you don't know what that is, it's a little like a
phenakistoscope, but fancier, though not quite so nice as a praxinoscope.
Still at sea? Picture a small drum, open at the top, with slits around the
sides. You put the drum on top of a spindle, paste pictures inside it, rotate it,
and look through the slits as they move past you. If you've chosen the right
pictures, they will appear to move. It's an early version of the motion
picture.
I put the strip inside the zoetrope I'd bought at the Whiz-Bang toy store,
twirled it, and saw the girl running jerkily. And I'd done it all without the
aid of the Lunar computer net known as the CC. With any luck, these
images still existed only in my recorder.
I went right back out to Delambre and put the zoetrope in a location
where it couldn't be missed. I set up the tent, fixed and ate a light supper,
and fell asleep.
I checked it several times during the weekend and always found it still
where I'd left it. Sunday night—still daylight in Delambre—I packed the
rover and decided to look once more before leaving. I was feeling
discouraged.
At first I thought it hadn't been touched, then I realized the pictures had
been changed. I knelt and spun the drum, and through the slits I saw the
flickering image of myself in my pressure suit, with Winston in his, capering
around my legs.
#
I had a week to think it over. Was she saying she wanted to see the
dog? Any dog, or just Winston? Or was she saying anything at all except I
see you?
What I had to remember was there was no real hurry to this project, my
feelings of impatience notwithstanding. If Winston had to be involved, it
would require bringing Liz deeper into my confidence, something I was

reluctant to do. So the next weekend I went out armed with four dogs, one
from each of the cultures in Texas. There was a brightly painted Mexican
one, carved from wood, another simpler wooden pioneer dog, a Comanche
camp scene, with dogs, painted on rawhide—the best I could do—and my
prize, a brass automaton of a dog that would shuffle up to a fire hydrant and
lift its leg.
I set them out on my next visit. As I was crawling into the tent
afterwards my phone rang.
"Hello? I said, suspiciously.
"I still say it can't fly."
"Liz? How'd you get this number?"
"You ask me that? Don't start me lying this early in the morning. I got
my methods."
I thought about telling her what the CC thought of her methods, and I
thought about chewing her out for invading my privacy—since my
retirement I'd restricted my telephone to incoming calls from a very short
list—but thinking about those things was as far as I got, because as I was
talking I'd stood up and turned around, and all four of my new gifts were
lined up just outside the tent, looking in at me. I turned quickly, scanning
the landscape in every direction, but it was useless. In that mirror skin of
hers she might be lying flat no more than thirty meters away and I wouldn't
have a prayer.
So what I said was "Never mind that, I was just thinking of you, and that
lovely dog of yours."
"Then this is your lucky day. I'm calling from the car, and I'm no more
than twenty minutes from Delambre, and Winston is having a wet dream that
may concern your left leg, so throw some of that chili on the stove."
#
"I think you gained two kay since last week," she said when she came
into the tent. "When it comes time to whelp that thing, you're gonna have to
do it in shifts." I appreciated those remarks so much that I added three
peppers to her bowl and miked it hard. Pregnancy is maybe the most mixed
blessing I'd ever experienced. On the one hand, there's a feeling I couldn't
begin to describe, something that must approach holiness. There's a life
growing in your body. When all is said and done, reproducing the species is
the only demonstrable reason for existence. Doing so satisfies a lot of the

brain's most primitive wiring. On the other hand, you feel like such a sow.
I told her as little as I could get away with, mostly that I'd seen someone
out here and that I wanted to get in contact with her. She saw my box of
toys: the zoetrope, and the dogs.
"If it's that girl you had the pictures of, and you saw her out here, I'd like
to meet her, too."
I had to admit it was. How else was I going to convince her to leave
Winston in my care for the rest of the weekend?
We tossed around a few ideas, none of them very good. As she was
getting ready to leave she thought of something, pulled a deck of cards from
her pocket, and handed them to me.
"I brought these along when I found out where you'd been coming all
these weekends." She'd previously told me the story of her detective work,
nosing around Texas, finding out from Huck that I always left Friday
evening when the paper went to bed—lately even earlier. Rover rental
records available to the public, or to people who knew how to get into them,
told her where I'd been renting. A bribe to the right mechanic got her access
to the odometer of my vehicle, and simple division told her how long a trip
I'd been taking each time, but by then she'd been pretty sure it was to
Delambre.
"I knew you'd seen something out here during the Bicentennial," she
went on. "I didn't know what, but you came back from that last walk
looking wilder than an acre of snakes, and you wouldn't tell anybody what it
was. Then you show up at my place with those pictures of a girl running
through nothing and you won't let me wire 'em or digitize 'em. I expect you
got secrets to keep, but I could figure out you were looking for somebody.
So if you want to find somebody, what you do is you start playing solitaire,
and pretty soon they'll come up and tell you—"
"—to play the black ten on the red Jack," I finished for her.
"You heard it. Well, at least it'll give you something to do." She left,
casting a worried eye over her pet, who didn't seem at all disturbed to see her
go, and with a final admonition that Winston got his walkies three times a
day or he was apt to get mean enough to make a train take a dirt road.
#
I'd already brought a deck of cards. I usually have one with me, as
manipulating them is something to do with my hands at idle moments, better

than needlepoint and potentially much more profitable. If you don't practice
the moves you find your hands freeze up on you at a critical moment.
But I never play solitaire, and the reason is a little embarrassing. I
cheat. Which is all very well for blackjack or five-card stud, but what's the
point in solitaire?
Point or not, I eventually found myself laying out a hand.
Pretty soon I got into it. Not the game itself, than which there are few
purer wasters of time, but the cards. You have to be able to visualize the
order, make them your friends so they'll tell you things. Do it long enough
and you'll always know what the next card will be, and you'll know what the
cards are that you can't see, as sure as if they were marked on the back.
I did it for a long time, until Winston got up and began to scratch at the
wall of the tent. Better get him into his suit before he got frantic, I thought,
and looked up into the face of the girl. She was standing there, outside the
tent, grinning down at Winston, and she had a telescope tucked under her
arm. She looked at me and shook a finger: naughty, naughty.
"Wait!" I shouted. "I want to talk to you."
She smiled again, shrugged her shoulders, and became a perfect mirror.
All I could see of her was the distorted reflection of the tent and the ground
she stood on. The distortions twisted and flowed and began to dwindle.
Pressing my face against the tent wall I could follow her progress for a little
while since she was the only moving object out there. She wasn't in any
hurry and I thought she looked back over her shoulder, but there was no way
to be sure.
I got into my suit quickly, thought it over, and suited Winston, too. I let
him out, knowing his ears and sense of smell were totally useless out here
but hoping some other doggy sense would give me a lead. He shuffled off,
trying to press his nose to the ground as he usually did, succeeding only in
getting moondust on the bottom of his helmet. I followed him with my
flashlight.
Soon he stopped and tried to press his face to the surface with more than
his usual doggedness. I knelt and looked at what he was trying to pick up. It
was a bit of spongy material that crumbled in my glove when I lifted it. I
laughed aloud; Winston looked up, and I patted the top of his helmet.
"I might have know you wouldn't miss food, even if you can't smell it," I
told him. And we set off together, following the trail of breadcrumbs.

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

Feeling not unlike the hood ornament on a luxury rover—and showing a
lot more chrome-plated belly than either Mr. Rolls or Mr. Royce would have
approved of—I stepped boldly forth into the sunlight, almost as naked as the
day I was born. Boldly, if you don't dwell on the thirty minutes I spent
getting up my nerve to do it in the first place. Naked, if you don't count the
mysterious force field that kept me wrapped in a warming blanket of air at
least five millimeters thick.
Even the warming part was illusory. It certainly felt as if the air was
keeping me warm, and without that psychological reassurance I doubt if I'd
have made it. Actually, the air was cooling me, which is always the problem
in a space suit, whether bought off the shelf at Hamilton's or hocus-pocused
into existence by the Genius of the Robert A. Heinlein. See, the human body
generates heat, and a spacesuit has to be a good insulator, that's its main
purpose; the heat will build up and choke you without an outlet. See?

Oh, brother. If you had a chuckle at my explanations of
nanoengineering and cybernetics, wait till you hear Hildy's Field Suits Made
Simple.
"You're doing fine, Hildy," Gretel (not her real name) coaxed. "I know
it takes some getting used to."
"How would you know that?" I countered. "You grew up in a field
suit."
"Yeah, but I've taken tenderfeet out before."
Tenderfeet, indeed. I bent over to see those pedal extremities, thinking
I'd have to get re-acquainted with them post-partum. I wiggled my toes and
light wiggled off the reflections. Like wearing thick mylar socks, only all I
could feel was what appeared to be the rough surface of Luna. There was
some feedback principle at work there, I'd been told; the field kept me
floating five millimeters high no matter how hard I pressed down. And a
good thing, too. Those rock were hot.
"How's the breathing?" Gretel asked, in a funny voice I'd get used to
eventually. Part of the field suit package was a modification of my
implanted telephone so that sub-vocalization could be heard over the
channel the Heinleiners used suit-to-suit.
"I still want to gasp," I said.
"Say again?"
I repeated it, saying each word carefully.
"That's just psychotic."
I think she meant psychosomatic, or maybe psychological. Or possibly
psychotic was the perfect word. How would you describe someone who
trusted her delicate hide to a spatial effect that, as near as I could understand
it, had no existence in the real world?
The desire to breathe was real enough, even though a suppressor of
some kind was at work in my brain cutting off that part of the autonomic
nervous system. My body was getting all the oxygen it needed, but when
your lungs have been inhaling and exhaling for over a hundred years, some
part of you gets a little alarmed when asked to shut it off for an hour or so.
I'd been holding my breath for almost ten minutes so far. I felt about ready
to go back inside and gulp.
"You want to go back inside?"

I wondered if I'd been muttering to myself. Gotta watch that. I shook
my head, remembered how hard that was to see, and mouthed "No."
"Then take my hand," she said. I did, and our two suit fields melted
together and I felt her bare hand in mine. I could see that, if these things
ever got on the market, there was going to be a big fad in lovemaking under
the stars.
#
Don't go shopping for a field suit just yet, though.
They'll surely be available in a few years, what with current conditions.
A lot of people are angry at the Heinleiners for not just bestowing the
patents gratis to the general public. I've heard mutterings. A lot of good it
will do the mutterers; they simply don't understand Heinleiners. There
goddam sure ain't no such thing as a free lunch, and they're out to prove it.
As I write this, the Heinleiners are still pretty pissed off, and who could
blame them? All charges have naturally been dropped, the statutes of
limitations have expired, as it were. Nobody's out hunting them. Yet I
swore a solemn oath not to reveal the names of any of them until given
permission, and that permission has not been granted, and who's to say
they're wrong? Say what you will about me as a reporter, but I never
revealed a source, and I never will. Hence, the girl I will call "Gretel."
Hence all the aliases I will bestow on the people I met after I followed
Gretel's trail into the perfect mirror.
And I promised not to lie to you, but from here on in I will not always
tell you the whole truth. Events have of necessity been edited, to protect
people with no reason to trust authority but who trusted me and then found .
. . but I'm getting ahead of myself.
#
The trail of breadcrumbs led into the rubble that washed at the base of
the Heinlein. At first it seemed as if they vanished into a blank wall, but I
found that if I ducked a little there was a way through.
Luckily, I had Winston on a leash, because he was straining to head
right into the pile, and god knows if I'd ever have found him again. I shined
my flashlight under the overhang—which seemed to be the back end of a
vintage rover—and saw it would be possible to squirm my way in. Without
the crumbs I never would have tried it, as I could already see four ways to
go. But I did go in, wondering all the time just how stable this whole pile

was, if I dared brush up against anything.
Not too far in it became clear I was on a pathway. At first it was just
bare rock. Soon there was a flooring laid down, made of discarded plastic
wall panels. I tested each step cautiously, but it seemed firm. I found each
panel had been spot welded to some of the more massive pieces of debris
that made up the jackstraw jumble. I further saw, looking around the edge
of the roadway, that the ground was no longer down there. My flashlight
picked up an endless array of junk. If there'd been any air I might have tried
dropping a coin or something; I had a feeling I'd hear it clatter for a long
time.
For a while I kept testing each new panel cautiously, but each was as
firmly in place as the last. I decided I was being silly. People obviously
used this path with some frequency, and despite its impromptu nature it
seemed sturdy enough. Flashing my light around above me I could soon see
the tunnel itself had been made by some kind of boring machine. It was
cylindrical, and a lot of rubbish had been blasted or cut away; I found sliced
edges of metal beams on each side of the tunnel, as if the center sections had
been cut out. I hadn't seen it as a cylinder at first because its walls were so
relentlessly baroque, not covered with anything as they would be in King
City.
Before long I came to a string of lights hung rather haphazardly along
the left-hand side of the tunnel. And not long after that I saw somebody
approaching me from a good distance. I shined the light at the person, and
she shined her light at me, and I saw she was also pregnant and also had a
bulldog on a leash, which seemed too much for coincidence.
Winston didn't put it together. Instead, he plowed forward in his usual
way, either to greet a new friend or to rend an enemy into bloody gobbets,
who could tell? I could hear the clang over my suit radio when he hit. He
sat down hard, having had no visible effect upon the perfect mirror.
Neither did I, though I scrupulously did all the futile things people do in
stories about humans encountering alien objects: chunking rocks, swinging
a makeshift club, kicking it. I left no scratches on it. ("Mister President, it is
my scientific opinion the saucer is made of an alloy never seen on Earth!")
I'd have tried fire, electricity, lasers, and atomic weapons, but I didn't have
any handy. Maybe lasers wouldn't have been the best idea.
So I waited, wondering if she'd been watching me, hoping she'd had a
good laugh at my expense, feeling sure she hadn't led me this far just to
strand me, and in a moment the surface of the mirror bulged and became a

human face. The face smiled, and then the rest of the body appeared. At
first I thought she was moving forward, but it turned out the mirror was
moving back and the field was forming around her body as she simply stood
there.
It moved back about three meters, and she beckoned to me. I went to
her, and she made some gestures which I didn't understand. Finally I got the
idea that I was to hold on to a bar fastened to the wall. I did, and the girl
crouched and held on to Winston, who seemed happy to see her.
There was a loud bang and something slammed into me. Bits of trash
and dust swirled, maybe a little mist, too. The perfect mirror was no longer
where it had been and the corridor had changed. I looked around and saw
the walls were now coated with the same mirror, and the flat surface had reformed behind me, where it had been originally. A rather dramatic airlock.
For a few more seconds Gretel was still wrapped in distortion, then her
suit field vanished and she became the nude ten-year-old who had run
through my dreams for such a long time. She was saying something. I
shook my head and glanced at the readouts for exterior temperature and
pressure—pure habit, I could see and hear the air was okay—then I took off
my helmet.
"First thing," Gretel said, "you've got to promise not to tell my father."
"Not to tell him what?"
"That you saw me on the surface without my suit. He doesn't like it
when I do that."
"I wouldn't, either. Why do you do it?"
"You gotta promise, or you can just go home."
I did. I would have promised one hell of a lot of things to get farther
down that tunnel I could see stretching ahead of me. I even would have kept
most of them. Personally, I don't view a promise made to a ten-year-old to
be binding, if it involves a matter of safety, but I'd keep that one if I could.
I had a thousand questions, but wasn't sure how to ask them. I'm a good
interviewer, but getting answers out of a child takes a different technique. It
would be no problem—the problem with Gretel was getting her to shut up—
but I didn't know it at the time. Right then she was squatting, getting
Winston out of his helmet, so I watched and waited. Liz had promised me
Winston never bit people unless ordered to do so, and I sure hoped that was
true.

Once again Winston came through for me. He greeted her like a longlost friend, bowling her over in his attempts to lick her face, reducing her to
giggles. I helped her get him out of the rest of his suit.
"You could get out of yours, too, if you want to," Gretel said.
"It's safe?"
"You might have asked that before I took off the dog's helmet."
She had a point. I started peeling out of it.
"You've led me a merry chase," I said.
"It took me a while to convince my father we ought to let you in at all.
But I'm never in a hurry about such things, anyway. Do you good to wait."
"What changed his mind?"
"Me," she said, simply. "I always do. But it wasn't easy, you being a
reporter and all."
A year ago that would have surprised me. Working for a newspad you
don't get your face as well-known as straight television reporters do. But
recent events had changed that. No more undercover work for me.
"Your father doesn't like reporters?"
"He doesn't like publicity. When you talk to him, you'll have to promise
not to use any of it in a story."
"I don't know if I can promise that."
"Sure, you can. Anyway, that's between you and him."
We were walking down the round, mirrored corridor by then. When we
came to another mirrored wall like the one I'd first encountered, she didn't
slow down but headed right for it. When she was a meter away it vanished
to reveal another long section of walkway. I looked behind us and there it
was. Simple and effective. The bored-out tubes were lined with the field,
and these safety barriers were spaced out along the way. This new
technology would revolutionize Lunar building techniques, whatever it was.
I was bursting with questions about it, but my feeling for her was that it
wasn't the right time to ask them. I was there as the result of a child's whim,
and it would be a good idea to see where I stood with her, get on her good
side as much as possible.
"So . . ." I said. "Did you like the toys?"

"Oh, please," she said. Not a promising beginning. "I'm a little grown
up for that."
"How old are you?" There was always the chance I'd read her wrong
from the beginning; she could be older than me.
"I'm eleven, but I'm precocious. Everyone says so."
"Especially Daddy?"
She grinned at me. "Never Daddy. He says I'm a walking argument for
retroactive birth control. Okay, sure I liked the toys, only I'd prefer to think
of them as charming antiques. Mostly, I liked the dog. What's his name?"
"Winston. So that's why you talked your father into letting me in?"
"No. I could get a dog easily enough."
"Then I don't get it. I worked so hard to interest you."
"You did? That's neat. Hell, Hildy, I'd have asked you in if you'd just
sat out there on your butt."
"Why?"
She stopped and turned to me, and the look on her face told me what
was coming. I'd seen that look before.
"Because you work for the Nipple. It's my favorite pad. Tell me, what
was Silvio really like?"
#
Most of my conversations with Gretel got around to Silvio sooner or
later, usually after long and adoring detours through the celebrity underbrush
of the current pre-pubescent idols of television and music. I'd interviewed
Silvio a total of three times, been at social occasions where he was present
maybe twenty times, exchanged perhaps a dozen sentences with him at those
functions. It didn't matter. It was all gold to Gretel, who was easily twice as
star-struck as most girls her age. She hung on my every word.
Naturally, I made up a lot. If I could do it in print, why not to her? And
it was good practice for telling her all the intimate details of the teeny stars,
few of whom I'd even heard of, much less met.
Is that awful? I suppose it is, lying to a little girl, but I'd done worse in
my life, and how badly did it hurt her? The whole gossip industry,
flagshipped by the Nipple and the Shit, is of questionable moral worth to
begin with, but it's a very old industry, and as such, must fill a basic human

need. I've apologized for it enough here. The biggest difference in my
stories to her was that, when I was writing it, it was usually nasty gossip.
My stories to her were usually nice ones. I viewed it as paying my keep. If
Scheherazade could do it, why not Hildy Johnson?
#
I was grateful that she held my hand on that first stroll on the surface.
Breathing is perhaps the most underrated pleasure in life. You notice it
when something smells good, curse it when something stinks, but the rest of
the time you don't even think of it. It's as natural as . . . well, see? To really
appreciate it, try holding your mouth and nose closed for three minutes, or
however long it takes to reach the edge of blackout. That first breath that
brings you back from the edge of death will be the sweetest thing you ever
tasted, I guarantee it.
Now try it for thirty minutes.
The oxygen in my new lung was supposed to be good for that long, with
a five to seven minute margin. "Think of it as thirty," Aladdin had said,
when he installed it. "That'll keep you safe."
"I'll think of it as fifteen," I retorted. "Maybe five." I'd been sitting in
his clinic at the time, the left side of my chest laid open, the ugly gray mass
of what had recently been my left lung lying in a pan on a table like so much
butcher-shop special of the day.
"Don't talk," he warned. "Not when I'm doing respiratory-system
work." He wiped a drop of blood from the corner of my mouth.
"Maybe one," I said. He picked up the new lung, a thing of shiny metal
with some trailing tubes, shaped very much like a lung, and started shoving
it into the chest cavity. It made wet sucking sounds going in. I hate surgery.
I'd have thought it was something brand-new but for my recent
researches into vacuum technology. One part of it was revolutionary, but
the rest had been cobbled together from things developed and set aside a
long time ago.
The Heinleiners weren't the first to work on the problem of adapting the
human body to the Lunar surface. They were just the first ones to find a
more or less practical answer. Most of the lung Aladdin put inside me was
just an air bottle, filled with compressed oxygen. The rest was an interface
device that allowed the oxygen to be released directly into my bloodstream
while at the same time cleansing the carbon dioxide. A few other implants

allowed some of the gas to be released through new openings in my skin,
carrying off heat. None of it was new; most of it had been experimented
with as early as the year 50.
But the year 50 wasn't railroad time. The system wasn't practical. You
still had to wear a garment to protect you from the heat and the cold, and it
had to protect you from both—extremes never seen on Earth—while at the
same time keeping the vacuum from your skin, bleeding off waste heat, and
a host of other requirements. Such garments were available; I'd bought two
of them within the last year. They were naturally much improved from the
mummy bags the first space explorers wore, but they worked on the same
principles. And they worked better than the implanted lungs. If you're
going to have to wear a suit, after all, what's the point of a thirty-minute
supply of air in place of a lung? If you plan much of a stay on the surface
you're going to have to back-pack most of your air, just like Neil Armstrong
did.
And the Heinleiners did, too, for longer stays. But they'd solved the
problem of what to do with the suit: just turn it off when not in use.
I supposed they'd also solved the psychological problem of the suits,
which was the panic reflex when one has not breathed normally for some
time, but I suspected the answer was the same one a child learns in her first
swimming lesson. Do it enough, and you'll stop being afraid.
I'd done it for fifteen minutes now, and I was still frightened. My heart
was racing and my palm was sweating. Or was that Gretel's?
"You'll sweat quite a bit," she said, when I asked. "It's normal. That
layer of air will stay pretty hot, but not too hot to handle. Also, the sweat
helps to bleed off the heat, just like it does inside."
I'd been told the suit's distance from one's body fluctuated by about a
millimeter in a regular rhythm. That varied the volume considerably,
sucking waste air from inside you and expelling it into vacuum in a bellows
action. Water vapor went along with it, but a lot just dripped down your
skin.
"I think I'd like to go back in now," I mouthed, and must have done it
well enough, because I heard her say "Okay," quite clearly. That was the
same circuitry the CC used to talk to me in private, back when I was still
speaking to him. Aside from the respirator/air supply/field generator, and a
few air ducts, not much had needed to be done to prepare me for field suit
use. Some of that's because I was already wired to a fare-thee-well, as the

CC had pointed out on my direct interface jaunts. Some adjustments had
been made to my eardrums to keep them from hurting in fluctuating
pressures, and a new heads-up display had been added so that when I closed
my eyes or just blinked, I saw figures concerning body temperature and
remaining air supply and so forth. There were warning alarms I'd been told
would sound in various situations, and I didn't intend ever to hear any of
them. Mostly, with a field suit, you just wore it. And all but a tiny portion
of that, you wore inside.
The air lock I'd used to get into the secret warrens was only for
inanimate objects, or people wearing inanimate objects, like the old-style
suit I'd been wearing. If you had a field suit in, you simply stepped into the
wall of mirror and your own suit melted into it, like a drop of mercury
falling into a quicksilver pool. That was the only way to get through a nullfield barrier other than turning it off. They were completely reflective on
both sides. Nothing got through, not air, not bullets, not light nor heat nor
radio waves nor neutrinos. Nothing.
Well, gravity got through, whatever gravity is. Don't seek the answer to
that one in these pages. But magnetism didn't, and Merlin was working on
the gravity part. Follow-up on that still to come.
Just before Gretel and I stepped through I saw part of the mirror wall
distorted in the shape of a face. That was the only way to see through the
wall, just stick your face in, and even that was tough to get used to. Gretel
and her brother—what else?—Hansel did it as naturally as I'd turn my head
to glance out a window. Me, I had to swallow hard a few times because
every reflex I had was telling me I was going to smash my nose against that
reflection of myself.
But I had no trouble this time because I wanted very badly to be on the
other side of that mirror. I was running by the time I hit it. And of course
there was no sensation of hitting anything—my suit simply vanished as it
went through the larger field—with the result that, because some part of me
had been braced for impact, had been flinching, wincing, bracing myself, it
was like reaching for that non-existent top step, and I did a comical
cakewalk as if the floor was coated with banana peels and came that close to
a pratfall any silent film comedian would have envied.
Before you snicker, you go and try it.
Gretel claimed to be able to distinguish people's faces when covered by
a null suit. I supposed that if you grew up in one it would be possible; they
were still all chrome-plated masks to me, and probably would be for a long

time. But I'd figured it was Hansel who poked his face through, since that's
where we'd left him, watching Winston, and it was indeed him who greeted
me after my maiden voyage in the new suit. Hansel was a lad of fifteen, a
tall, awkward, rather shy boy with a shock of blonde hair like his sister's and
a certain look in his eye I'm sure he got from his father. I thought of it as the
mad scientist's gleam. As if he'd like to take you apart to see how you
worked, only he was too polite to ask if he could. He'd put you back
together, I hasten to add, or at least he'd intend to, though the skills might
not always be up to the intent. He got that from his father, too. Where the
shyness came from I had no idea. It was not inherited paternally.
"I just got a phone call from the ranch," Hansel said. "Libby says the
palomino mare is about to foal."
"I got it, too," Gretel said. "Let's go."
They were off while I was still catching my breath. It had been a long
time since I'd tried to keep up with children, but I didn't dare let these get out
of my sight. I wasn't sure if I could find my way back to the Heinlein alone.
Sounds unlikely, doesn't it? If there's one thing Lunarians are good at, it's
negotiating a three-dimensional maze, or at least we'd like to think so. But
the mazes of King City tend to be of two types: radiating out from a central
plaza, with circular ring roads, or a north/south up/down grid. The paths of
the Delambre Dump were more like a plate of spaghetti. Two days in
Delambre would have any urban planner ready for a padded cell. It just
growed.
The paths I was now hurrying down had been made by nothing more
mysterious than obsolescent tunneling machines—one of the other things
Lunarians are good at. They usually bored their way through rock, but the
sort of techno-midden stratigraphy found in Delambre presented them no
problems; they'd laser their way through anything. The Heinleiners had a
dozen of them, all found on site, repaired, and seemingly just sort of set
loose to find their own way. Not really, but anyone who had tried to find a
rhyme or reason in the pathways had to figure an earthworm would have
done a tidier job.
Once the wormholes were there, human crews came in and installed the
flooring out of whatever plastic panels were at hand. Since those panels had
been a construction staple for over a century, they weren't hard to find. The
last step was to provide an ALU every hundred meters or so. An ALU was
an Air Lock Unit, and consisted of this: a null-field generator with logics to
run their odd locking systems at each end, a big can of air serviced weekly

by autobots, and a wire running to a solar panel on top of the heap of
garbage to power the whole thing. When somebody got around to it glowand heat-wires were strung along the top of the tunnel so they wouldn't be
too cold or dark, but these were viewed as luxuries, and not all parts of the
tunnels had them.
A more jack-leg, slip-shod system of keeping the Breathsucker at bay
had never been seen on this tired old orb, and nobody with half a brain
would trust her one and only body to it for a split second. And with good
reason: breakdowns were frequent, repairs were slow. Heinleiners simply
didn't care, and why should they? If part of the tunnel went down, your suit
would switch on and you'd have plenty of time to get to the next segment.
They just didn't worry much about vacuum.
It made for weird travel, and another reason to keep up with the
children. Both of them were carrying flashlights, which were almost
mandatory in the tunnels, and which I'd forgotten again. We came to a dark,
cold section and it was all I could do to keep their darting lights in sight.
Sure, I could call them back if I got lost, but I was determined not to. It
wouldn't have been fun, you see, and above all kids just want to have fun.
You don't want to get a reputation as somebody they have to keep waiting
for.
It was cold, too, right up to the point of chattering teeth, and then my
suit switched on automatically and before I got out of the dark I was warm
again. Winston looked back at me and barked. He was still in his old-style
suit, Hansel carrying his helmet. They'd wanted me to let them give him a
null-suit, but I didn't know how to explain it to Liz.
#
The first time the children took me to the farm, I had been expecting to
see a hydroponic or dirt-based plantation of the sort most Lunarians know
must be out there somewhere, but would have to consult a directory to find,
and had never actually seen. I'd been to one in the course of a story long
ago—I've been most places in my century—and since you probably haven't
I'll say they tend to be quite dull. Not worth you time. Whether the crop is
corn or potatoes or chickens, what you see are low rooms with endless rows
of cages or stalls or furrows or troughs. Machines bring food or nutrients,
haul away waste, harvest the final product. Most animals are raised
underground, most plants on the surface, under plastic roofs. All of it is kept
distant from civilization and hardly ever talked about, since so many of us
can't bear to think the things we eat ever grew in dirt, or at one time cackled,

oinked, and defecated.
I was expecting a food factory, albeit one built to typical Heinleiner
specs, as Aladdin once described them to me: "Jerry-rigged, about threequarter-assed, and hellishly unsafe." Later I did see a farm just like that, but
not the one belonging to Hansel and Gretel and their best friend, Libby.
Once again I'd forgotten I was dealing with children.
The farm was behind a big pressure door aboard the old Heinlein that
said CREW'S MESS #1. Inside a lot of tables had been shoved together and
welded solid to make waist-high platforms. These had been heaped with soil
and planted with mutant grasses and bonsai trees. The scene had been laced
with little dirt roads and an HO Gauge railroad layout, dotted with
dollhouses and doll-barns and little doll towns of often-incompatible scales.
The whole thing was about one hundred by fifty meters, and it was here the
children raised their horselets and other things. Lots of other things.
Being children, and Heinleiners, it was not as neat as it might have been.
They'd forgotten to provide good drainage, so large parts suffered from
erosion. A grandiose plan to make mountains against the back wall had the
look of a project never finished and long-neglected, with bare orange plastic
matting showing the bones of where the mountains would have been if they
hadn't run out of both enthusiasm and plaster of Paris.
But if you squinted and used your imagination, it looked pretty good.
And your nose didn't need to be fooled at all. Walk in the door and you'd
immediately know you were in a place where horses and cattle roamed free.
Libby called to us from one of the little barns, so we climbed up a stile
and onto the platform itself. I walked gingerly, afraid to step on a tree or,
worse, a horse. When I got there the three of them were kneeling beside the
red-sided barn. They had the roof lid raised and were peering down to
where the mare was lying on her side on a bed of straw.
"Look! It's coming out!" Gretel squeaked. I did look, then looked
away, and sat down beside the barn, knocking over a section of white rail
fence as I did so. Hell, the fence was just for show, anyway; the cows and
horses jumped over it like grasshoppers. I lowered my head a little and
decided I was going to be all right. Probably.
"Something wrong, Hildy?" Libby asked. I felt his hand on my shoulder
and made an effort to look up at him and smile. He was a red-headed boy of
almost eighteen, even lankier than Hansel, and he had a crush on me. I
patted his hand and said I was fine and he went back to his pets.

I'm not notably queasy, but I'd been having these spells associated with
pregnancy. I still had a month to go, far too late to change my mind. It was
an experience I wasn't likely to forget. Trust me, when you get up at three
A.M. with an insatiable hunger for chocolate-coated oysters, you don't forget
it. The sight of it coming back up in the morning is unlikely to slip your
mind, either.
I'd been a little concerned about the pre-natal care I was getting. There
was a problem, in that I could hardly go to a clinic in King City, as the
medics were bound to notice my unorthodox left lung. The Heinleiners had
a few doctors among them and the one I'd been seeing, "Hazel Stone," told
me I had nothing to worry about. Part of me believed her, and part of me—a
new part I was just beginning to understand: the paranoid mother—did not.
It didn't seem to surprise her and she took the time to do what she could to
put my mind at ease.
"It's true the stuff I have out here isn't as up-to-date as my equipment in
King City," she had said. "But we're not talking trephining and leeches,
either. The fact is that you're doing well enough I could deliver him by hand
if I had to, with just some clean water and rubber gloves. I'll see you once a
week and I guarantee I'll spot any possible complications instantly." She
then offered to "just take him out now and pop him in a bottle, if you want
to. I'll keep him right in my office, and I'll hook up as many machines as it
takes to make you feel better."
I'd realized she was just humoring me, but I gave it some thought. Then
I told her, no, I was determined to stick it out to the end, since I'd come this
far, and I said I realized I was being silly.
"It's part of the territory," she had said. "You get mood swings, and
irrational impulses, cravings. If it gets bad enough, I can do something
about those, too." Maybe it was just a reaction to all the tampering the CC
had recently been doing to me, but I refused her mood levelers. I didn't like
the swings, and I'm not a masochist, but if you're going to do this, Hildy, I
told myself, you should find out what it's like. Otherwise, you might as well
just read about it.
But the real source of my nervousness was just as silly as a plate of
pickles and ice cream. Since I was still living in Texas and commuting to
Delambre, I had also been seeing Ned Pepper once a week, too. Ostensibly
it was to keep him and others from getting suspicious, but I'm pretty sure it
was also because I found him oddly reassuring. The thing is, while no one
held any brief for his medical knowledge or skills, most people felt he was a

damn good intuitive diagnostician. Had he been born in a simpler era he
might have made quite a name for himself. And . . .
"Hildy," he told me, tapping his stethoscope against his lip, "I don't want
to alarm you, but something about this pregnancy makes me nervous as a
jacked-off polecat." He took another pull on his bottle and staggered to his
feet as I settled my skirt back around my legs. That's the only reason I'd
been able to go to him and not the King City sawbones; a West Texas
gynecological exam barely disarranged your clothing. The Doctor would
poke his cold metal heartbeat disc under my shirt and listen to my heart and
the fetal one, thump my back and my belly, take my body temperature with a
glass thermometer, then ask me to swing my feet up into these here stirrups,
my dear. I knew he had a shiny brass speculum he was dying to try out but I
drew the line at that. Just let him look and play doctor and we'd both go
home happy. So what was this nervous shit? He didn't have any right to be
nervous. He sure didn't have the right to tell me about it. He seemed to
realize that as soon as the slug of red-eye hit his belly.
"I assume you're getting real medical care?" he asked, sheepishly.
When I told him I was, he nodded, and snapped his suspenders. "Well, then.
Don't fret yourself none. He'll probably come out a ridin' a wild bronc and
dealin' five-card stud. Just like his mama."
Naturally, I did worry. Pregnancy is insanity, take it from me.
#
When I was sure my nausea had passed I stood up and saw I'd been
sitting on the hen coop. It had a steel framework but my weight had
loosened a lot of the fake wooden shingles glued to the sides. A rooster
about the size of a mouse was protesting this outrage by pecking at my toes.
Inside, several dozen hens were . . . well, egging him on. Sorry.
The colt wouldn't be standing on his own for a little while yet, but the
show was basically over. Hansel and Gretel and Libby moved off to other
pursuits. I stayed a little longer, empathizing with the mare, who looked up
at me as if to say You'll get your turn soon enough, Miss Smarty. I reached
in and stroked the new-born with my fingertip, and the mother tried to bite
my hand. I didn't blame her. I got up, dusted my knees, and headed over to
the farm house.
I knew the house lid was hinged; I'd seen the kids lift it up. But I was
still ambivalent enough about these pets that I didn't want to do that. Instead
I bent over and pushed the little doorbell. In a moment one of the male

kewpies came out and looked up expectantly, hoping for a treat.
If the horselets and mini-kine and dwarfowl were cherry bombs in a
scale of illegal explosiveness, then the kewpies were ten sticks of dynamite.
Kewpies were little people, no more than twenty centimeters tall.
The children had named them well. These are not adult human beings,
done to scale. In an effort to make them smarter, Libby had given them
bigger brains, and thus bigger heads. Perfectly sane reasoning, for a child.
It might even be right, for all I knew about it. But though he assured me the
current generation was much more clever than the two preceding ones, they
were no more intelligent than any of several species of monkey.
They were not human, let's get that out of the way right now. But they
contained human genes, and that is strictly forbidden on Luna under laws
over two centuries old. I didn't have any of these creepy little baby dolls to
ride my little horselet when I was a nipper. I don't think anybody did. No,
these were the result of Libby's enquiring young mind, and no one else's.
If you could get over the shock and horror almost every Lunarian would
feel at first sight of the things, they were actually quite cute. They smiled a
lot, and were eager to grasp your finger in their tiny little hands. Most of
them could say a word or two, things like "candy!" and "Hi!" A few formed
rudimentary sentences. Possibly they could have been trained to do more,
but the children didn't take the time. In spite of their hands they were not
tool users. They were not little people. And they were cute.
Enough of that. The fact is they made my skin crawl on some very
primitive level. They were bad juju. They were the forbidden fruit of the
Tree of Science. They were faerie sprites, and thou shalt not suffer a witch
to live.
So the real truth is I couldn't make up my mind about the damn things.
On the one hand, what had attracted me to the Heinleiners was the fact that
they were doing things no one else was doing. So . . . all reasonable and
logical rationalizations aside . . . why did they have to do that?
While I was still pondering this question, not for the first time, someone
came up beside me and lifted the lid of the farm house. I looked in with
him, and we both frowned. The inside of the structure was furnished with
little chairs and beds, the former tumbled over and the latter not occupied.
Half a dozen kewpies were curled up here and there, sleeping where the urge
had taken them, and there were piles of what you'd expect from animals
where that urge had taken them. It went a long way toward helping me

believe they weren't little people. It also recalled documentary horror films
from the twentieth century of homes for the insane and the retarded.
The man let the lid drop, looked around, and bellowed for his children,
who came running from where they had been racing model cars, guilty looks
on their faces. He glowered down at them.
"I told you that if you can't keep your pets clean, you can't have them,"
he said.
"We were gonna clean them up, Dad," Hansel said. "Soon as we
finished the race. Isn't that right, Hildy?"
The little bastard. Fearing that my sufferance here was still very much
dependent on these precocious brats, I said, diplomatically I hope, "I'm sure
they would have."
And I said that because I wasn't about to lie to the man standing beside
me, father to Hansel and Gretel, and the man on whose good graces my
continued presence among the Heinleiners really relied.
This is the man the media has always referred to as "Merlin," since he
would never reveal his real name. I'm not even sure if I know his real name,
and I think he trusts me by now, as much as he ever will. But I don't like the
name of Merlin, so in this account I will refer to him as Mister Smith.
Valentine Michael Smith.

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

Mister V.M. Smith, leader of the Heinleiners, was a tall man, ruggedly
handsome in the mold of some of our more virile movie stars, with white,
even teeth that flashed with little points of light when he smiled and blue
eyes that twinkled with wisdom and compassion.
Did I say he was tall? Actually, he was a little shrimp of a guy. Or,
come to think of it, I'd say he was of medium height. And by golly, maybe
his hair was black and curly. Ugly he was, with a snaggled-toothed smile
like a dead pig in the sunshine. Hell, maybe he was bald.
When you get right down to it, I'm not even going to swear he was male.
I think the heat is largely off of him by now, but he (or she) thinks
differently, so there will not even be a description of him from me. My
portraits of the other Heinleiners, children included, are deliberately vague
and quite possibly misleading. To picture him, do what I do when reading a
novel: just pick a famous face you like and pretend he looks like that. Or
make your own composite. Try a young Einstein, with unruly hair and a
surprised expression. You'll be wrong, although I will swear there was a
look in his eyes as if the universe was a much stranger place than he'd ever
imagined.
And that business about leading the Heinleiners . . . if they had a leader,
he was it. It was Smith who had made their isolated way of life possible
with his researches into forgotten sciences. But the Heinleiners were an
independent bunch. They didn't go in for town meetings, were unlikely to
be found on the rosters of service clubs—didn't really hold much of a brief
for democracy, when you get right down to it. Democracy, one of them said
to me once, means you get to do whatever the majority of silly sons of
bitches says you have to do. Which is not to say they favored dictatorship
("getting to do what one silly son of a bitch says you have to do." op. cit.).
No, what they liked (if I may quote one more time from my Heinleiner
philosopher) was forgetting about all the silly sons of bitches and doing
what they damn well pleased.
This is a hazardous way of life in a totally urbanized society, apt to land

you in jail—where an embarrassing number of Heinleiners did live. To live
like that you need elbow room. You need Texas, and I mean the real Texas,
before the arrival of the iron horse, before the Mexicans, before the
Spaniards. Hell, maybe before the Indians. You needed the Dark Continent,
the headwaters of the Amazon, the South Pole, the sound barrier, Everest,
the Seven Lost Cities. Wild places, unexplored places, not good old stodgy
old Luna. You needed elbow room and adventure.
A lot of Heinleiners had lived in disneys, some still did as at least a
better alternative to the anthill cities. But it didn't take long to discover what
toy frontiers they actually were. The asteroid belt and the outer planets had
high concentrations of these crotchety malcontents, too, but it had been a
long time since either place had been a real challenge to humanity. A lot of
ship's captains were Heinleiners, a lot of solitary miners. None of them were
happy—possibly that type of person can never be happy—but at least they
were away from the masses of humanity and less likely to get into trouble if
offered an intolerable insult—like bad breath, or inappropriate laughter.
That's unfair. While there were quite a number of antisocial hotheads
among them, most had learned to socialize with the group, swallow the
unpleasantness of daily life, put up with the thousand small things we each
endure every day. It's called civilization. It's making your needs, your
dreams, subservient to the greater good, and we all do it. Some of us do it so
well we forget we ever had dreams of adventure. The Heinleiners did it
badly; they still remembered. They still dreamed.
Those dreams and five cents will get you a cup of coffee anywhere in
Luna. The Heinleiners realized that, until Mister Smith came along and
made them think fairy tales can come true, if you wish upon a star.
I followed Smith out of the farm, where he'd left his children and Libby
hard at work cleaning out the kewpies' house. We were in one of the long
corridors of the R.A. Heinlein, some of which, like this one, were coated
with the silvery null-field. I was about to go after him when I remembered
Winston. I stuck my head back into the room, snagged his helmet, and
whistled, and he came lumbering out from beneath the tables. He was
licking his chops and I thought I saw traces of blood around his mouth.
"Have you been eating horses again?" I asked him. He merely gazed up
and licked his nose. He knew he wasn't supposed to get up on the tables, but
there were always some horselets that had foolishly jumped off and he felt
they were fair game. I didn't know what the kids thought of his hunting,
since I didn't know if they were aware of it; I hadn't told them. But I know

Winston was getting a taste for horsemeat.
I'd thought I'd have to hurry to catch up with Smith, but when I looked
up I saw he'd paused a little way down the corridor and was waiting for me.
"So you're still around, eh?" he said. Yessir, my reputation in the old
R.A.H. couldn't have been higher.
"I guess it's because I just love children."
He laughed at that. I'd only met him three times before and not talked to
him very long on any of those occasions, but he was one of those people
good at sizing others up on short acquaintance. Most of us think we are, but
he was.
"I know they're not easy to love," he said. "I probably wouldn't love
them so much if they were." It was a very Heinleinerish thing to say; these
folks cherish perversity, you understand.
"You're saying only a father could love 'em?"
"Or a mother."
"That's what I'm counting on," I said, and patted my belly.
"You'll either love him quick, or drown him." We walked on for a while
without saying anything. Every once in a while one of the null-field safety
locks would vanish in front of us and re-appear behind us. All automatic,
and all happening only for those with null-suits installed.
These people didn't engineer anything any better than they had to, and
the reason was simply that they had this marvelous back-up system. It's
going to be revolutionary, I tell you.
"I get the feeling you don't approve," he said, at last.
"Of what? Your kids? Hey, I was just—"
"Of what they do."
"Well, Winston sure does. I think he's eaten half their stock."
I was thinking fast. I wanted to learn more from this man, and the way
to do that is not by running down his children and his way of life. But one
of the things I knew about him was that he didn't like liars, was good at
detecting them, and, though a career in reporting had made me a world-class
liar, I wasn't sure I could get one by him. And I wasn't sure I wanted to. I
had hoped I'd put a lot of that behind me. So instead of answering his
question, I said something else, a technique familiar to any journalist or

politician.
And it seemed to have worked. He just grunted, and reached down to
pet Winston's ugly mug. Once more the hound came through for me, not
taking off the hand at the wrist. Still digesting the horselet, probably.
#
We came to a door marked MAIN DRIVE ROOM, and he held it open
for me. You could have driven a golf ball into the room and never hit a wall,
and you could have driven a medium-size rover race in it. Whether you
could drive a spaceship the size of the Heinlein was very much an open
question. But in front of me were the signs that someone was trying.
Most of the cavernous room was filled with structures whose precise
description I must leave to your imagination, since the drive room of the
Heinlein is still a closely-guarded secret and certainly will be until long after
they get the damn thing to work. I will say this: whatever you imagine will
surely be far off the mark. It is unexpected, and startling, like opening the
hood of a rover and finding it's powered by a thousand mice licking a
thousand tiny crankshafts, or by the moral power of virginity. And this:
though I could hardly identify anything as basic as a nut and bolt in the
fantastical mess, it still had the look of Heinleiner engineering, wherein
nothing is ever any better than it has to be. Maybe if they get time to move
beyond prototypes they'll get more elegant and more careful, but in the
meantime it's "Don't bend that wrench. Get a bigger hammer." Heinleiner
toolboxes must be filled with bubblegum and bobby pins.
And yes, O good and faithful reader, they were planning to launch the
hulk of the old Robert A. Heinlein into interstellar space. You heard it here
first. They were not, however, planning to do it with an endless stream of
nuclear cherry bombs pooting out the tailpipe. Just what principles were
envisioned is still proprietary information, but I can say it was a variant
technology of the mathematics that produced the null-field. I can say it
because no one but Smith and a handful of others know what that technology
is.
Just imagine them harnessing the old wreck to a team of very large
swans, and leave it at that.
"As you can see," Smith was saying as we walked down a long and
fairly rickety flight of metal stairs, "they've just about frabjulated the
primary phase of the osmosifractionating de-hoo-dooer. And those guys
ratattating the willy-nilly say they ought to have it whistling Dixie in three

days' time."
No secrecy involved here. I'd have written exactly what he said, if I had
any hope of remembering it, and the meaning would have been the same:
nothing. Smith never seemed to mind if his audience was coming into the
clubhouse two or three holes behind him; he rattled off his own private
jargon without regard to whether or not it was being monitored. Sometimes
I thought it just helped him to think out loud. Sometimes I thought he was
showing off. Probably a little of both.
But I can't get away from the subject of the interstellar drive without
mentioning the one time he made an attempt to put it in layman's terms. It
stuck in my mind, possibly because Smith had a way of making "layman"
rhyme with "retarded."
"There are basically three states of matter," he had said. "I call them
wackiness, dogmatism, and perversity. The universe of our experience is
almost totally composed of dogmatic matter, just as it's mostly what we call
'matter,' as opposed to 'anti-matter'—though dogmatic matter includes both
types. Every once in a great while we get evidence of some perverse matter.
It's when you move into the realm of the wacky that you have to watch out."
"I've known that all my life," I had told him.
"Ah, but the possibilities!" he had said, waving his hand at the drive
taking shape in the engine room of the Heinlein.
As he did now, providing the sort of segue I hate when a director does it
in a movie, but the fact is Smith had a habit of waving his hand grandly
when coming upon his mighty works. Hell, he had a right.
"See what can come from the backwaters of science?" he said. "Physics
is a closed book, they all said. Put your talents to work in something
useful."
"'They jeered me at the Sorbonne!'" I suggested.
"They threw eggs when I presented my paper at the Institute! Eggs!"
He leered at me, dry-washing his hands, hunching his shoulders. "The fools!
Let them see who has the last laugh, ha ha HA!" He dropped the mad
scientist impression and patted a huge machine on its metal flank, a cowboy
gentling a horse. Smith could have been insufferably stuffy except for the
fact he'd seen almost as many old movies as I had.
"No kidding, Hildy, the fools are going to be impressed when they see
what I've wrung out of the tired old husk of physics."

"You'll get no argument from me," I said. "What happened to physics,
anyway? Why was it neglected for so long?"
"Diminishing returns. They spent an insane amount of money on the
GSA about a century ago, and when they turned it on they found out they'd
hubbled it up. The repairs would have—"
"The GSA?"
"Global Supercooled Accelerator. You can still find a lot of it, running
right around the Lunar equator."
I remembered it then; I'd followed it part of the way when I ran in the
Equatorial Rover Race.
"They built big instruments out in space, too. They learned a lot about
the universe, cosmologically and sub-atomically, but very little of it had any
practical use. It got to where learning any more, in the directions physics
kept going, would cost trillions just to tool up. If you did it, when you were
done you'd have learned what went on in the first billionth of a nano-second
of creation, and then you'd just naturally want to know what happened in the
first thousandth of a nano-nano-second, only that'd cost ten times as much.
People got tired of paying those kind of bills to answer questions even less
reality-based than theology, and the smart people noticed that for peanuts
you could find out practical things in biological science."
"So all the original research now is in biology," I said.
"Hah!" he shouted. "There is no original research, unless you count
some of the things the Central Computer does. Oh, a few people here and
there." He waved his hand, dismissing them. "It's all engineering now.
Take well-known principles and find a way to make a better toothpaste."
His eyes lit up. "That's a perfect example. A few months back, I woke up
and my mouth tasted like peppermint. I looked into it, turns out it's a new
sort of 'bot. Some idiot thought this up, built it, and let it loose on an
unsuspecting public. It's in the water, Hildy! Can you imagine?"
"It's a crying shame," I muttered, trying not to meet his eye.
"Well, I got the antidote. Maybe my mouth does taste rotten in the
morning, but at least it tastes like me. Reminds me who I am." Which I
guess is a perfect example of both the perversity of Heinleiners and the
cultural passivity they rebelled against. And the big reason I liked them, in
spite of their best efforts to thwart my affection.
"It's all handed down from on high now," he went on. "We're like

savages at an altar, waiting for miracles to be handed down. We don't
envision the miracles we might work, if we set ourselves to it."
"Like little people, eight inches high and smart as lab rats."
He winced, the first indication I'd had of a moral uncertainty. Thank
god for that; I like people to have opinions, but people with no doubts scare
me.
"You want me to defend that? Okay. I've brought those children up to
think for themselves, and to question authority. It's not unlimited; me or
somebody who knows more about it has to approve their projects, and we
keep an eye on them. We've created a place where they can be free to make
their own rules, but they're children, they have to follow our rules, and we
set as few as possible. Do you realize this is the only place in Luna where
the eyes of our mechanical Big Brother can't look? Not even the police can
come in here."
"I have no reason to love the Central Computer, either."
"I didn't think so. I thought you might have a story to tell about that, or
I'd never have let you in. You'll tell it when you're ready. Do you know why
Libby makes little people?"
"I didn't ask him."
"He might have told you; might not have. It's his solution to the same
problem I'm working on: interstellar travel. His reasoning is, a smaller
human being requires less oxygen, less food, a smaller spacecraft. If we
were all eight inches high, we could go to Alpha Centauri in a fuel drum."
"That's crazy."
"Not crazy. Ridiculous, probably. Unattainable, almost certainly.
Those kewpies live about three years, and I doubt they'll ever have much of
a brain. But it's an innovative solution to a problem the rest of Luna isn't
even working on. Why do you think Gretel goes running across the surface
in her birthday suit?"
"You weren't supposed to know about that."
"I've forbidden it. It's dangerous, Hildy, but I know Gretel, and I know
she's still trying it. And the reason is, she hopes she'll eventually adapt
herself to living in vacuum without any artificial aids."
I thought of the fish stranded on the beach, flopping around, probably
doomed but still flopping.

"That's not how evolution works," I said.
"You know it and I know it. Tell it to Gretel. She's a child, and a smart
one, but with childish stubbornness. She'll give it up sooner or later. But I
can guarantee she'll try something else."
"I hope it's less hare-brained."
"From your lips to God's ears. Sometimes she . . ." He rubbed his face,
and made a dismissing gesture with his hand. "The kewpies make me
uneasy, I'll admit that. You can't help wondering how human they are, and
if they are human, whether or not they have any rights, or should have any
rights."
"It's experimentation on humans, Michael," I said. "We have some
pretty strong laws on that subject."
"What we have are taboos. We do plenty of experimentation on human
genes. What we're forbidden to do is create new humans."
"You don't think that's a good idea?"
"It's never that simple. What I object to are blanket bans on anything.
I've done a lot of research into this—I was against it at first, just like you
seem to be. You want to hear it?"
"I'd be fascinated."
We'd come to an area of the engine room I thought of as his office, or
laboratory. It was the place I'd spent most of what little time I'd had with
him. He liked to put his feet up on a wooden desk as old as Walter's but a
lot more battered, look off into infinity, and expound. So far, his innate
caution had always stopped him from getting too deeply into anything when
I was around, but I sensed he needed an outsider's opinion. The lab? Think
of it as full of bubbling retorts and sizzling Jacob's ladders. Omit the
hulking body strapped to the table; that was his children's domain. The
place didn't look anything like that, but it's the proper stage set,
metaphorically.
"It's a question of where to draw the line," he said. "Lines have to be
drawn; even I realize that. But the line is constantly moving. In a
progressing society, the line should be moving. Did you know it was once
illegal to terminate a pregnancy?"
"I'd heard of it. Seems very strange."
"They'd decided that a fetus was a human. Later, we changed our

minds. Society used to keep dead people hooked up to something called
'life-support,' sometimes for twenty or thirty years. You couldn't turn the
machines off."
"Their brains were dead, you mean."
"They were dead, Hildy, by our standards. Corpses with blood being
pumped through them. Bizarre, creepy as hell. You wonder what they were
thinking of, what their reasoning could possibly have been. When people
knew they were dying, when they knew that death was going to be horribly
painful, it was thought wrong of them to kill themselves."
I looked away; I don't know if he caught it, but I think he did.
"A doctor couldn't help them die; he'd get prosecuted for murder.
Sometimes they even withheld the drugs that would be best at stopping the
pain. Any drug that dulled the senses, or heightened them, or altered the
consciousness in any way was viewed as sinful—except for the two most
physically harmful drugs: alcohol and nicotine. Something relative
harmless, like heroin, was completely illegal, because it was addictive, as if
alcohol was not. No one had the right to determine what he put into his own
body, they had no medical bill of rights. Barbaric, agreed?"
"No argument."
"I've studied their rationalizations. They make very little sense now.
The reasons for the bans on human experimentation make a lot of sense.
The potential for abuse is enormous. All genetic research involves hazards.
So rules were evolved . . . and then set in stone. No one has taken a look at
them in over two hundred years. My position is, it's time to think it over
again."
"And what did you come up with?"
"Hell, Hildy, we've barely started. A lot of the prohibitions on genetic
research were made at a time when something released into the environment
could theoretically have disastrous results. But we've got room to
experiment now, and fool-proof means of isolation. Do the work on an
asteroid, and if something goes wrong, quarantine it, then shove it into the
sun."
I had no problem with that, and told him so.
"But what about the human experiments?"
"They make me queasy, just like you. But that's because we were raised
to view them as evil. My children have no such inhibitions. I've told them

all their lives that they should be able to ask any question. And they should
be able to do any experiment, as long as they feel they have a reasonable
idea of its outcome. I help them with that part, me, and the other parents."
I probably had a dubious expression on my face. It would have made
perfect sense, since I was feeling dubious.
"I'm way ahead of you," he said. "You're going to bring up the old
'superman' argument."
I didn't dispute it.
"I think it's time that one was looked at again. They used to call it
'playing God.' That term has fallen out of favor, but it's still there. If we're
going to set out to improve humans genetically, to build a new human, who's
going to make the choices? Well, I can tell you who's making them now,
and I'll bet you know the answer, too."
It didn't take a lot of thought. "The CC?" I ventured.
"Come on," he said, getting up from his desk. "I'm going to show you
something."
#
I had a hard time keeping up with him—would have at the best of times,
but my current state of roly-polytude didn't help things. He was one of those
straight-ahead people, the sort who, when they've decided where they're
going, can't be easily diverted. All I could do was waddle along in his wake.
Eventually we reached the base of the ship, which I knew mainly
because we left square corridors and right-angle turns for the haphazard
twists of the Great Dump. Not long after that we descended some stairs and
were in a tunnel bored through solid rock. I still had no idea how far this
network extended. I gathered it was possible to walk all the way to King
City without ever visiting the surface.
We came to an abandoned, dimly-lit tube station. Or it had been
abandoned at one time, but the Heinleiners had restored it: pushed the trash
on the platform to one side, hung a few lights, homey touches like that.
Floating a fraction above a gleaming silver rail was a six-person Maglev car
of antique design. It had no doors, peeling paint, and the sign on the side
still read MALL 5-9 SHUTTLE. With stops at all the major ghost warrens
along the way, no doubt: this baby was old.
Random cushions had been spread on the ripped-out seats and we sat on
those and Smith pulled on a cord which rang a little tinkling bell, and the car

began to glide down the rail.
"The whole idea of building a superman has acquired a lot of negative
baggage over the years," he said, picking up as if the intervening walk had
never happened. As if he needed another annoying characteristic. "The
German Fascists are the first ones I'm aware of who seriously proposed it, as
part of an obsolete and foolish racial scheme."
"I've read about them," I said.
"It's nice to talk to someone who knows a little history. Then you'll
know that by the time it became possible to tinker with genes, a lot more
objections had been raised. Many of them were valid. Some still are."
"Is that something you'd like to see?" I asked. "A superman?"
"It's the word that throws you off. I don't know if a 'superman' is
possible, or desirable. I think an altered human is an idea worth looking
into. When you consider that these carcasses we're walking around in were
evolved to thrive in an environment we've been evicted from . . ."
Maybe he said more, but I missed it, because just about then we had a
head-on collision with another tram going in the opposite direction.
Obviously, we didn't really. Obviously, it was just the reflection of the
headlights of our own car as we approached another of those ubiquitous
null-fields. And even more obviously, you weren't there to stand up and
shout like a fool and see your life pass before your eyes, and I'll bet you
would have, too. Or maybe I'm just slow to catch on.
Smith didn't think so. He was very apologetic when he realized what
had happened, and took time to tell me about another little surprise in store,
which happened a minute later when a null-field vanished in front of us and,
with a little gust of wind, we entered vacuum and began to really pick up
speed. The tunnel walls blurred in the beam of our headlights, details
snatched away before they could be perceived.
He had more to say on the subject of human engineering. I didn't get it
all because I was concentrating on not breathing, still learning to wear a
null-suit. But I got his main points.
He thought that while Gretel's method was wrong, her goal was
worthwhile, and I couldn't see what was wrong with it, either. Basically, we
either manufacture our environment or adapt to it. Both have hazards, but it
did seem high time we at least start discussing the second alternative.
Take weightlessness, for example. Most people who spent a lot of time

in free-fall had some body adaptations made, but it was all surgical. Human
legs are too strong; push too hard and you can fracture your skull. It's handy
to have hands instead of feet at the ends of your ankles. Feet are as useless
as vermiform appendices in free-fall. It's also useful to be able to bend and
twist more than the human body normally can.
But the question before the court was this: should humans be bred to
space travel? Should the useful characteristics be put into the genes, so
children are born with hands instead of feet?
Maybe so, maybe not. We weren't talking radical change here, or
anything that couldn't be done just as easily surgically, without raising the
troublesome issues of more than one species of human being.
But what about a human adapted to vacuum? I've no idea how to go
about it, but it probably could be done. What would he look like? Would he
feel superior to us? Would we be his brother, or his cousin, or what? one
thing was sure: it would be a lot easier to do it genetically than with the
knife. And I feel certain the end result would not look very human.
I chewed that one over quite a bit in the coming days, examining my
feelings. I found that most of them came from prejudice, as Smith had said.
I'd been raised to think it was wrong. But I found myself agreeing that it
was at least time to think it over again.
As long as I didn't have to clean up after kewpies.
#
The train car pulled into a siding at another abandoned station where
somebody had scrawled the word "Minamata" over whatever had been there
before. I had no idea how far we'd come, or in what direction.
"This is still part of the Delambre dump, more or less," Smith said, so at
least I had a general idea. We started down a long, filthy corridor, Smith's
flashlight beam bobbing from wall to wall as we walked. In a movie, rats
and other vermin would have been scuttling out of our way, but a rat would
have needed a null-suit to survive this place; mine was still on, and I was
still thinking about breathing.
"There's really no reason why the stuff in here shouldn't be spread out
over the surface like the rest of the garbage," he went on. "I think it's mainly
psychological reasons it's all pumped in here. This is a nasty place. If it's
toxic or radioactive or biochemically hazardous, this is where it comes."

We reached an air lock of the kind that used to be standard when I was a
child, and he motioned me inside. He slapped a button, then gestured
toward the air fitting on the side of my chest.
"Turn that counter-clockwise," he said. "They only come on
automatically when there's a vacuum. There's gas where we're going, but
you don't want to breathe it."
The lock cycled and we stepped into Minamata.
The place had no name on the municipal charts of King City, just Waste
Repository #2. The Heinleiners had named it after a place in Japan that had
suffered the first modern-day big environmental disaster, when industries
had pumped mercury compounds into a bay and produced a lot of twisted
babies. So sorry, mom. That's the breaks.
Minamata Luna was really just a very large, buried storage tank. By
large, I mean you could have parked four starships the size of the Heinlein
without scraping the fenders. Texas is a lot bigger, but it doesn't feel like
being a bug in a bottle because you can't see the walls. Here you could, and
they curved upward and vanished into a noxious mist. The far end was
invisible.
Maybe there was some artificial light in there. I didn't see any, but they
were hardly necessary. The bottom third of the horizontal cylinder was full
of liquid, and it glowed. Red here, green there . . . sometimes a ghastly blue.
The makers of horror films would have killed to get that blue.
We had entered at what seemed the axis of the cylinder, which was
rounded off at this end, like a pressure tank. A ledge, three meters wide and
with a railing, curved away from us in each direction, but to the right was
blocked off with a warning sign. Looking past it, I could see the ledge had
crumbled away in several places. When I looked back Smith was already
moving away from me toward the left. I hurried to catch up with him.
I never did quite catch him. Every time I got close my eye was drawn
by the luminescent sea off to my right, and a few hundred meters down.
The thing about that sea . . . it moved.
At first I only saw the swirls of glowing color like an oil film on water.
I'd always thought colorful things were just naturally pretty things, but
Minamata taught me differently. At first I couldn't explain my queasy
reaction. None of the colors, by themselves, seemed all that hideous (except
for that blue). Surely that same swirl of color, on a shirt or dress, would be a

gorgeous thing. Wouldn't it? I couldn't see why not. I began walking more
slowly, trailing my hand along the top of the rail, trying to figure why it all
disturbed me so.
The side of the cylinder went straight down from the edge of the ledge
we walked on, then gradually curved inward until it met the fluorescent sea.
Waves were rolling sluggishly to crash against the metal sides of the tank.
Waves, Hildy? What could be causing waves in this foul soup?
Maybe some agitating mechanism, I thought, though I couldn't see any
use for one. Then I saw a part of the sea hump itself up, ten or twenty
meters high—it was hard to judge the scale from my vantage point. Then I
saw strange shapes on the borderline between sea and shore, things that
moved among the mineral efflorescences that grew like arthritic fingers
along that metal beach. Then I saw something that, I thought, raised its head
on a spavined neck and looked at me, reached out a hungry hand . . .
Of course, it was a long way off. I could have been wrong.
Smith took my arm without a word and urged me along. I didn't look at
the Minamata Sea again.
#
We came to a series of circular mirrors standing against the vertical wall
to our left. Each had a number over it. I realized that tunnels had been
bored into the walls here and each had been sealed off with a null-field
barrier.
Smith stopped before the eighth, pointed at it, and stepped in. I
followed him, and found myself in a short tunnel, maybe twenty meters
long, five meters high. Halfway down the tunnel were metal bars. Beyond
that point a level floor had been built to support a cot, chair, desk, and toilet,
all looking as if they'd been ordered from some cheap mail-order house. On
our side of the bars was a portable air plant, which seemed to be doing its
job, as my suit had vanished as I stepped through the field. Spare oxygen
cylinders and crates of food were stacked against the wall.
Sitting on the cot and watching a slash-boxing show on the television,
was Andrew MacDonald. He glanced up from the screen as we entered, but
he did not rise.
Possibly this was a new point of etiquette. Should the dead rise for the
living? Be sure to ask at your next seance.
"Hello, Andrew," Smith said. "I've brought someone to see you."

"Yes?" Andrew said, with no great interest. His eyes turned to me,
lingered for a moment. There was no spark of recognition. Worse than that,
there was none of that penetrating quality I'd seen on the day he . . . hell,
how else can I say it? On the day he died. For a moment I though this was
just some guy who looked a lot like Andrew. I guess I was half right.
"Sorry," he said, and shrugged. "Don't know her."
"I'm not surprised," Smith said. He looked at me. I had the feeling I
was supposed to say something perceptive, intelligent. Maybe I was
supposed to have figured it all out.
"What the fuck's going on here?" I said, which was a lot better than
"duuuuh," which was my first reaction, though neither really qualifies as
perceptive.
"Ask him," Andrew said. "He thinks I'm dangerous."
I'd started toward the bars but Smith put his hand on my arm and shook
his head.
"See what I mean?" the prisoner said.
"He is dangerous," Smith told me. "When he first came here, he nearly
killed a man. Would have, but we got to him in time. Want to tell us about
that, Andrew?"
He shrugged. "He stepped on my foot. It wasn't my fault."
"I've had enough of this," I said. "What the hell are you people doing in
here? I saw this man die, or his twin brother."
Smith was about to say something, but I'd finally gotten Andrew
interested. He stood and came to the bars, held on with one hand while the
other played idly with his genitals. You see that sometimes, in old alkies or
voluntary skitzys down in Bedrock. It's a free planet, right? Nobody can
stop them, but people hurry by, like you don't stop and stare if someone is
vomiting, or picking his nose. I'd never seen an apparently healthy man
masturbating with such utter lack of modesty. What had they done to him?
"How did I do?" he asked me, tugging and squeezing. "All they'll tell
me is I died in the ring. You were there? Were you close up? Who was it
that got me? Damn, the least they could do is give me a tape."
"Are you really Andrew MacDonald?"
"That's my name, ask me again and I'll tell you the same."
"It's him," Smith said, quietly. "That's what I've finally decided, after

thinking it over a lot."
"That's not what you said last time," the man said. "You said I was only
part of old Andy. The mean part. I don't think I'm mean." He lost interest
in his penis and stretched a hand through the bars, gesturing. "Toss me a can
of that beef stew, boss man. I've had my eye on that for days."
"You've got plenty of food in there."
"Yeah, but I want stew."
Smith got a plastic can and lobbed it toward the cell; the man snagged it
and tore off the top. He took a big handful and crammed it into his mouth,
chewing noisily. There was a stove, a table, and utensils plainly in sight
behind him, but he didn't seem to care.
"I didn't see you fight," I said, at last.
"Shit. You know, I'd like you if you weren't so fat. You wanna fuck?"
A gravy-covered hand went to his groin once again. "Let's get brown,
honey."
I'm going to ignore the rest of his antics. I still remember them vividly,
and still find them disturbing. I'd once wanted to make love to this man. I'd
once found him quite attractive.
"I was there when they carried you back from the ring," I said.
"The good old squared circle. The sweet science. All there is, really, all
there is. What's your name, fatty?"
"Hildy. You were mortally injured and you refused treatment."
"What a jerk I must have been. Live to fight another day, huh?"
"I'd always thought so. And I thought what you were doing, risking
your life, was stupid. I thought it was unnecessary, too, but you told me
your reasons, and I respect them."
"A jerk," he repeated.
"I guess, when it came time for you to live up to your bargain, I thought
you were stupid, too. But I was impressed. I was moved. I can't say I
thought you were doing the right thing, but your determination was
awesome."
"You're a jerk, too."
"I know."

He continued shoving stew into his face, looking at me with no real
spark of human feeling I could detect. I turned to Smith.
"It's time you told me what's going on here. What's been done to this
man? If this is an example of what you were talking about on the way . . ."
"It is."
"Then I don't want anything to do with it. In fact, damn it, I know I
promised not to talk about you and your people, but—"
"Hang on a minute, Hildy," Smith said. "This is an example of human
experimentation, but we didn't do it."
"The CC," I said, after a long pause. Who else?
"There's something seriously wrong with the CC, Hildy. I don't know
what it is, but I know the results. This man is one. He's a cloned body,
grown from Andrew MacDonald's corpse, or from a tissue sample. When
he's in a mood to talk, he's said things we've checked against his records, and
it seems he really does have MacDonald's memories. Up to a point. He
remembers things up to about three or four years ago. We haven't been able
to test him thoroughly, but what tests we've been able to run bear out what
we've seen from other specimens like him. He thinks he is MacDonald."
"Damn right I am," the prisoner chimed in.
"For all practical purposes, he's right. But he doesn't remember the
Kansas Collapse. He doesn't remember Silvio's assassination. I was certain
he wouldn't remember you, and he didn't. What's happened is that his
memories were recorded in some way, and played back into this clone
body."
I thought it over. Smith gave me time to.
"It doesn't work," I said, finally. "There's no way this thing could have
turned into the man I met in only three or four years. This guy is like a big,
spoiled child."
"Big is right, babe," the man said, with the gesture you'd expect.
"I didn't say the copy was perfect," Smith said. "The memories seem to
be extremely good. But some things didn't record. He has no social
inhibitions whatsoever. No sense of guilt or shame. He really did try to kill
a man who accidentally stepped on his foot, and he never saw what was so
wrong about it. He's incredibly dangerous, because he's the best fighter in
Luna; that's why we have him here, in the best prison we can devise. We,

who don't even believe in prisons."
I could see it would be a tough one to get out of. If you got past the
null-field, there were the toxic gases of Minamata. Beyond that, vacuum.
It seemed that "MacDonald" was the most recent of a long line of
abandoned experiments. Smith wouldn't tell me how the Heinleiners had
come to have him, except to say that, in his case, he'd most likely been sent.
"Early on in this program, we had a pipeline into the secret lab where
this work was going on. The first attempts were pathetic. We had people
who just sat there and drooled, others who tore at themselves with their
teeth. But the CC got better with practice. Some could pass as normal
human beings. Some of them live with us. They're limited, but what can
you do? I think they're human.
"But lately, we've been getting surprise packages, like Andrew here.
We lock them up, interrogate them. Some of them are harmless. Others . . .
I don't think we can ever let them free."
"I don't understand. I mean, I see this one could be dangerous, but—"
"The CC wants in here."
"Into Minamata?"
"No, this is his place. You saw the water down there. That's his work.
He wants into the Heinleiner enclave. He wants the null-field. He wants to
know if I'm successful with the stardrive. He wants to know other things.
He found out about our access to his forbidden experiments, and we started
getting people like Andrew. Walking time bombs, most of them. After a
few tragic incidents, we had to institute some security precautions. Now
we're careful about the dead people we let in here."
It was not the first time an action by the CC had turned my world
upside-down. You live in a time and a place and you think you know what's
going on, but you don't. Maybe no one ever did.
Smith had unloaded too many things on me too quickly. I'd had some
practice at that, with the CC playing games with my head, but I wonder if
anyone ever gets really good at it.
"So he's working on immortality?" I asked.
"Of a sort. The oldest people around now are pushing three hundred.
Most people think there's a limit on how long the human brain can be
patched up in one way or another. But if you could make a perfect record of

everything a human being is, and dump it into another brain . . ."
"Yeah . . . but Andrew is dead. This thing . . . even if it was a better
copy, it still wouldn't be Andrew. Would it?"
"Hey, Hildy," Andrew said. When I turned to face him I got a big glob
of cold, canned beef stew right in the kisser.
He never looked more like an ape as he capered around his cell, hugging
himself, bent over with laughter. It showed no signs of stopping. And the
funny thing was, after a brief flash of homicidal intent, I found it impossible
to hate him. Whatever the CC had left out of this man, he was not evil, as I
had first thought. He was childish and completely impulsive. Some sort of
governor had not been copied right; his conscience had been smudged in
transmission, there was static in his self-control. Think of it, do it. A simple
philosophy.
"Come on next door," Smith said, after giving me some help getting the
worst mess off me. "You can clean up there, and I have something to show
you."
So we went through the null-field again—Andrew was still laughing—
walked eight or nine steps further to cell #9, and stepped in.
And who should I see there but Aladdin, he of the magic lungs, standing
on this side of a barred cell identical to the one we'd just left. Only this one
was not occupied, and the door stood open.
"Who's this one for?" I asked. "And what's Aladdin doing here?" Some
days I'm quick, but this didn't seem to be one of them.
"There's no assigned occupant yet, Hildy," Smith said, displaying
something that had once been a flashlight but had now folded out into what
just had to be a Heinleiner weapon—it had that gimcrack look. "We're
going to ask you some questions. Not many, but the answers may take a
while, so get comfortable. Aladdin's here to remove your null-suit generator
if we don't like the answers."
There was a long, awkward silence. Being held at gunpoint is not
something any of us had much experience of, from either end of the gun. It's
a social situation you don't run into often. Try it at your next party, see how
the guests handle it.
To their credit, I don't think they liked it much more than me.
"What do you want to know?"

"Start with all your dealings with the Central Computer over the last
three years."
So I told them everything.
#
Gretel, that sweet child, would have invited me in the first weekend, as
it turned out. It was Smith and his friends who held up the approval. They
were checking me out, and their resources for doing so were formidable. I'd
been watched in Texas. My background had been researched. As I went
along there were a few times when I missed this or that detail, and I was
always corrected. To lie would have been futile . . . and besides, I didn't
want to lie. If anyone had the answers to the questions I'd been asking
myself about the CC, it was surely these people. I wanted to help them by
telling everything I knew.
I don't want to make this sound more dire than it actually was. Fairly
early we all relaxed. The flashlight was re-folded and put away. If they'd
been really suspicious of me I'd have been brought here on my first visit, but
after the things they had told me it was only prudent for them to interrogate
me in the way they did.
The thing that had upset them was my suicide attempt on the surface. It
had left behind physical evidence, in the form of a ruptured faceplate, and
set them to wondering if I had really died up there.
And as I continued talking about it a disturbing thing occurred to me:
what if I had?
How could I ever know, really? If the CC could record my memories
and play them back into a cloned body, would I feel any different than I did
then? I couldn't think of a test to check it, not one I could do myself. I
found myself hoping they had one. No such luck.
"I'm not worried about that, Hildy," Smith said, when I brought it up. In
retrospect, maybe that wasn't a smart thing to do, pointing out that they
couldn't be sure of me, either, but it didn't matter, since they'd already
thought of it and made up their minds. "If the CC has gotten that good, then
we're licked already."
"Besides," Aladdin put in, "if he's that good, what difference would it
make?"
"It could be important if he'd left a post-hypnotic suggestion," Smith

said. "A perfect copy of Hildy, with a buried injunction to spy on us and
spill her guts when she went back to King City."
"I hadn't thought of that," Aladdin said, looking as if he wished the
flashlight hadn't been put away so hastily.
"As I said, if he's that good we might as well give up." He stood, and
stretched. "No, my friends. At some point you have to stop the tests. At
some point you just have to go with your feelings. I'm very sorry to have
done this to you, Hildy, it's against all I believe in. Your personal life should
be your own. But we're engaged in a quiet war here. No battles have been
fought, but the enemy is constantly feeling us out. The best we can do is be
like a turtle, pull into a shell he can't penetrate. I'm sorry."
"It's okay. I wanted to talk about it, anyway."
He held out his hand, and I took it, and for the first time in many, many
years, I felt like I belonged to something. I wanted to shout "Death to the
CC!" Unfortunately, the Heinleiners were short on slogans, membership
badges, that sort of thing. I sort of doubted I'd be offered a uniform.
Hell, they didn't even have a secret handshake. But I accepted the
ordinary one I was offered gratefully. I was in.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

What did you do during the Big Glitch?
It's an interesting question from several angles. If I'd asked what you
were doing when you heard Silvio had been assassinated, I'd get back a
variety of answers, but a minute after you heard ninety-nine percent of you
were glued to the newspad (twenty-seven percent to the Nipple). It's the
same for other large, important events, the kind that shape our lives. But
each of you will have a different story about the Glitch. The story will start
like this:
Something major in your life suffered a malfunction of some kind.
Depending on what it was, you called the repair-person or the police or
simply started screaming bloody murder. The next thing you did (99.99
percent of you, anyway), was turn on your newspad to see what the hell was
happening. You turned it on, and you got . . . nothing.
Our age is not simply information-rich. It's information-saturated. We
expect that information to be delivered as regularly as the oxygen we
breathe, and tend to forget the delivery is as much at the mercy of fallible
machines as is the air. We view it as only slightly less important than air.
Two seconds of down-time on one of the major pads will generate hundreds
of thousands of complaints. Irate calls, furious threats to cancel
subscriptions. Frightened calls. Panicky calls. To turn on the pad and get
nothing but white noise and fuzz is Luna's equivalent of a planet-wide
earthquake. We expect our info-nets to be comprehensive, ubiquitous, and
global, and we expect it right now.
To this day, the Big Glitch is the mainstay of the counseling industry in
Luna. Those who deal in crisis management have found it a fabulous meal
ticket that shows no signs of expiring. They rate it higher, in terms of stress
produced, than being the victim of violent assault, or the loss of a parent.
One of the things that made it so stressful was that everyone's
experience was different. When your world-view, your opinions and the
"facts" you base them on, the events that have shaped our collective
consciousness, what you like (because everyone else does) and what you
don't like (ditto), all come over that all-pervasive newspad, you're a bit at sea

when the pad goes down and you suddenly have to react for yourself. No
news of how people in Arkytown are taking it. No endless replays of the
highlights. No pundits to tell you what to think about it, what people are
doing about it (so you can do the same). You're on your own, pal. Good
luck. Oh, and by the way, if you choose wrong, it can kill you, buddy.
The Glitch is the one big event where nobody saw the whole thing in an
overview provided by experts whose job it is to trim the story down to a size
that will fit a pad. Everybody saw just a little piece of it, their own piece.
Almost none of those pieces really mattered in the larger scheme of things.
Mine didn't, either, though I was closer to the "center" of the story, if it had a
center, than most of you. Only a handful of experts who finally brought it
under control ever really knew what was going on. Read their accounts, if
you're qualified, if you want to know what really went on. I've tried, and if
you can explain it to me please send a synopsis, twenty-five words or less,
all entries to be scrupulously ignored.
So know going in that I'm not going to provide many technical details.
Know that I'm not going to tell you much about what went on behind the
scenes; I'm as ignorant of it as anyone else.
No, this is simply what happened to me during the Big Glitch . . .
#
Afterwards, when it became necessary to talk about Delambre and the
colony of weirdos in residence there, the newspads had to come up with a
term everyone would recognize, some sort of shorthand term for the place
and the people. As usual in these situations, there was a period of casting
about and market research, listening to what the people themselves were
calling it. I heard the place called a village, a warren, and a refuge. My
particular favorite was "termitarium." It aptly described the random burrows
in the Delambre trash heap.
Pads who didn't like the Heinleiners called the residents a cabal. Pads
who admired them referred to Delambre and the ship as a Citadel. There
was even confusion about the term "Heinleiner." It meant, depending on
who you were talking about, either a political philosophy, a seriously
crackpot religion (eventually known as "Organized Heinleiners"), or the
practitioners of scientific civil disobedience loosely led by V.M. Smith and a
few others.
Simplicity eventually won out, and the R.A.H., the trash pile adjacent to
it, and certain caves and corridors that linked the whole complex to the more

orderly world came to be called "Heinlein Town."
Simplicity has its virtues, but to call it a town was stretching the
definition.
There were forces other than the Heinleiners' militant contrariness that
worked against Heinlein Town ever fielding a softball team, electing a dog
catcher, or putting up signs at the city limits—wherever those might be—
saying Watch Us Grow! Not all the "citizens" were engaged in the type of
forbidden research done by Smith and his offspring. Some were there
simply because they preferred to be isolated from a society they found too
constricting. But because a lot of illegal things were going on, there had to
be security, and the only kind the Heinleiners would put up with was that
afforded by Smith's null-field barriers: the elect could just walk right
through it, while the un-washed found it impenetrable.
But the security also entailed some things even an anarchist would find
inconvenient.
The constriction most of these people were fleeing could be summed up
in two words: Central Computer. They didn't trust it. They didn't like it
peering into their lives twenty-four hours a day. And the only way to keep it
out was to keep it completely out. The only thing that could do that was the
null-field and the related technologies it spun off, arcane arts to which the
CC had no key.
But no matter what your opinion of the CC, it is damn useful. For
instance, whatever line of work you are in, I'd be willing to bet it would be
difficult to do it without a telephone. There were no telephones in Heinlein
Town, or none that reached the outside world, anyway. There was no way to
reach the planet-wide data net in any fashion, because all methods of
interfacing with it were as useful coming in as going out. If Heinlein Town
had one hard and fast rule it was this: The CC shall extend no tentacle into
the Delambre Enclave (my own term for the loose community of trashdwellers).
Hey, folks, people have to work. People who live completely away
from the traditional municipal services have an even stronger work
imperative. There was no oxygen dole in Heinlein Town. If you stayed, and
couldn't pay your air assessment, you could damn well learn to breathe
vacuum.
One result was that eighty percent of "Heinlein Town" residents were no
more resident than I was. I was a weekender because I didn't want to give

up my home and my place in Texas. Most weekenders lived in King City
and spent all their free time in Delambre because they had to pay the bills
and found it impossible to earn any money in Heinlein Town. There were
not many full-time economic niches available, a fact that galled the
Heinleiners no end.
Heinlein Town? Here's what it was really like:
There were half a dozen places with enough people living close by to
qualify as towns or villages. The largest of these was Virginia City, which
had as many as five hundred residents. Strangeland was almost as big. Both
towns had sprung up because of an accident of the process of waste disposal:
a few score very large tin cans had been jumbled together at these locations,
and they were useful for living and farming. By large, I mean up to a
thousand meters in length, half that in diameter. I think they had been strapon fuel tanks at one time. The Heinleiners had bored holes to connect them,
pressurized them, and moved in like poor relations. Instant slum.
You couldn't help being reminded of Bedrock, though these people were
often quite prosperous. There were no zoning regulations that didn't relate
to health and safety. Sewage treatment was taken seriously, for instance, not
only because they didn't want the place to stink like Bedrock but because
they didn't have access to the bounty of King City municipal water. What
they had had been trucked in, and it was endlessly re-used. But they didn't
understand the concept of a public eyesore. If you wanted to string a line
across one of the tanks and hang your laundry on it, it's a free country, ain't
it? If you thought manufacturing toxic gases in your kitchen was a good
idea, go ahead, cobber, but don't have an accident, because civil liability in
Heinlein Town could include the death penalty.
Nobody really owned land in Delambre, in the sense of having a deed or
title (hold on, Mr. H., don't spin in your grave yet), but if you moved into a
place nobody was using, it was yours. If you wanted to call an entire
million-gallon tank home, that was fine. Just put up a sign saying KEEP
OUT and it had the force of law. There was plenty of space to go around.
Everything was private enterprise, often a cooperative of some kind. I
met three people who made a living by running the sewers in the three
biggest enclaves, and selling water and fertilizer to farmers. You paid
through the nose to hook up, and it was worth it, because who wants to
handle every detail of daily life? Many of the largest roads were tollways.
Oxygen was un-metered, but paid for by a monthly fee to the only real civic
agency the Heinleiners tolerated: the Oxygen Board.

Electricity was so cheap it was free. Just hook a line into the main.
And here's the real secret of Mr. Smith's success, the reason a fairly
unlikable man like him was held in such high esteem in the community. He
didn't charge for the null-field jig-saw network that hermetically sealed
Heinlein Town off from the rest of Luna—that had made their way of life
possible. If you wanted to homestead a new area of Delambre, you first
rented a tunneling machine from the people who found, repaired, and
maintained them. When you had your tunnel, you installed the tanks, solar
panels, and heaters of the ALU's every hundred meters, then you went to Mr.
Smith for the null-field generators. He handed them out free.
He had every right to charge for them, of course, and nary a Heinleiner
would have complained. But just so you don't think he was a
goddamcommunist, I should point out that while he gave away the units, he
didn't give away the science. The first thing he told you when he handed
you a generator was, "You fuck with this, you go boom." Years ago
somebody hadn't believed him, had tried to open one up and see what made
the pretty music, and sort of fell inside the generator. There was a witness,
who swore the fellow was quickly spit back out—and how he ever fell into a
device no bigger than a football was a source of wonder in itself—but when
he came out, he was inverted, sort of like a dirty sock. He actually lived for
a little while, and they put him in the public square of Virginia City as a
demonstration of the fruits of hubris.
So there you have the economic, technical, and behavioral forces that
shaped the little hamlet of Virginia City, as surely as rivers, harbors,
railroads and climate shaped cities of Old Earth. Since no pictures of the
place have yet been allowed out by the residents, since I've gathered that, to
most people, "Heinlein Town" conjures thoughts of either troglodyte caverns
dripping slime and infested with bats or of some super-slick, super-efficient
techno-wonderland, I thought I should set the record straight.
To visualize the public square in Virginia City, think of a brighter,
cleaner version of Robinson Park in Bedrock. On a smaller scale. There
was the same curving roof, the same stingy acre of grass and trees in the
center, and the same jumble of packing crates stacked higgledy-piggledy
around the green acre. Both of them just grew that way—Robinson Park in
spite of the law, Virginia City because of the lack of it. In both places
squatters appropriated discarded shipping containers, cut windows and
doors, and hung their hats in them. There and in Bedrock the residents didn't
give a hoot for stacking the damn thing warehouse-fashion, in neat, squared-

up rows. The result was sort of like a pueblo mud dwelling, but not nearly
so orderly, with long crates spanning empty space or jutting out crazily,
ladders leaning everywhere.
There the resemblance ended. Inside the Bedrock hovels you'd be lucky
to find a burlap rug and spare pair of socks; the Heinleiner modules were
gaily painted and furnished, with here a window box full of geraniums and
there a rooftop pigeon pen. The lawn in Virginia City was golf-green trim
and trash free. Bedrockers tended to stack themselves twenty or thirty deep,
until whole impromptu skyscrapers toppled. None of the Virginia City
dwellings were more than six crates from the floor.
The square was the hub of commerce in Delambre, with more shops and
cottage industry than anywhere else. I usually went there first on my
weekend visits because it was a good place to meet people, and because my
peripatetic guides and shameless mooches, Hansel, Gretel, and Libby, were
sure to pass through on a Saturday morning and see if they could hit up good
ol' Hildy for a Double-fudge 'n' Rum Raisin Banana Split at Aunt Hazel's Ice
Cream Emporium and While-U-Wait Surgery Shoppe.
On the day in question, the day of the Big Glitch, I had parked my bynow quite considerable tuchis in one of the canvas chairs set out on the
public walk at that establishment. I nursed a cup of coffee. There would be
plenty of ice cream to eat when the children arrived, and I had no particular
taste for it. I'd made worse sacrifices in pursuit of a story.
Each of the four tables at Hazel's had a canvas umbrella sprouting from
the center, very useful for keeping off the rain and the sun. I scanned the
skies, looking for signs of a cloudburst. Nope, looked like another day of
curved metal roofs and suspended arc-lights. You can't beat the weather
inside an abandoned fuel tank.
I looked out over the square. In the center was a statue, a bit larger than
life-size, of a cat, sitting on a low stone plinth. I had no idea what that was
all about. The only other item of civic works visible was a lot less obscure.
It was a gallows, sitting off to one side of the square. I'd been told it had
only been used once. I was glad to hear the event had not been wellattended. Some aspects of Heinleinism were easier to like than others.
"What the hell are you doing here, Hildy?" I heard myself say.
Someone at a neighboring table looked up, then back down at her sundae.
So the pregnant lady was muttering to herself; so what? It's a free planet.
From beneath the table I heard a familiar wet smacking sound, looked down,
saw Winston had lifted one bleary eye to see if food was coming. I nudged

him with my toe and he sprawled sybaritically on his back, inviting more
intimacy than I had any intention of giving. When no more attention came,
he went to sleep in that position.
"Let's look this situation over," I said. This time neither Winston nor the
lover of hot fudge looked up, but I decided to continue my monologue
internally, and it went something like this:
What with umpty-ump suicide attempts, Hildy, it's been what you might
call a bad year.
You greeted the appearance of the Silver Girl with the loud hosannas of
a Lost Soul who has Seen The Light.
You brought her to ground, using fine journalistic instincts honed by
more years than you care to remember—helped by the fact that she wasn't
exactly trying to stay hidden.
And—yea verily!—she was what you'd hoped she'd be: the key to a
place where people were not content to coast along, year to year, in the little
puddle of light and heat known as the Solar System, evicted from our home
planet, cozened by a grand Fairy Godfather of our own creation who made
life easier for us than it had ever been in the history of the species, and who
was capable of things few of us knew or cared about. Let me hear you say
amen!
Amen!
So then . . . so then . . .
Once you've got the story a certain post-reportoral depression always
sets in. You have a smoke, pull on your shoes, go home. You start looking
for the next story. You don't try to live in the story.
And why not? Because covering any story, whether it be the Flacks and
Silvio or V.M. Smith and his merry band, just showed you more people, and
I was beginning to fear that my problem was simply that I'd had it with
people. I'd set out looking for a sign, and what I'd found was a story. The
Angel Moroni materialized out of good old flash powder, and was held up
with wires. The burning bush smelled of kerosene. Ezekiel's wheel,
flashing across the sky? Look closely. Is that bits of pie crust on it, or
what?
How can you say that, Hildy? I protested. (And the lady with the
sundae got up and moved to another table, so maybe the monologue wasn't
as interior as I had hoped. Maybe it was about to get positively

Shakespearean and I would stand up on my chair and commit a soliloquy.
To be or not to be!) After all (I went on, more calmly), he's building a
starship.
Well . . . yeah. And his daughter is building pigs with wings, and
maybe they'll both fly, but my money was on needing protection from
falling pigshit before I held an interstellar boarding pass in my hand.
Yeah, but . . . well, they're resisting in here. They don't kow-tow to the
CC. Not two weeks ago you were moved almost to tears to be accepted
among them. Now we'll do something about the CC, you thought.
Sure. One of these days.
Two things had come clear to me once the fuzzy-headed camaraderie
had worn off and my cynicism re-asserted itself. One was that the
Heinleiners were as capable of lollygagging procrastination as anyone else.
Aladdin had admitted to me that the resistance was mostly a passive thing,
keeping the CC out rather than bearding him in his lair, mostly because no
one had much of a clue as to how to go about the latter. So they all figured
they'd take the fight to him . . . when they felt like it. Meantime, they did
what we all did about insurmountable problems: they didn't think about it.
The second thing I realized was that, if the CC wanted to be in Heinlein
Town, he would be in Heinlein Town.
I wasn't privy to all their secrets. I didn't know anything of the
machinations that had brought the MacDonald-clone to Minamata, nor much
of anything else about just how hard the CC was trying to penetrate the little
Heinleiner enclave. But even such as me could tell it would be easy to get a
spy in here. Hell, Liz had visited the previous week-end, with me, and had
been admitted solely on the strength of her reputation as a person of known
Heinleiner tendencies. Some sorts of checks were run, I'm sure, but I would
bet anything the CC could get around them if he wanted to infiltrate a spy.
No, the CC was surely curious about these people, and no doubt
frustrated, but the CC was a strange being. Whatever cryogenic turmoil was
currently animating his massive brain was and probably would remain a
mystery to me. It was clear that things were going wrong, or he'd never
have been able to over-ride his programming and do the things he'd done to
me. But it was equally clear that most of his programming was still intact,
or he'd simply have kicked down the front door of this place and marched
everyone off for trial.
Having said all that, why the disillusion, Hildy?

Two reasons. Unreasonable expectations: in spite of all good sense, I
had hoped these people would be somehow better than other people. They
weren't. They just had different ideas. And two, I didn't fit. They didn't
need reporters in here. Gossip sufficed. Teaching was taken very seriously;
no dilettantes need apply. The only other thing I was interested in was
building a starship, and I'd be about as useful as a kewpie with a slide rule.
"Three reasons," I said. "You're depressed, too."
"Don't be," Libby said. "I'm here."
I looked up and saw him sit down after first carefully placing a dish
oozing with chocolate, caramel, and melting ice cream on the table in front
of him. He reached down and scratched Winston's head. The dog licked his
nose, sniffed, and went back to sleep, ice cream being one of the few
foodstuffs he had little interest in. Libby grinned at me.
"Hope I didn't keep you waiting too long," he said.
"No problem. Where's H & G?"
"They said they'd be along later. Liz is back, though." I saw her
approaching across the village green. She had a bottle in one hand. The
Heinleiners made their own booze, naturally, and Liz had professed to like it
on her earlier visit. Probably that little dab of kerosene they added for
flavor.
"Can't stay, folks, can't stay, gotta run," she said, just as if I'd urged her
to stick around. She produced a folding cup from her gunbelt and poured a
shot of pure Virginia City Bonded, tossed it down. It wasn't the first of the
day.
That's right, I said gunbelt. Liz had taken to Heinlein Town from the
first moment I brought her in, because it was the only place outside of the
movie studios where she worked that she could wear a gun. But in here she
could load it with real bullets. She currently sported a matched pair of Colt
.45's, with pearl handles.
"I was hoping we could go do some shooting," Libby said.
"Not today, sweetie. I just dropped by to get a bottle, and retrieve my
dog. Next weekend, I promise. But you buy the lead."
"Sure."
"Has he been a good dog?" Liz cooed, crouching down and scratching
his back, almost toppling over in the process. She was probably talking to

Winston, but I told her he'd been good, anyway. She didn't seem to hear.
Libby leaned a little closer to me and looked at me with concern.
"Are you really feeling depressed?" he asked. He put his hand on mine.
All I really needed at that point in my life was another case of puppy
love, but that's just what had happened. At the rate he was going, pretty
soon he'd be humping my leg, like Winston.
For pity sake, Hildy, give it a rest.
"Just a little blue," I said, putting on a smile for him.
"How come?"
"Wondering where my life is going."
He looked blankly at me. I'd seen the same expression on Brenda's face
when I said something incomprehensible to one who sees nothing but
endless, unlimited vistas stretching ahead. Charitably, I didn't kick him.
Instead, I removed my hand from under his, patted his hand, and finally
noticed the disturbance going on under the table.
"Problems, Liz?" I asked.
"I think he wants to stay here." She had attached a leash to his collar
and was tugging on it, but he had planted his forepaws and dug in. Forget
mules; if you want a metaphor for stubbornness, you need look no farther
than the English Bulldog.
"You could pick him up," Libby suggested.
"If I had no further use for my face," she agreed. "Also arms, legs, and
ass. Winston's slow to anger, but he's worth seeing when he gets there."
She stood, hands on hips in frustration, and her dog rolled over on his back
and went to sleep again. "Damn, Hildy, he surely must like you."
I thought what he liked was hunting live prey—horses and cows,
mostly, though recently a kewpie had gone missing. But I didn't mention
that. Not for Libby's tender ears.
"It's okay, Liz," I said. "He's not much trouble. I'll just keep him this
weekend and drop him by your place on my way home."
"Well, sure, but . . . I mean I'd planned to . . ." She groped around a
little more, then poured herself another drink and made it vanish.
"Right," she said. "See you later, Hildy." She slapped my shoulder in
passing, then took off across the green.

"What was that all about?" Libby asked.
"You never know with Liz."
"Is she really the Queen of England?"
"Yep. And I am the ruler of the Queen's na-vee!"
He got that blank look, field-tested and honed to perfection by Brenda,
then shrugged and applied himself to demolishing the melting mess in front
of him. I guess Gilbert and Sullivan was too much even for a Heinleiner
youth.
"Well . . ." he said, wiping his mouth on the back of his hand, "she sure
can shoot, I've gotta say that."
"I wouldn't get into a fistfight with her either, if I was you."
"But she drinks too much."
"Amen to that. I'd hate to have to pay her liver-replacement tab."
He leaned back in his chair, looking well satisfied with life.
"So. You taking me back to Texas this Sunday evening?"
In a weak moment I'd promised to show all three children where I lived.
Hansel and Gretel seemed to have forgotten about it, but not Libby. I'd have
taken him, but I was pretty sure I'd spend most of my time fighting him off,
and I just wasn't up to it.
"Afraid not. I've got too many test papers to grade. All this traveling to
and from Delambre's gotten me far behind in my teaching duties."
He tried not to show his disappointment.
"Next time," I told him.
"Sure," he said. "Then what do you want to do today?"
"I really don't know, Libby. I've seen the stardrive, and I didn't
understand it. I've seen the farm, and Minamata, and I've seen the spider
people." I'd seen even more wonders than that, some of them unmentioned
here because of promises I made, others for reasons of security, and most
because they simply weren't that interesting. Even a community of wildeyed genius experimenters is going to lay some eggs. "What do you think
we should do?"
He thought it over.
"There's a baseball game over in Strangeland in about an hour."

I laughed.
"Sure," I said. "I haven't watched one in years."
"You can watch if you want," he said. "I meant, we sort of choose up
sides, you know, depending on how many people show up . . ."
"A pick-up game. I thought you meant, like—"
"No, we don't have—"
"—the Heinleiner Tanstaafl's against the King City—"
"—that many people in here."
"Forgive me. I'm still a big-city girl, I guess. You need an umpire?" I
smacked my bloated belly. "I brought my own pads."
He grinned, opened his mouth, and said "We could everybody freeze,
and nobody will get hurt."
At least that's what it sounded like to me, for a split second, before the
synapses sorted themselves out and I saw the last seven words had come
from a tall, bulky party in an alarming but effective costume, holding a rifle
in one hand and a bullhorn in the other.
Once I spotted him, I quickly saw about a dozen others like him and the
same number of King City police, moving across the square in a ragged
skirmish line. The cops had drawn handguns, something seldom seen on
Luna. The others had big projectile weapons or hand-held lasers.
"What the hell are they?" Libby asked. We'd both stood up, like most of
the other people I could see.
"I'd guess they were soldiers," I said.
"But that's crazy. Luna doesn't have an army."
"Looks like we got one when we weren't looking."
And quite a bunch they were, too. The KC cops were equally men and
women, the "soldiers" were all male, and all large. They wore black:
jumpsuits, equipment belts, huge ornate crash helmets with tinted visors,
boots. The belts were hung with things that might have been hand grenades,
ammunition clips, or high-tech pencil sharpeners, for all I could tell.
It later turned out they were mostly props. The costumes had been
rented from a film studio, since the non-existent Army of Luna had nothing
to offer in the way of super-macho display.

They came in our general direction. When they encountered people
they pushed them to the floor and the cops started patting them down for
weapons, and slipping on handcuffs. The soldiers kept on moving, swinging
the muzzles of their weapons this way and that, looking quite pleased with
themselves, all to the booming accompaniment of more orders from the
bullhorn.
"What should we do, Hildy?" Libby asked, his voice shaking.
"I think it's best if we do what they say," I said, quietly, patting his
shoulder to settle him down. "Don't worry, I know a good lawyer."
"Are they going to arrest us?"
"Looks like it."
A cop and a soldier marched up to us and the soldier looked at a datapad
in his hand, then at my face.
"Are you Maria Cabrini, also known as Hildegarde Johnson?"
"I'm Hildy Johnson."
"Cuff her," he told the cop. He turned away as the policewoman started
toward me, and as Libby moved to put himself between me and the cop.
"You keep your hands off her," Libby said, and the soldier pivoted
easily and brought up the butt of his gun and smashed it into the side of
Libby's face. I could hear his jaw shatter. He fell to the ground, totally
limp. As I stared down at him, Winston waddled out from under the table
and sniffed his face.
The cop was saying something angry to the soldier, but I was too
stunned to hear what it was.
"Just do it," the soldier snarled at her, and I started to kneel beside Libby
but the cop grabbed my arm and pulled me up. She snapped one cuff over
my left wrist, still looking at the retreating back of the soldier.
"He can't get away with that," she said, more to herself than to me. She
reached for my other hand and it finally sunk in that this was more than a
normal arrest situation, that things were out of joint, and that maybe I ought
to resist, because if a big ape could just club a young boy senseless
something was going on here that I didn't understand.
So I yanked my right hand away and started to run but she was way
ahead of me, twisting my left hand hard until I ended up bent over the table
with her behind me, pressing my face into the remains of Libby's sundae. I

kept fighting to keep my right hand free and she jerked me upright by my
hair, and she screamed, and let go of me.
They tell me Winston came off the ground like a squat rocket, that great
vise of a jaw open wide, and clamped it shut on her forearm, breaking her
grip on me and knocking her to the ground. I fell over myself, and landed
on my butt, from which position I watched in horrified fascination as
Winston made every effort to tear the limb from its socket.
I hope I never see anything like that again. Winston couldn't have
massed a seventh as much as the policewoman, but he jerked her around like
a rag doll. His jaws opened only enough to get a better grip in a different
place. Even over the sound of her screams I could hear the bones crunching.
Now the soldier was coming back, raising his rifle as he came, and now
a shot rang out and blood sprayed from the front of his chest, and again, and
once more, and he fell on his face, hard, and didn't move. Then everybody
was firing at once and I crawled under the metal table as lead slugs screamed
all around me.
The fire was concentrated at first on a window high in the stack of
apartment crates surrounding the square. Part of the wall vanished in plastic
splinters, then a red line thrust into the wreckage and something bloomed
orange flame. I saw more gun barrels sticking out of more windows, saw
another soldier go down with the lower part of his leg blown off, saw him
turn as he fell and start firing at another window.
In seconds it seemed I was the only person there who didn't have a
weapon. I saw a Heinleiner crouched behind the gallows, snapping off shots
with a handgun. His null-suit was turned on, coating him in silver. I saw
him hit by a half a clip from an automatic rifle. He froze. I don't mean he
stood still; he froze, like a chromium statue, toppled with bullets still
whanging off of him, rolled over on his back, still in the same attitude. Then
his null-suit switched off and he tried to get up, but was hit by three more
bullets. His skin had turned lobster-red.
I didn't understand that, and I didn't have time to think about it. People
were still running for cover, so I did, too, past overturned tables and chairs
and the dead body of a King City policeman, into Aunt Hazel's shop. I
scurried around and crouched behind the counter, intending to stay there
until someone came to explain what the hell was going on.
But the itch is buried deep, and makes you do stupid things when you
least expect it. If you've never been a reporter, you wouldn't understand. I

raised my head and looked over the counter.
I can replay the tape from my holocam and say exactly what happened,
in what order, who did what to whom, but you don't live it that way. You
retain some very vivid impressions, in no particular order, with gaps
between when you don't have any idea what happened. I saw people
running. I saw people cut almost in half by lasers, ripped by bullets. I heard
screams and shouts and explosions, and I smelled gunpowder and burning
plastic. I suppose every battlefield has looked and sounded and smelled
pretty much the same.
I couldn't see Libby, didn't know if he was dead or alive. He wasn't
where he had fallen. I did see more cops and soldiers arriving from some of
the feeder tunnels.
Something crashed through the windows in front, something large, and
tumbled over the ice cream freezers there, turning one of them over. I
crouched down, and when I looked up again there was the policewoman,
Winston still attached to her arm, which was in danger of coming off.
It was a scene from hell. Crazed by pain, the woman was swinging her
arm wildly, trying to get the dog to let go. Winston was having none of it.
Bleeding from many cuts, he ignored everything but his inexorable grip.
He'd been bred to grab a bull by the nose and never let go; a K.C.
policewoman wasn't about to get free.
But now she was scrabbling for her holster, forgotten in her fear and
panic. She got her gun out and aimed it toward the dog. Her first shot went
wild, killing nothing but an ice cream freezer. The second shot hit Winston
in the left hind leg, where it was thickest, and still the beast didn't let go. If
anything, he fought all the harder.
Her last shot hit him in the belly. He went limp—everything but his
jaw. Even in death he wasn't going to let go.
She took aim at his head, and then slumped over, passed out at last. It
was probably for the best, because I think she would have blown her own
arm off, the way she had the gun pointed.
Later, I felt sorry for her. At the time I was simply too confused to feel
much of anything but fear. I mourned Winston later, too. He'd been trying
to protect me, though I recall thinking at the time that he'd over-reacted.
She'd only been trying to handcuff me, hadn't she?
And what about the soldiers? It had looked to me as if the Heinleiners

had fired the first shot. All sane reasoning would lead me to think that, if
that first soldier hadn't been hit, this could all have ended peacefully at the
jailhouse with a lot of lawyers arguing, charges brought, countersuits filed.
I'd have been out on bail within a few hours.
Which was still what I'd have liked to have done, and would have, but
any fool could see things had gone too far for that. If I stepped out waving a
white flag I was pretty sure I'd be killed, apologies sent to the next of kin.
So Hildy, I told myself, your first priority is to get out of here without
getting shot. Let the lawyers sort it out later, when the bullets aren't flying.
With that end in mind, I started crawling toward the door. My intent
was to stick my head out, low, and see what stood between me and the
nearest exit. Which turned out to be a black boot planted solidly in the
doorway, almost under my nose by the time I got there. I looked up the
black-clad leg and into the menacing face of a soldier. He was pointing a
weapon at me, some great bulky thing I thought might be a machine gun,
whose muzzle looked wide enough to spit baseballs.
"I'm unarmed," I said.
"That's the way I like 'em," he said, and flipped up his visor with his
thumb. There was something in his eyes I didn't like. I mean, beyond
everything else I didn't like about the situation. Just a little touch of
madness, I think.
He was a big man with a broad face entirely innocent of any evidence of
thought. But now a thought did flicker behind those eyes, and his brow
wrinkled.
"What's your name?"
"H . . . Helga Smith."
"Nah," he said, and dug into a pocket for a datapad, which he scanned
with a thumb control until my lovely phiz smiled back at us. He returned the
smile, but I didn't, because his smile was the worst news I'd had so far in a
day filled with bad news. "You're Hildy Johnson," he said, "and you're on
the death list so it don't matter what happens here, see?" And he started
working on his belt, one-handed, the other hand keeping the gun pointed at
my forehead.
I found myself getting detached from events. Maybe it was a reflex
action, something to distance oneself from an abomination about to happen.
Or maybe it was just too many things that couldn't be happening. This can't

be happening. I'd silently shrieked it one too many times and now a mental
numbness was setting in. I ought to be thinking of something to do. I ought
to be talking to him, asking questions. Anything. Instead, I just sat there,
squatting on my heels, and felt as if I'd like to go to sleep.
But my senses were heightened. They must have been, because with all
the shooting going on outside (how could he do this in the middle of a war?),
and over the scream of a dying compressor motor in the overturned freezer I
was able to hear a voice from the grave. A growl.
The soldier didn't hear it, or maybe he was too busy. He had his pants
down around his heels and he knelt in front of me and that's when I saw
Winston, dragging his hind leg, bleeding from his gut, eyes filled with
murder.
The man lowered himself over me.
I wanted Winston to bite him . . . well, you know where I wanted
Winston to bite him. I got second best. The bulldog fastened on the soft
flesh of the soldier's inner thigh. The man's leg jerked in pain, and he was
flying over me. I grabbed the strap of his rifle as he went by.
He had strength and mass on his side, but there was the little matter of
Winston. The dog had cut an artery. The soldier tried to wrestle his rifle
away from me with one hand and pry Winston loose with the other and
ended up doing both things badly. Blood was spraying everywhere. I was
screaming. Not the big full scream you hear at the movies, and not a scream
of rage, but a high-pitched scary thing I was powerless to stop.
Then I got one hand on the barrel of the rifle, and one hand on the stock,
and fumbled for the trigger as he realized what was happening and gave up
his struggle with Winston, concentrating on me. He got his hand over the
barrel. Sadly for him, it was over the end of the barrel, and when I squeezed
the trigger his hand wasn't there anymore. It wasn't anywhere anymore, but
the air was full of a red mist.
The soldier never did stop fighting. I guess that's why they're soldiers.
With Winston hanging from his leg, his pants around his ankles, missing a
hand, he still came at me and I swung the rifle up and held the trigger down
and didn't really see what happened next because on full auto-fire the
weapon packed such a kick that I was knocked on my ass again, and when I
opened my eyes he was mostly on the walls, except for bits here and there
on the floor, and the one big piece still in Winston's mouth.
I could say I paused and reflected on the enormity of taking a human

life, or how nauseated I was at the sight of his dismembered body. I did
think of those things, and many others. But later. Much later. At that time
my mind had collapsed on itself and was only large enough to hold a few
thoughts, and only one of those at a time. First, I was going to get out of
there. Second, anybody between me and getting out of there was going to
have a Hildy-sized hole drilled right through his or her stinking carcass. I
had killed, and by god I meant to keep on killing if that's what I had to do to
get to safety.
"Winston. Here, boy." I got up on one knee and talked to him. I didn't
know what to expect. Would he recognize me? Was he too far gone in
bloodlust?
But after a final shake of the soldier's leg, he let go and came to me. He
was dragging his hind leg and he was gut-shot, but still walking.
I will admit I don't know why I took him. I mean, I really don't. My
holocam recorded the scene, but it doesn't tape thoughts. Mine weren't very
organized just then. I remember thinking I sure as hell owed him. It also
crossed my mind that I was probably safer with him than without him; he
was one hell of a weapon. I prefer to think I thought those things in that
order. I won't swear to it.
I scooped him up in one arm, holding the rifle in the other, and stuck my
head around the corner. Nobody blew it off. Nobody seemed to be moving
at all. The square was a lot smokier and there was still a lot of gunfire, but
everyone seemed to have taken cover. I could do that, too, and wait for
somebody to find me, or I could use the smoke to hide in, knowing I could
easily stumble on someone else who was doing the same thing, and was a
better shot than I was.
I don't know how you make a decision like that. I mean, I made it, but I
don't recall weighing the pro's and con's. I just looked around the corner,
didn't see anybody, and then I was running.
Actually, running is a very generous word for what I did, with a dying
dog tucked under one arm and a heavy weapon dangling from the other.
And don't forget a belly the size of Phobos. Thank god holocams record
only what you see, and not what you look like. That couldn't have been an
image I'd like preserved for posterity.
My goal was the entrance to a corridor that led back toward the
Heinlein, and I was about halfway there when someone behind me yelled
"Halt!" in a firm and not-at-all-friendly voice, and things happened very fast

. . . and I did everything right, even with all the things that went wrong.
I turned and kept back-pedaling, slowly, and I dropped Winston (who
uttered the only yelp of pain he made through his entire heroic ordeal—and
I'm sorry, Winston, wherever you are). I saw it was a King City cop, and he
was young, and he looked as scared as I was, and he carried a huge drilling
laser, which was pointed at me.
"Drop your weapon," he said, and I said Sorry, chum, this isn't personal,
only not out loud, and I pulled the trigger. Nothing happened, and it was
then I noticed the blinking red light on this curved metal thingy that must
have been the ammo clip, and which must have been saying feed me!, or
words to that effect in gun-language, and understood why what I'd thought
was a short burst had had such a cataclysmic effect on my would-be rapist.
So I dropped the gun and I held up my hands, and I saw Winston making his
last dash, hobbling across the ten meters or so that separated us, and I put my
hands out, palms up, and I shouted No!, and I will swear in any court in the
world that I saw the man's finger tightening on the trigger from ten meters
away, with the muzzle wavering between me and Winston as if he couldn't
decide which to shoot first. And I know this is flatly impossible, but I even
thought I saw the light start to come out the end of the weapon in the same
fraction of a second that I grabbed my null-suit control and twisted it hard.
I was dazzled by green light. For a few moments I was blind. When
vision returned the world was full of multi-colored incandescent balloons
that drifted here and there, obscuring the world, popping like cartoon soap
bubbles. I was sweating horribly inside my suit-field. It could have been
worse. Outside the field, most everything seemed to be on fire.
About the only way you can go wrong with a laser is to shoot it at a
mirror. You couldn't blame the cop for that. I hadn't been a mirror when he
pulled the trigger; it was that close.
But he really should have let go a lot sooner.
Everywhere the beam hit me, it was reflected back, but because the
human body is much a complex shape the reflected beam went all over the
place. The resulting scorch line hit the walls in many places, melting plastic
panels and starting fires behind them. It hit the cop at least three times. I
think any of them would have been fatal without quick treatment. He was
lying still, with flames engulfing his clothing in three deep, black slashes.
Somewhere in its wild gyrations the beam had hit Winston. His fur was
on fire and he wasn't moving, either.

I was trying to think of what to do when a high wind rose. It briefly
whipped the flames into a white-hot frenzy, but then it snuffed them out. All
the smoke cleared in an instant and the scene took on that crisp clarity you
find only in vacuum.
I turned, and ran for cover.

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

I crouched in a pile of chrome-plated pipes not twenty meters from two
patrolling figures in spacesuits, trying to pretend I was just another piece of
bent pipe. I wasn't quite sure how to go about this. Don't move, and think
tubular thoughts, I finally decided, and it had worked so far.
I was keeping one eye on the clock, one eye on the soldiers, and one eye
on the blinking red light in my head-up display. Since this adds up to three
eyes, you can imagine how busy I was. I was the busiest motionless person
you ever saw. Or didn't see.
As if that weren't enough, I was calling every telephone number in my

vast mental card file.
Forget those trivial inventions like fire, the wheel, the bow and arrow,
the plow. Man didn't become truly civilized until Alex Bell uttered those
immortal words, "Shit, Watson, I spilled acid all over my balls." Hiding
there with my oxygen running out, my only hope of staying alive lay in
getting some help over the telephone, and if it worked I resolved to light a
candle every year on Mr. Bell's birthday.
My situation was dire, but it could have been worse. I could have been
a member of the King City police dragooned (I later learned) into the first
wave of the assault on Virginia City. In addition to the hazards of an armed
populace, not to mention the meanest, gamest dog who ever lived, they had
the added problem of not having pressure suits when the second wave,
which attacked from the surface, began cutting the cables which brought
power from the solar panels topside, which powered the null-fields which
kept the air in.
That's what had happened just after I was lasered by the last cop. It was
the air rushing out of the public square that had first fanned, then
extinguished the flames on Winston's corpse.
It wasn't a blow-out like the one at Nirvana, or I wouldn't be here to tell
you about it. What we're used to in a blow-out is a lot of air rushing through
a relatively small hole. You get picked up and battered, then you get
squeezed, and even in a null-suit your chances of survival are slim. But
when a null-field goes, it goes all at once, and the air just expands. You get
a gentle wind, then poof! Like a soap bubble. And then you get a lot of
cops and soldiers grabbing their throats, spitting blood, and falling quietly to
the ground. I saw two people die like this. I guess it's a fairly quick,
peaceful way to go, but I still get nauseous just thinking about it.
At the time I thought the Heinleiners had done it. It was a logical tactic.
It was the way they customarily fought fires, and god knows there were
plenty of fires by the time the air went. And it just didn't make sense that
their own people would cut the power, knowing the first group didn't have
suits.
Well, it was their own people who did it, and it wasn't the only thing
about the assault that didn't make sense. But I learned about that much later.
Hiding there in the pipes all I knew is that a lot of people had tried to kill
me, and a lot more were still trying. It had been a game of cat and mouse for
about three hours since the null-field power went down.

The power loss had immediately turned the corridor I meant to travel to
the Heinlein from a silvery cylinder into a borehole through eons of trash,
just like the one I had traveled to lo those many weeks ago to enter this crazy
funhouse in the first place. That was a damn good thing, because not long
after the blowout I met the first of many pressure-suited people coming
down the path in the other direction.
We didn't actually meet, which was another good thing, because he or
she was carrying a laser just like the one that had almost fried me. I saw him
(I'm going to say him, because all the soldiers were male and there was
something in the way he moved) while he was still some distance from me,
and I quickly melted into the wall. Or into where the wall had been, you see.
There were thousands of gaps along the corridor large enough for even a
pregnant woman to squeeze through.
Once into one of the gaps, however, you never knew what lay beyond.
You had entered a world with no rational order to it, a three-dimensional
random maze made of random materials, some of it locked in place by the
pressure of other junk above it, some of it alarmingly unstable. In some of
these hidey-holes you could slip through here and squeeze through there and
swing across a gap in another place, like in a collapsed jungle gym. In
others, two meters in and you found a cul-de-sac a rat would have found
impassable. You never knew. There was simply no way to tell from the
outside.
That first refuge was one of the shallow ones, so I had pressed myself
against a flat surface and began learning the Zen of immobility. I had
several things going for me. No need to hold my breath, since I was already
doing that because of the null-suit. No need to be very quiet, because of the
vacuum. And in the suit he might not have seen me if I'd been lying right in
his path.
I told myself all those things, but I still aged twenty years as he crept by,
swinging his laser left and right, close enough that I could have reached out
and touched him.
Then he had passed, and it started getting very dark again. (Did I
mention all the lights went out when the power failed? They did. I'd never
have seen him if he hadn't been carrying a flashlight.)
I wanted that flashlight. I wanted it more than anything in the world.
Without it, I didn't see how I'd ever make it to safety. It had already gotten
dark enough that I could barely see the useless rifle I'd carried with me, and
wouldn't see anything at all when he'd moved a little farther along.

I almost jumped out of my skin when I realized he could have seen the
flashing red light on the empty clip as he passed; I'd forgotten to cover it up.
If only I had another . . . then I looked more closely at the clip. It had an
opening at the end, and a brass shell casing gleamed in there. I realized it
was two clips taped together. The idea was to reverse it when you'd used up
the first. God, soldiers are tricky bastards.
So I reversed it, almost dropping first the clip, then the rifle, and I
leaned out into the corridor and squeeze off a shot in the direction the soldier
had come from to see if the damn thing worked. From the recoil I felt, I
knew it did. I hadn't counted on the muzzle flash, but apparently the man
didn't see it.
Stepping out into the corridor, I fired a short burst into the soldier's
back. Hey, even if I could have shouted a warning to him in vacuum, I
really don't think I would have. You don't know the depths you can sink to
when all you're thinking about is survival.
His suit was tough, and my aim was not the best. One round hit him and
it didn't puncture his suit, just sent him stumbling down the path, turning,
bringing his weapon up, so I fired again, a lot longer this time, and it did the
trick.
I won't describe the mess I had to sort through to find his light.
#
My fusillade had destroyed his laser and used up my last ammo clip, so
encumbered with only the flashlight and what remained of my wits I set out
looking for air.
That was the trick, of course. The null-suit was a great invention, no
doubt about it. It had saved my life. But it left something to be desired in
the area of endurance. If a Heinleiner wanted to spend much time in vacuum
he'd strap a tank onto his back, just like everyone else, and attach a hose to
the breast fitting in front. Without a strap-on, the internal tank was good for
twenty to thirty-five minutes, depending on exertion. Forty minutes at the
outside. Like, for instance, if you were asleep.
I hadn't done much sleeping and didn't plan on any soon, but I hadn't
thought it would be a problem at first. All or the corridors were provided
with an ALU every half-kilometer or so. The power to these had been cut,
but they still had big air tanks which should still be full. Re-charging my
internal tank should be just a matter of hooking the little adapter hose to my
air fitting, twisting a valve, and watching the little needle in my head-up

swing over to the FULL position.
The first time, it was that easy. But I could see even then that having to
search out an ALU every half hour was the weakest point in my not-verystrong survival strategy. I couldn't keep it up endlessly. I had to either get
out of there on my own or call for help.
Calling seemed to make the most sense. I still had no idea what was
happening beyond the limits of Heinlein Town, but had no reason to suspect
that if I could get through to a lawyer, or to the pad, my problems would not
be over. But I couldn't call from the corridor. There was too much junk
over my head; the signal would not get through. However, through sheer
luck or divine providence I was in one of the corridors I was fairly familiar
with. A branch up to the left should take me right out onto the surface.
It did, and the surface was crawling with soldiers.
I ducked back in, thankful for the mirror camouflage I was wearing.
Where had they all come from?
There were not regiments, or divisions, or anything like that. But I
could see three from my hiding place, and they seemed to be patrolling
except for one who was standing around near the entrance I'd just exited.
Guarding it, I presumed. Perhaps he just meant to take captives, but I'd seen
people shooting to kill and wanted no part of finding out his intentions.
One of the other things I'd been lucky about was in seeing the man in
the square who'd been hit by bullets while wearing his null-suit. Otherwise I
might have wrongly concluded the suit, through which nothing could pass,
could render me immune to bullets. Which it would . . . but only at a cost.
This was explained to me later. Maybe you already figured it out; Smith
said "as should be intuitively obvious," but he talks like that.
Bullets possess kinetic energy. When you stop one dead in its tracks,
that energy has to go somewhere. Some of it is transferred to your body:
e.g., the bullet knocks you over. But most of the energy is absorbed by the
suit, which promptly freezes stiff, and then has to do something with all that
energy. There's no place to store it in the null-generator. Smith tried that,
and the generators overheated or, in extreme cases, exploded. Not a pretty
thought, considering where it's implanted.
So what the field does is radiate the heat away. From both surfaces of
the field.
"I'm sure it's a symmetry we can defeat, given time," Smith told me.

"The math is tricky. But what a bulletproof jacket it will make, eh?"
It sure would. In the meantime, what happened is you got parboiled.
Getting rid of excess heat was already your biggest problem in a null-suit.
You could survive one hit in a suit (several people did), but usually only if
you could turn it off pretty quickly and cool yourself. With two or more hits
your internal temperature would soar and your brain would cook.
The suit was supposed to turn itself off in that case, automatically. But
naturally it wouldn't turn off if there was vacuum outside. It won't do that no
matter how extreme conditions inside got; vacuum is always the worst of
any set of evils.
If I got shot now, I'd cook, from the skin inwards.
#
I didn't start out singing hosannas to the name of A.G. Bell. For the first
hour I wanted to dig him up and roast him slowly. Not his fault, of course,
but in the state I was in, who cared?
After filling my tank again I made my way to the top of the junk pile.
This was possible—though by no means easy—because where I was, near
the Heinlein, the thickness of the planetary dump was not great. By
squirming, making myself small, picking my way carefully I was soon able
to stick my head out of the mess. Any of a thousand passing satellites ought
to have a good line of sight at me from there, so I started dialing as fast as
my tongue could hit the switchboard on the insides of my teeth. I figured I'd
call Cricket, because he . . .
. . .could not be reached at that number. According to my head-up,
which is seldom wrong about these things. Neither could Brenda, or Liz. I
was about to try another number when I finally realized nobody could be
reached, because my internal phone relied, when out on the surface, on a
booster unit that's standard equipment in a pressure suit.
How could I be expected to think of these things? You tap your teeth,
and pretty soon you hear somebody's voice in your ear. That's how a
fucking telephone works. It's as natural as shouting.
I sure as hell thought about it then, and soon realized I had another
problem. The signal from my phone wouldn't get through my null-suit field.
The Heinleiners used the field itself to generate a signal in another wave
band entirely, so they could communicate with each other, suit-to-suit, and
nobody, not even the CC, could overhear them. I was screwed by their

security.
I thought about this a long time, keeping one eye on the oxygen gauge.
Then I went back to the dark corridor and sneaked up on the body of the
man I had killed.
He was still there, though shoved over to one side of the passage. I
managed to get his helmet off and lose myself back in the maze, where I
used my light and a few bits of metal that came to hand to pry out what I
hoped was the booster for his suit radio. I had done my work better than I
knew; there was a bullet hole punched through it.
I held on to it anyway. I got another charge of air and went back to the
surface, where I used a length of wire to connect my pressure fitting to the
radio itself, on the theory that this was the only way for anything to get out
of the suit. I switched it on, was rewarded with a little red light going on in
a display on the radio. I dialed Cricket again, and got nothing.
So I brought all my vast and subtle technological skills to bear on
repairing the radio. Translation: I whanged the sumbitch on the dashboard
of the junk rover I was sitting in, and I dialed again. Nothing. Whang. Still
not a peep. So I WHANGED it again and Cricket said "Yeah, what the hell
do you want?"
My tongue had been leading a life of its own, nervously dialing and redialing Cricket's number as I worked my engineering magic on the radio.
And now, when I needed it, I couldn't get the damn tongue to work at all, so
overwhelmed was I at hearing a familiar voice.
"I haven't got time to dick around here," Cricket warned.
"Cricket, it's me, Hildy, and I—"
"Yeah, Hildy, you cover it your way and I'll cover it mine."
"Cover what?"
"Just the biggest damn story that ever . . ." I heard the sound of mental
brakes being applied with the burning of much mental rubber; after the
clashing of mental gears Cricket said, sweetly, "No story, Hildy. Nothing at
all. Forget I said anything."
"Damn it, Cricket, is the shit coming down out there, too? What's
happened? All I know is—"
"You can figure it out for yourself, just like I did," he said.
"Figure what out? I don't know what you're—"

"Sure, sure, I know. It won't work, Hildy. You've conned me out of a
big story for the last time."
"Cricket, I don't even work for the Nipple anymore."
"Once a reporter, always a reporter. It's in your blood, Hildy, and you
could no more ignore this one than a whore could keep her legs together
when the doorbell rings."
"Cricket, listen to me, I'm in big trouble. I'm trapped—"
"Ah ha!" he crowed, confusing me completely. "A lot of folks are
trapped, old buddy. I think it's the best place for you. Read about it in a few
hours in the Shit." And he hung up.
I almost threw the radio out across the horizon, but sanity returned just
in time. With it came caution, as my eyes, following the would-be
trajectory, saw two figures clambering up the junk. They were headed for
me, probably on the scent of my transmission. I ducked over the side of the
junked rover and dived back into the maze.
#
I still haven't entirely forgiven Cricket, but I've got to say that love died
during that phone call. Sure, I deserved some of it; I'd tricked him often
enough in the past. And in his defense, he thought I was trapped in an
elevator, as thousands of Lunarians were at that moment, and he didn't think
I'd be in any particular danger, and if I was, there wasn't anything he could
have done about it.
Yeah, sure. And your momma would have fucked pigs, Cricket, if she
could have found any who'd have her. You didn't give me time to explain.
What really high-gravved me was that, when I finally got back in
position to call him again, he'd set his phone to refuse calls from me. I
risked my neck ducking in for more air then finding a new place to transmit
from, and what I got for my efforts was a busy signal.
I got a lot of those in quick succession. Brenda didn't answer. Neither
did anybody at the Nipple, which worried me no end. Think about it. A
major metropolitan newspad, and nobody's answering the phone?
I knew it had to do with the big story Cricket mentioned. Impossible
visions flitted through my head, from a city-wide blowout to thousands upon
thousands of soldiers like the ones I'd seen laying waste to the whole planet.
But I had to keep trying. So I went back down into the maze and sought

out my favorite airing hole. And two big guys in suits were camped out
there, weapons ready.
#
I'd had ten minutes of air when I first backed into the pile of chrome
pipes to hide from the soldiers. That had been seven minutes earlier.
The first thing I'd done was cut back the oxygen dissemination rate in
my artificial lung to a level just short of unconsciousness. Ditto the cooling
rate. I figured that would stretch the ten minutes into fifteen if I didn't have
to move around too much. So far I hadn't moved at all. The blinking red
light I was watching was telling me my blood oxygen level was low.
Another gauge, normally dormant, had lit up as well, and this one assured
me my body temperature stood at 39.1 degrees and was rising slowly. I
knew I couldn't take much more without becoming delirious; anything over
forty was dangerous territory.
I'm a miserable tactician, I'll admit it, at least in a situation like that. I
could see the elements of the problem, but all I could do was stew about it.
Those guys topside, for instance. Could they communicate my position to
the gorillas guarding the air tank? They were no more than thirty meters
above me; if they had any kind of generalship at all a message would soon
be arriving to the guards to be on the lookout for a roly-poly, out-of-breath
football trophy, known to associate with lengths of chrome-plated pipe.
If so, what could I do about it? There was no hope of making my way
through the maze to the next air station—which might well be guarded,
anyway. So if these guys didn't find somewhere else to go in the next eight
minutes, it was going to be a dead heat (terrible choice of words there) as to
whether I died of suffocation or boiled in my own sweat. I didn't really have
a preference in the matter; it's something only a coroner could care about.
Brenda Starr, comic-strip reporter, would surely have thought up some
clever ruse, some diversion, something to lure those freaking soldiers away
from the air tank long enough for her to re-fuel. Hildy Johnson, scaredshitless schoolteacher and former inkster, didn't have the first notion of how
to go about it without drawing attention to herself.
There was one bit of good news in the mix. My tongue had continued
its independent ways as I crouched in hiding, and soon I was startled by the
sound of a busy signal in my ear. I didn't even know who I'd called, much
less how the signal got out. I eventually surmised (and later found out it was
true) that something in the junk pile was acting as an antenna, relaying my

calls to the surface, and thence to a satellite.
So I tried Brenda again (still no answer), and the Nipple (still nothing),
and then I dialed Liz.
"Buckingham Palace, Her Majesty speaking," came a slurred voice.
"Liz, Liz, this is Hildy. I'm in big trouble."
There was a long, somehow boozy silence. I wondered if she'd fallen
asleep. Then there was a sob.
"Liz? Are you still there?"
"Hildy. Hildy. Oh, god, I didn't want to do it."
"Didn't want to do what? Liz, I don't have time for—"
"I'm a drunk, Hildy. A goddam drunk."
This was neither news, nor a well-kept secret. I didn't say anything, but
listened to the sound of wracking sobs and watched the seconds tick off on
my personal clock and waited for her to talk.
"They said they could put me away for a long time, Hildy. A long, long
time. I was scared, and I felt really awful. I was shaking and I was throwing
up, only nothing came up, and they wouldn't let me have a drink."
"What are you talking about? Who's 'they?'"
"They, they, dammit! The CC."
By then I had more or less figured it out. She stammered disconnected
parts to me then, and I learned the complete story later, and it went
something like this:
Even before the Bicentennial celebration Liz had been firmly in the
employ of the CC. At some point she had been arrested, taken in, and
charged with many counts of weapons violations. (So were a lot of others;
the invasion of Heinlein Town had been armed with weapons confiscated
during a huge crackdown—an event that never made the news.)
"They said I could go to jail for eighty years, Hildy. And then they left
me alone, and the CC spoke to me and told me if I did a few little things for
him, here and there, the charges might be dropped."
"What happened, Liz? Did you get careless?"
"What? Oh, I don't know, Hildy. They never showed me the evidence
they had against me. They said it would all come out in the trial. I don't

know if it was obtained illegally or not. But when the CC started talking I
figured out pretty quick that it didn't matter. We talked about that; you
know that, if he ever wanted to, he could frame every person on Luna for
something or other. All I could see was when we got to court, it'd be an
airtight case. I was afraid to let it get that far."
"So you sold me out."
There was silence for a long time. A few more minutes had gone by.
The guards hadn't moved. There wasn't anything else to do but listen.
"Tell me the rest of it," I said.
It seemed there was this group of people out around Delambre that the
CC wanted to know more about. He suggested Liz get me out there and see
what happened.
I should have been flattered. The CC's estimate of my bloodhound
instincts must have been pretty high. I suppose if I hadn't seen anything
during that first trip, something else would have been arranged, until I was
on the scent. After that, I could be relied on to bring the story to ground.
"He was real interested when you brought in that tape of the little girl. I
. . . by that time I was a wholly-owned subsidiary, Hildy. I told him I could
find some way of getting you to tell me what was going on. I'd have done
about anything by then."
"The hostage syndrome," I said. The guards were still there.
"What? Oh. Yeah, probably. Or sheer lack of character. Anyway, he
told me to hold back or you'd get suspicious. So I did, and you finally
invited me in."
And on that first visit she'd stolen a null-field generator. She didn't say
how, but it probably wasn't too hard. They're not dangerous unless you try
to open them up.
I could put the rest of it together myself. During the next week the CC
had learned enough null-field technology to make something to get his
troops through the barriers, if not to equip them with null-suits or fields of
their own.
"And that's pretty much it," she said, and sighed. "So I guess he arrested
you, and probably all those other folks, too, right? Where have they got
you? Have they set bail yet?"
"Are you serious?"

"Hell, Hildy, I don't think he could have anything serious on you."
"Liz . . . what's going on out there?"
"What do you mean?"
"Cricket said all hell was breaking loose, somehow or other."
"You got me, Hildy. I was just . . . ah, sleeping, until you called. I'm
here in my apartment. Come to think of it, the lights are flickering. But that
could be just my head."
She was in the dark as much as I was. A lot of people were. If you
didn't leave your apartment and you didn't live in one of the sectors where
the oxygen service was interrupted, the chances of your having missed the
early stages of the Big Glitch were excellent. Liz had been in an alcoholic
stupor, with her phone set to take calls only from me.
"Liz. Why?"
There was a long pause. Then, "Hildy, I'm a drunk. Don't ever trust a
drunk. If it comes to a choice between you and the next drink . . . it's not
really a choice."
"Ever thought of taking the cure?"
"Babe, I like drinking. It's the only thing I do like. That, and Winston."
Maybe I would have hit her right in the belly at that point; I don't know.
I know I was filled with rage at her. Telling her the dog was fried and vacdried wouldn't have begun to get back at her for what she'd done to me.
But just then I suddenly got real, real hot. I'd already been too warm,
you understand; now, in an instant, my skin was so hot I wanted to peel it off
and there was a burning ache on the left side of my chest.
The null-suit did what it could. I watched in growing alarm as the
indicator that had been telling me how many minutes I had to live took a
nose dive. I thought it wasn't going to stop. Hell, it was almost worth it.
With the falling gauge came a cooling blast of air all over my body. At least
I wasn't going to fry.
I'd finally put together what was happening, though. For almost a
minute I'd been feeling short, sharp shocks through the metal pipes I leaned
against and the metal brace I had my feet on. Then I saw a bullet hit a pipe.
That's the only thing it could have been, I reasoned. It left a dent, a dull
place on the metal. Somebody was standing on top of the junk pile and
shooting down into it at random. It had to be blind shooting, because I

couldn't see the shooter. But the bullets were ricocheting and one had finally
struck me. I couldn't afford another hit.
So I grabbed a length of pipe and started toward the corridor. I didn't
think I could do much good against the tough pressure suits, but if I swung
for the faceplates I might get one of them, and at least I'd go down fighting.
I owed it to Winston, if to no one else, to do that much.
Getting to the corridor was like reaching for that top step that isn't there.
I stepped out, pipe cocked like the clean-up batter coming to the plate. And
nobody was there.
I saw their retreating backs outlined by the light of their helmet lamps.
They were jogging toward the exit.
I'll never know for sure, but it seems likely they'd been summoned to the
top to help in the search for me. How were they to know the guys on top of
the pile were only a few meters directly above them? Anyway, if they'd
stayed in place, I'd have been dead in ninety seconds, tops. So I gave them
ten seconds to get beyond the point where they could possible see me, and I
reached for the ALU adapter hose.
It wasn't there.
It made me mad. I couldn't think of anything more foolish than getting
this close to salvation and then suffocating with about a ton of compressed
oxygen at my fingertips. I slammed my hand against the tank, then got my
flashlight and cast about on the ground. I was sure they'd taken it with them.
It's what I would have done, in their place.
But they hadn't. It was lying right there on the ALU's baseplate,
probably knocked off when one of the guards decided to rest his fat ass on
the tank. I fumbled it in place between the tank and my chest valve, and
turned the release valve hard.
I make my living with words. I respect them. I always want to use the
proper one, so I searched a long time for the right one to describe how that
first rush of cooling air felt, and I concluded nobody's made up a word for
that yet. Think of the greatest pleasure you ever experienced, and use
whatever word you'd use to describe that. An orgasm was a pale thing
beside it.
#
Why hadn't they taken the connector hose? The answer, when I
eventually learned it, was simple, and typical of the Big Glitch. They hadn't

known I needed it.
The cops and soldiers who had invaded Heinlein Town hadn't been told
much about anything. They hadn't been led to expect armed resistance.
They knew next to nothing about the nature of or limitations to null-suit
technology. They surely hadn't been told there were two groups, working at
cross purposes to the extent that one group would ensure the destruction of
the other. All this affected their tactics terribly. A lot of people lived
because of this confusion, and I was one of them. I'd like to take credit for
my own survival—and not everything I did was stupid—but the fact is that I
had Winston, and I had a lot of luck, and the luck was mostly generated by
their ignorance and poor generalship.
I had vaguely realized some of this by the time I made my way from the
ALU and to a branching corridor I thought would take me to a different
surface exit. I didn't know what good it would do me, but it was worthwhile
to keep it in mind.
Once on the surface again, I called the Nipple and again got a busy
signal, all the time keeping my eyes open for more of the bad guys. I was
hoping they were all up atop the junk, possibly stumbling around and
breaking legs, heads, and other important body parts. I wished Callie were
there; she'd have put a hex on them.
Callie? Well, what the hell. I had to dredge the number up from the
further reaches of my memory, and it did no good at all. Not even a busy
signal. Nothing but dead air.
Then I remembered the top code. Why did it take me so long? I think it
was because Walter really had impressed it on me that the code was not to
be used at all, that it existed as an unachievable level of dire perfection. A
story justifying the use of the top code would need headlines that would
made 72-point type seem like fine print. The other reason is that I had never
thought of what was happening to me as a story.
I didn't really expect much from it, to tell the truth. I'd been using my
normal access code to the Nipple, and that should have gotten through any
conceivable log-jam of calls and directly into Walter's office. So far it had
yielded only busy signals. But I punched in the code anyway, and Walter
said:
"Don't tell me where you are, Hildy. Hang up and move as far from
your present position as you dare, and then call me back."
"Walter!" I screamed. But the line was already dead.

It would be nice to report that I immediately did as he said, that I wasted
no time, that I continued to show the courageous resolve that had been my
trademark since the first shots were fired. By that I mean that I hadn't cried
to that point. I did now. I wept helplessly, like a baby.
Don't try this in you null-suit, when you get one. You don't breathe, so
your lungs just sort of spasm. It's enough to make your ears pop. Crying
also throws the regulator mechanism out of whack, so that I wasted ten
minutes' oxygen in three minutes of hysterics. Trust Mister V.M. Smith not
to have reckoned with emotional outbursts when he laid out the parameters.
I had cleverly retained the connector hose to the air tank, so I made my
way back there and filled up again. If only I could find a loose, portable
tank I'd be able to strike off across the surface. Hell, if it was too big to
carry I could drag it. Did I hear someone mention the dead soldier and his
suit? Great idea, but my uncanny accuracy with the machine gun had
damaged one of the hose fittings. I checked when I borrowed the flashlight,
and again—because I needed the air, and who knows, maybe I'd been
mistaken—when I salvaged the radio. Libby could probably have fudged
some sort of adaptor from the junk all around me, but considering the
pressure in that tank I'd sooner have kissed a rattlesnake.
These are the thoughts that run through your mind in the exhausted
aftermath of a crying jag. It felt good to have done it, like crying usually
does. It swept away the building sense of panic and let me concentrate on
the things that needed to be done, let me ignore the impossibility of my
position, and enabled me to concentrate on the two things I had going for
me, like chanting a mantra: my own brain, which, no matter how much
evidence I may have adduced to the contrary, was actually pretty good; and
Walter's ability to get things done, which was very good.
I actually found myself feeling cheerful as I reached the egress again
and scanned the surface for enemies. Not finding any made me positively
giddy. Move from your present position, Walter had said. As far as you
dare.
I moved out of the maze and dashed across a short strip of sunlight and
into the shadow of the Heinlein.
#
"Hello, Walter?"
"Tell me what you know, Hildy, and make it march."

"I'm in big trouble here, Wal—"
"I know that, Hildy. Tell me what I don't know. What happened?"
So I started in on a condensed history of me and the Heinleiners, and
Walter promptly interrupted me again. He knew about them, he said. What
else? Well, the CC was up to something horrible, I said, and he said he
knew that, too.
"Assume I know everything you know except what happened to you
today, Hildy," he said. "Tell me about today. Tell me about the last hour.
Just the important parts. But don't mention specific names or places."
Put that way, it didn't take long. I told him in less than a hundred words,
and could have done it in one: "Help!"
"How much air do you have?" he asked.
"About fifteen minutes."
"Better than I thought. We have to set up a rendezvous, without
mentioning place names. Any ideas?"
"Maybe. Do you know the biggest white elephant on Luna?"
". . . yeeeesss. Are you near the trunk or the tail?"
"Trunk."
"All right. The last poker game we played, if the high card in my hand
was a King, start walking north. If it was a Queen, east. Jack, south. Got
it?"
"Yeah." East it would be.
"Walk for ten minutes and stop. I'll be there."
With anyone else I'd have wasted another minute pointing out that only
left me a margin of five minutes and no hope at all of getting back. With
Walter I just said, "So will I." Walter has many despicable qualities, but
when he says he'll do something, he'll do it.
I'd have had to move soon, anyway. As we were talking I'd spotted two
of the enemy moving across the plain in big, loping strides. They were
coming from the north, so I hefted the radio and tossed it toward the
southeast. They immediately altered direction to follow it.
Here came the hard part. I watched them pass in front of me. Even in a
regular suit I'd have been hard to spot in the shadows. But now I started
walking eastwards, and in a moment I stepped out into the bright sunshine. I

had to keep reminding myself how hard Gretel had been to spot when I'd
first encountered her. I'd never felt so naked. I kept an eye on the soldiers,
and when they reached the spot where the radio had fallen to the ground I
froze, and watched as they scanned the horizon.
I didn't stay frozen long, as I quickly spotted four more people coming
from various directions. It was one of the hardest things I ever did, but I
started walking again before any of them could get too close.
With each step I thought of a dozen more ways they could find me and
catch me. A simple radar unit would probably suffice. I'm not much at
physics, but I supposed the null-suit would throw back a strong signal.
They must not have had one, because before long I was far enough away
that I couldn't pick any of them out from the ground glare, and if I couldn't
see them they sure as hell couldn't see me.
At the nine-minute point a bright silver jumper swooped silently over
my head, not ten meters high, and I'd have jumped out of my socks if I'd had
any on. It turned, and I saw the big double-n Nipple logo blazoned on its
side and it was a sweet sight indeed.
The driver flew a big oval at the right distance from the Heinlein, which
was almost out of sight by then, letting me see him because I had to come to
him, not the other way around. Then it settled down off to my right, looking
like a giant mosquito in carnal embrace with a bedstead. I started to run.
He must have had some sort of sensor on the ladder, because when I had
both feet on it the jumper lifted off. Not the sort of maneuver I'd like to do
on a Sunday jaunt, but I could understand his haste. I wrenched the lock
door open and cycled it, and stepped inside to the unlikely spectacle of
Walter training a machine gun on me.
Ho-hum. I'd had so many weapons pointed at me in the last few hours
that the sight—which would have given me pause a year ago, say at contract
re-negotiation time—barely registered. I experienced something I'd noticed
before at the end of times of great stress: I wanted to go to sleep.
"Put that thing away, Walter," I said. "If you fire it you'd probably kill
us both."
"This is a reinforced pressure hull," he said, and the gun didn't waver.
"Turn that suit off first."
"I wasn't thinking about decompression," I said. "I was thinking you'd
probably shoot yourself in the foot, then get lucky and hit me." But I turned

it off, and he looked at my face, glanced down at my naked, outrageously
pregnant body, and then looked away. He stowed the weapon and resumed
his place in the pilot's seat. I struggled into the seat beside him.
"Pretty eventful day," I said.
"I wish you'd get back to covering the news instead of making it," he
said. "What'd you do to get the CC so riled up?"
"That was me? This is all about me?"
"No, but you're a big part of it."
"Tell me what's happening."
"Nobody knows the whole thing yet," he said, and then started telling
me the little he knew.
It had begun—back in the normal world—with thousands of elevators
stalling between levels. No sooner had emergency crews been dispatched
than other things began to go haywire. Soon all the mass media were off the
air and Walter had had reports that pressure had been breached in several
major cities, and other places had suffered oxygen depletion. There were
fires, and riots, and mass confusion. Then, shortly before he got the call
from me, the CC had come on most major frequencies with an
announcement meant to reassure but oddly unsettling. He said there had
been malfunctions, but that they were under control now. ("An obvious lie,"
Walter told me, almost with relish.) The CC had pledged to do a better job
in the future, promised this wouldn't happen again. He'd said he was in
control now.
"The first implication I got from that," Walter said, "was that he hadn't
been in control for a while, and I want an explanation of that. But the thing
that really got me, after I thought about it, was . . . what kind of control did
he mean?"
"I'm not sure I understand."
"Well, obviously he's in control, or he's supposed to be. Of the day-today mechanics of Luna. Air, water, transportation. In the sense that he runs
those things. And he's got a lot of control in the civil and criminal social
sectors. He makes schedules for the government, for instance. He's got a
hand in everything. He monitors everything. But in control? I didn't like
the sound of it. I still don't."
While I thought that one over something very bright and very fast
overtook us, shot by on the left, then tried to hang a right, as if it had

changed its mind. It turned into a fireball and we flew right into it. I heard
things pinging on the hull, things the size of sand grains.
"What the hell was that?"
"Some of your friends back there. Don't worry, I'm on top of it."
"On top of it . . .? They're shooting at us!"
"And missing. And we're out of range. And this ship is equipped with
the best illegal jamming devices money can buy. I've got tricks I haven't
even used yet."
I glanced at him, a big unruly bear of a man, hunched over his manual
controls and keeping one eye on an array of devices attached to the
dashboard, devices I was sure hadn't come from the factory that built the
jumper.
"I might have known you'd have connections with the Heinleiners," I
said.
"Connections?" he snorted. "I was on the board of directors of the L5
Society when most of those 'Heinleiners' hadn't even been born yet. My
father was there when the keel of that ship was launched. You might say I
have connections."
"But you're not one of them."
"Let's say we have some political differences."
He probably thought they were too left-wing. Long ago in our
relationship I'd talked a little politics with Walter, as most people did who
came to work at the Nipple. Not many had a second conversation. The most
charitable word I'd heard used to describe his convictions was "daft." What
most people would think of an anarchy Walter would call a social straitjacket.
"Don't care for Mister Smith?" I asked.
"Great scientist. Too bad he's a socialist."
"And the starship project?"
"It'll get there the day they return to the original plan. Plus about twenty
years to rebuild it, tear out all the junk Smith has installed."
"Pretty impressive junk."
"He makes a great spacesuit. He hasn't shown me a star drive."

I decided to leave it at that, because I had no intention of getting into an
argument with him, and because I had no way of telling if he was right or
wrong.
"Guns, too," I said. "If I'd thought about it, I'd have known you'd be a
gun owner."
"All free men are gun owners." No use pointing out to him that I'd been
un-free most of my life, and what I'd tried to do with the instrument of my
freedom when I finally obtained one. It's another argument you can't win.
"Did you get that one from Liz?"
"She gets her guns from me," he said. "Or she did until recently. She's
too far gone in drink now. I don't trust her." He glanced at me. "You
shouldn't either."
I decided not to ask him what he knew about that. I hoped that if he had
known Liz was selling out the Heinleiners he'd have given them some kind
of warning, political differences or not. Or at least that he'd have warned
me, given all he seemed to know about my recent activities.
I never did ask him that.
There are a lot of things I might have asked him during the time we
raced across the plain, never getting more than fifty meters high. If I'd asked
some of them—about how much he knew about what was going on with the
CC—it would have saved me a lot of worry later. Actually, it would have
just given me different things to worry about, but I firmly believe I do a
better job of worrying when I can fret from a position of knowledge. As it
was, the sense of relief at being rescued by him was so great that I simply
basked in the warmth of my new-found sense of safety.
How was I to know I'd only have ten minutes with him?
He'd been constantly monitoring his instruments, and when one of them
chimed he cursed softly and hit the retros. We started to settle to the ground.
I'd been about to doze off.
"What's the matter?" I said. "Trouble?"
"Not really. I'd just hoped to get a little closer, that's all. This is where
you get off."
"Get off? Gee, Walter, I think I'd rather go on to your place." I'd had a
quick glance around. This place, wherever it was, would never make it into
1001 Lunar Sights To See. There was no sign of human habitation. No sign

of anything, not even a two-century-old footpath.
"I'd love to have you, Hildy, but you're too hot to handle." He turned in
his seat to face me. "Look, baby, it's like this. I got access to a list of a few
hundred people the CC is looking for. You're right at the top. From what
I've learned, he's very determined to find them. A lot of people have died in
the search. I don't know what's going on—some really big glitch—but I do
intend to find out . . . but you can't help me. The only thing I could think of
to do is stash you some place where the CC can't find you. You'll have to
stay there until all this blows over. It's too dangerous for you on the
outside."
I guess I just blew air there for a while. There had been too many
changes too quickly. I'd been feeling safe and now the rug was jerked out
from under me again.
I'd known the CC was looking for me, but somehow it felt different to
hear it from Walter. Walter would never be wrong about a thing like that.
And it didn't help to infer from what he'd said that what the CC meant to do
when he found me was kill me. Because I knew too much? Because I'd
stuck my nose in the wrong place? Because he didn't want to share the
super-toothpaste royalties with me anymore? I had no idea, but I wanted to
know more, and I meant to, before I got out of Walter's jumper.
Walter, who'd just called me baby. What the hell was that all about?
"What do you want me to do?" I asked. "Just camp out here on the
maria? I'm afraid I didn't bring my tent."
He reached behind his seat and started pulling out things and handing
them to me. A ten-hour air bottle. A flashlight. A canvas bag that rattled.
He slapped a compass into my palm, and opened the air lock door behind us.
"There's some useful stuff in the bag," he said. "I didn't have time to get
anymore; this is my own survival gear. Now you've got to go."
"I'm not."
"You are." He sighed, and looked away from me. He looked very old.
"Hildy," he said, "this isn't easy for me, either, but I think it's your only
chance. You'll have to trust me because there isn't time to tell you any more
and there isn't time for you to panic or act like a child. I wanted to get you
closer, but this is probably better." He pointed at the dashboard. "Right now
we're invisible, I hope. You get out now, the CC will never figure out where
you went. I get you any closer, and it'll be like drawing him a map. You

have enough air to get there, but we don't have any more time to talk,
because I've got to lift out of here within one more minute."
"Where do you want me to go?"
He told me, and if he'd said anything else I don't think I'd have gotten
out of the jumper. But it made just enough sense, and he sounded just scared
enough. Hell, Walter sounding scared at all was a new one on me, and did
not fail to make an impression.
But I was still balanced there on the edge, wondering if he'd force me if
I simply stayed put, when he grabbed me by the neck and pulled me over to
him and kissed me on the cheek. I was too surprised to struggle.
He let me go immediately, and turned away.
"You . . . ah, are you due soon? Will that be—"
"Another ten days yet," I told him. "It won't be a problem." Or it
shouldn't be, unless . . . "Unless you think I'll have to hide for—"
"I don't think so," he said. "I'll try to contact you in three days. In the
meantime, keep your head down. Don't try to contact anyone. Stay a week,
if you have to. Stay nine days."
"On the tenth I'm damn sure coming out," I told him.
"I'll have something else by then," he promised. "Now go."
I stepped into the lock, cycled it, felt the null-suit switch itself on. I
climbed down onto the plain and watched the jumper leap into the sky and
dwindle toward the horizon.
Before I even strapped on the backpack bottle I reached up and felt
Walter's tear still warm on my cheek.
#
I'm not sure how far Walter dropped me from my final destination.
Something on the order of twenty, thirty kilometers. I didn't think it would
be a problem.
I covered the first ten in the long, side-legged stride that Earth-bred leg
muscles can produce in Lunar gravity, the gait that, except for bicycles, is
the most energy-efficient transportation known to man. And if you think
you can eat up the distance that way in an ordinary pressure suit, try it in a
null-suit. You practically fly.
But don't do it pregnant. Before long my tummy started feeling funny,

and I slowed down, doing nervous calculations about oxygen and distance as
I began to get into territory that looked familiar to me.
I reached the old air lock with three hours of spare air, dead on my feet.
I think I actually catnapped a few times there, waking up only as I was about
to fall on my face, consulting the compass as I wiped my eyes, getting back
on the proper bearing. Luckily, by the time that started happening I was on
ground I knew.
I had a bad moment when the lock didn't seem to want to cycle for me.
Could it be this place had been sealed off in the last seventy years? It had
been that long since I used it. Of course, there were other locks I knew in
the area, but Walter had said it was too dangerous to use them. But use them
I would, rather than die out here on the surface. It was with that thought that
the cantankerous old machinery finally engaged and the lock drum rotated. I
stepped inside, cycled, and hurried into the elevator, which deposited me in a
little security cubicle. I punched the letters M-A-R-I-A-X-X-X. Somewhere
not too far away, an old lady would be noting the door was in use. If Walter
was right, that information would not be relayed on to the Central Computer.
There's no place like home, I thought, as I stepped into the dimness and
familiar rotten odor of a Cretaceous rain forest.
I was in a distant corner of the dino-ranch where I had grown up.
Callie's ranch. It had always been hers, the Double-C Bar brand, never a
thought of the C&M or anything like that. Not that I'd wanted it, but it
would have been nice to feel like more than a hired hand. Now let's not get
into that.
But this particular corner—and I wondered how Walter had known
this—I'd always thought of as Maria's Cavern. There really was a cave in it,
just a few hundred meters from where I now stood, and I had made it into
my playhouse when I was very young and still known as Maria Cabrini.
So it was to Maria's Cavern I now went, and in Maria's Cavern that I
desultorily scraped together a mat of dry moss to lie down on, and on the
canvas bag Walter had given me that I intended to rest my head and sleep for
at least a week, only I never saw if my head actually made it there because I
fell asleep as my head was on the way down.
I actually did get about three hours' sleep. I know, because I checked
the clock in my head-up display when the first labor pain woke me up.

CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

If theoretical physics and mathematics had been the realm of females,
the human race would have reached the stars long ago.
I base this contention on personal experience. No dedicated male could
ever have the proper insight into the terrible geometry of parturition. Faced
with the problem of making an object of size X appear on the other side of
an opening of size X/2, and armed with the knowledge to enable her to view
it as a problem in topology or Lobachevskian geometry, I feel sure one of
the billions of women in the thrall of labor would have had an insight
involving multiple dimensions on hyperspace if only to make it stop hurting.
FTL travel would have been a cinch. As for Einstein, some woman a
thousand years his junior could easily have discovered the mutability of time
and space, if only she had the tools. Time is relative? Hah! Eve could have
told you that. Take a deep breath and bear down, honey, for about thirty
seconds or an eternity, whichever comes last.
I didn't describe the injuries I received on my second Direct Interface
with the Central Computer for a lot of reasons. One is that pain like that

can't be described. Another: the human mind doesn't remember pain well,
one of the few things God got right. I know it hurt; I can't recall how much
it hurt, but I'm pretty sure giving birth hurt more, if only because it never
seemed to stop. For these reasons, and others involving what privacy one
can muster in this open age, I will not have much to say here about the
process about which God had this to say in Genesis 3, verse sixteen: "I will
greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception, in sorrow thou shalt bring
forth children . . ." All this for swiping one stinking apple?
I went into labor. I continued laboring for the next thousand years, or
well into that same evening.
There are no real excuses for most of my ignorance of the process. I'd
seen enough old movies and should have remembered the—mostly comic—
scenes where the blessed event arrives ahead of schedule. In my defense I
can only plead a century of ordered life, a life wherein when a train was
supposed to arrive at 8:17:15 it damn well arrived at 8:17:15. In my world
postal service is fast, cheap, and continuous. You expect your parcels to
arrive across town within fifteen minutes, and around the planet in under an
hour. When you place an interplanetary call, the phone company had better
not plead a solar storm is screwing things up; we expect them to do
something about it, and they do. We are so spoiled by good service, by
living in a world that works, that the most common complaint received by
the phone company—and I'm talking thousands of nasty letters each year—
concerns the time lag when calling Aunt Dee-Dee on Mars. Don't give me
this speed-of-light shit, we whine; get my call through.
That's why I was caught off-guard by the first contraction. The little
bastard wasn't due for two weeks yet. I knew it had always been possible
that it would start early, but then I'd have phoned the doctor and he'd have
mailed me a pill and put a stop to that. And on the proper day I'd have
walked in and another pill would have started the process and I could have
read a book or watched the pad or graded papers until they handed me the
suitably cleaned and powdered and swaddled and peacefully sleeping infant.
Sure, I knew how it used to be, but I was suffering from a delusion that most
of you probably share with me. I thought I was immune, damn it. We put
all this behind us when we started hatching our kids out of bottles, didn't
we? If our minds know this, how would our bodies dare to betray us? I felt
all these things in spite of recent events, which should have taught me that
the world didn't have to be as orderly a place as I had thought it was.
So my uterus declared its independence, first with a little twitch, then

with a spasm, and in no time at all in a tidal wave of hurting like the worst
attack of constipation since the fellow tried to shit that proverbial brick.
I'm no hero, and I'm no stoic. After the fortieth or fiftieth wave I
decided a quick death would be preferable to this, so I got up and walked out
of the cave with the intention of turning myself in. How bad could it be? I
reasoned. Surely me and the CC could work something out.
But because I'm no heroic stoic, my life was saved; after the forty-first
or fifty-first pain threw me down to grovel in the dirt, I did a little arithmetic
and figured I'd have about three hundred contractions before I reached the
nearest exit, so I stumbled back to the cave as soon as I could walk again,
figuring I'd prefer to die in there than out in the mud.
I used the decreasing periods of rationality between pains to think back
to my only source of folk wisdom in the matter of childbirth: those good old
movies. Not the black and white ones. If you watch those you might come
to believe babies were brought by the stork, and pregnant women never got
fat. You would surely have to conclude that birthing didn't muss your hair
and your make-up. But in the late twentieth there were some movies that
showed the whole ghastly process. Recalling them made me even queasier.
Hell, some of those women died. I brought back scenes of hemorrhage,
forceps delivery, and episiotomy, and knew that wasn't the half of it.
But there were constants in the process of normal birth, which was about
all I could plan for, so I set about doing that. I rummaged in Walter's
rucksack and found bottled water, gauze, disinfectants, thread, a knife. I laid
them out beside me like a grisly home surgery kit lacking only the
anesthetic. Then I waited to die.
#
That's the bad side of it. There was another side. Let's just skip over
fevered descriptions of the grunting and groaning, of the stick I bit in half
while bearing down, of the blood and slime. A moment came when I could
reach down and feel his little head down there. It was a moment balanced
between life and death. Maybe as near to a perfect moment as I ever
experienced, and for reasons I've never quite been able to describe. The pain
was still there, maybe even at a peak. But continual pain finally exerts its
own anesthetic; maybe neural circuit breakers trip, or maybe you just learn
to absorb the pain in a new way. Maybe you learn to accept it. I accepted it
at that moment, as my fingers traced the tiny facial features and I felt his tiny
mouth opening and closing. For a few more seconds he was still a part of
my body.

At that moment I first experienced mother love. I didn't want to lose
him. I knew I'd do anything not to lose him.
Oh, I wanted him to come out, right enough . . . and yet a part of me
wanted to remain poised in that moment. Relativity. Pain and love and fear
and life and death moving at the speed of light, slowing time down to the
narrow focus of that one perfect moment, my womb the universe, and
everything outside of it suddenly inconsequential.
I had not loved him before. I had not delighted to feel him kick and
squirm. I admit it: I had not entered into this pregnancy with anything like
adult care and consideration, and right up to the last week had viewed the
fetus as a parasite I might well be rid of. The only reason I didn't get rid of
it was my extreme state of confusion regarding life in general, and my own
purpose in it in particular. Since trying with such determination to end my
life, I had simply been sitting back and letting things happen to me. The
baby was just one of those things.
Then the moment slipped by and he slipped out and was in my hands
and I did the things mothers do. I've since wondered if I'd have known what
to do without the memory of those dramatic scenes and sex education
classes eight or nine decades before. You know what? I almost think I
would have.
At any rate, I cleaned him, and dealt with the umbilicus, and counted his
fingers and toes and wrapped him in a towel and held him to my breast. He
didn't cry very much. Outside the cave a warm prehistoric rain was falling
through the giant ferns, and a bronto bellowed in the distance. I lay
exhausted, strangely contented, smelling my own milk for the first time.
When I looked down at him I thought he smiled at me with his screwed-up,
toothless monkey face, and when I offered him a finger to play with his little
hand grabbed it and held on tight. I felt love swell in my bosom.
See what he'd done to me? He had me using words like bosom.
Three days went by, and no Walter. A week, and still no word.
I didn't care much. Walter had brought me to the one place in Luna
where I could survive and even thrive. There were fish in the stream and
there was fruit and nuts on the trees. Not pre-historic flora and fauna; aside
from the dinos and the big cycadaceous trees and ferns and shrubs they ate,
the CC Ranch was furnished with completely modern life-forms. There
were no trilobites in the water, mainly because nobody had ever found a way
to turn a profit on trilobites. Instead, there were trout and bass, and I knew

how to catch them. There were apple and pecan trees, and I knew where to
find them because I'd planted a lot of them myself. There were no predators
to speak of. Callie had just the one tyrannosaur, and he was kept penned up
and fed bronto scraps. For that one week I led a sort of pastoral ideal cavegirl life I doubt any of our Paleolithic ancestors would have recognized. I
didn't think about it much.
I didn't think much about Callie, either. She didn't show up to see her
new grandson. I don't blame her for that, because she didn't even know he
had been conceived, much less hatched, and even if she had known she
wouldn't have dared visit us because she might have led the CC to my hiding
place.
That's what saved us: Callie's long-standing refusal to link into the
planetary data net, a bull-headed stance for which everyone she knew had
derided her. I had been one of them. I remember in my teens, presenting
her with a cost-benefit analysis I'd carefully prepared that I felt sure would
convince her to give in to "progress," knowing full well that a financial
argument was most likely to carry weight with her. She'd studied it for
about a minute, then tossed it aside. "We'll have no government spies in the
Double-C Bar," she said, and that was the end of that. We stayed with our
independent computer system, keeping interfaces with the CC to a
minimum, and as a result I could venture out of my cave and gather my
fruits and nuts without worrying about paternalistic eyes watching from the
roof. The rest of Luna was in turmoil now. Callie's Ranch was unaffected;
she simply pulled in her arms and her head like a turtle and sat down to wait
it out with her own oxygen, power, and water, no doubt feeling very smug
and eager to emerge and tell a lot of people how she'd told them so. And I
waited it out in the most remote corner of her hermetic realm.
And while we waited, historic events happened. I don't have much of a
feel for them even now. I had no television, no newspads, and I'm just like
anyone else: if I didn't read it and see it on the pad, it doesn't seem quite real
to me. News is now. Reading about it after the fact is history.
Perhaps this is the place to talk about some of those events, but I'm
reluctant to do so. Oh, I can list a few statistics. Almost one million deaths.
Three entire medium-sized towns wiped out to the last soul, and large
casualties in many others. One of those warrens, Arkytown, has still not
been reclaimed, and there's growing sentiment to leave it as it is, frozen in its
moment of disaster, like Pompeii. I've been to Arkytown, seen the hundred
thousand frozen corpses, and I can't decide. Most of them died peacefully,

from anoxia, before being pickled for all eternity by the final blowout. I saw
an entire theater of corpses still waiting for the curtain to rise. What's the
point of disturbing them to give them a decent burial or cremation?
On the other hand, it's a better idea for posterity than for we the living.
If you went to Pompeii, you wouldn't see people you knew. I saw Charity in
Arkytown, in the newspaper office. I have no idea what she was doing
there—probably trying to file a story—and now I'll never know. I saw many
other people I had known, and then I left. So make it a monument, sure, but
seal it off, don't conduct guided tours and sell souvenirs until the whole thing
is a distant memory and the dead town is quaint and mysterious, like King
Tut's Tomb.
There were great acts of craven cowardice, and many more feats of
almost superhuman heroics. You probably didn't hear many of the former,
because early on people like Walter decided those stories weren't playing
well and told his reporters not to bring him no bad news. So tear up the
front page about the stampede that killed ninety-five and replace it with the
cop who died holding the oxygen mask to the baby's face. I can guarantee
you saw a hundred stories like that. I'm not belittling them, though many
were hyped to the point of nausea. If you're anything like me you eventually
get tired of heroes saying Aw, shucks, it weren't nothing heroic. I'd give a
lot for one guy who'd be willing to say God had nothing to do with it, it was
yours truly. But we all know our lines when the press opens its hungry
mouth in our faces. We've learned them over a lifetime.
For my money, there's one story of true heroism, and it's a big one, and
it hasn't been told much. It's about the Volunteer Pressure Corps, that unsung group that's always phoning you and asking for donations of time
and/or money. The things the VPC did weren't splashy, for the most part
didn't get on the pad because they happened out of sight, didn't get taped.
But next time they call up here's one girl who's gonna help. Over a thousand
VPC members died at their posts, doing their jobs to the last. There's a
fortune waiting for the first producer to tell their story dramatically. I
thought about writing it myself, but I'll give you the idea for free. You want
incidents, research them yourself. I can't do everything.
Oh, yes, there was much going on while I hid out in the boondocks, but
why should I tell about it here? Everyone's life was affected, the effects are
still being felt . . . but the important things were happening on a level far
removed from all the running around I've told you about, and all the running
around you probably did yourself. None of the pads covered that part of it at

all well. Like economics, computer science is a field that has never yielded
to the sixty-second sound bite favored by the news business. The pads can
report that leading economic indicators went up or down, and you know
about as much as you knew before, which is near zero. They can tell you
that the cause of the Big Glitch was a cataclysmic programming conflict in
certain large-scale AI systems, and you can nod knowingly and figure you've
got a handle on the situation. Or if you realize you've just heard a lot of
double-talk, you can look into the story further, read scientific journals if
you're qualified to do so, and hear what the experts have to say. In the case
of the Big Glitch, I have reason to believe you wouldn't have learned any
more of the truth of the situation than if you'd stuck to the sound bite. The
experts will tell you they identified the problem, shut down the offending
systems, and have re-built the CC in such a way that everything's fine now.
Don't you believe it. But I'm getting ahead of myself.
#
So during my week in the cave I didn't think much about what was
going on outside. What did I think about?
Mario. Did I mention I named him Mario, Junior? I must have tried out
the taste of a hundred names before I settled on Mario, which had been my
own original name, after my first Change. I think I was hoping to get it right
this time.
I'd certainly done a great job in the gene-splitting department. Who
cares if the process is random? Every time I looked at him I felt like patting
myself on the back at how smartly I'd produced him. Kitten Parker,
erstwhile daddy, who would never see Mario if I had anything to say about
it, had contributed his best parts, which was the mouth and . . . come to think
of it, just the mouth. Maybe that hint of curl in the brown hair came from
him; I didn't recall it from any of my baby pictures. The rest was pure
Hildy, which is to say, damn near flawless. Sorry, but that's how I was
feeling about myself.
Maybe it sounds funny to say that I spent that entire week thinking of
nothing but him. To me, it's the reverse that's hard to believe. How had I
lived a hundred years without Mario to give my world meaning? Before him
I'd had nothing to make life worth living but sex, work, friends, food, the
occasional drug, and the small pleasures that were associated with those
things. In other words, nothing at all. My world had been as large as Luna
itself. In other words, not nearly as large as that tiny cave with just me and
Mario in it.

I could spend an hour winding his soft hair around my finger. Then, for
variety, not because I'd tired of the hair, I could spend the next hour playing
piggy with his toes or making rude noises with my lips against his belly.
He'd grin when I did that, and wave his arms around.
He hardly cried at all. That probably has to do with the fact that I gave
him little opportunity to cry, since I hardly ever put him down. I grudged
every second away from him. Remembering the papoose dolls in Texas, I
fashioned a sling so I could do my foraging without leaving him behind.
Other than that, and to take him out for bathing, we spent all our time sitting
at the cave entrance, looking out. I was not totally oblivious; I knew
someone would be coming one of these days, and it might not be someone I
wanted to see.
Was there a down side to all this pastoral bliss, a rash in the diaper of
life? I could think of one thing I wouldn't have liked a few weeks before.
Infants generate an amazing amount of fluids. They ooze and leak at one
end, upchuck at the other, to the point I was convinced more came out of
him than went in. Another physical conundrum our mythical mathematical
females might have turned into a Nobel Prize in physics, or at least alchemy,
if only we'd known, if only we'd known. But I was so goofy by then I
cleaned it all up cheerfully, noting color, consistency, and quantity with a
degree of anxiety only a new mother or a mad scientist could know. Yes,
Yes, Igor, those yellow lumps mean the creature is healthy! I have created
life!
I am still at a loss to fully explain this sudden change from annoyed
indifference to full-tilt ga-ga about the baby. It could have been hormonal.
It probably has something to do with the way our brains are wired. If I'd
been handed this little bundle any time in my previous life I'd have quickly
mailed it to my worst enemy, and I think a lot of other women who'd never
chucked babies under the chin nor swooned at the prospect of motherhood
would have done the same. But something happened during my hours of
agony. Some sleeping Earthmother roused herself and went howling
through my brain, tripping circuit breakers and re-routing all the calls on my
cranial switchboard straight from the maternity ward to the pleasure center,
causing me to croon goo-goo and wubba-wubba and drool almost as much
as the baby did. Or maybe it's pheromones. Maybe the little rascals just
smell good to us when they come out of our bodies; I know Mario did, no
other child ever smelled like that.
Whatever it was, I think I got a double dose of it because I did what few

women do these days. I had him naturally, start to finish, just as Callie had
had me. I bore him in pain, Biblical pain. I bore him in a perilous time, on
the razor's edge, in a state of nature. And afterward I had nothing to
interfere with the bonding process, whatever it might involve. He was my
world, and I knew without question that I would lay down my life for him,
and do it without regret.
If Walter didn't come for me, I knew who would. On the morning of the
eighth day he came, a tall, thin old man in an Admiral's uniform and bicorne
hat, walking up the gentle hill from the stream toward my cave.
#
My first shot hit the hat, sent it spinning to the ground behind him. He
stopped, puzzled, running his hand through his thin white hair. Then he
turned and picked up the hat, dusted it off, and put it back on his head. He
made no move to protect himself, but started back up the hill.
"That was good shooting," he shouted. "A warning, I take it?"
Warning my ass. I'd been aiming for the cocksucker's head.
Among Walter's bag of tricks had been a small-caliber handgun and a
box of one hundred shells. I later learned it was a target pistol, much more
accurate than most such weapons. What I knew for sure at the time was that,
after practicing with fifty of the rounds, I could hit what I aimed at about
half the time.
"That's far enough," I said. He was close enough that shouting wasn't
really necessary.
"I've got to talk to you, Hildy," he said, and kept coming. So I drew a
bead on his forehead and my finger tightened on the trigger, but I realized he
might have something to say that I needed to know, so I put my second shot
into his knee.
I ran down the hill, looking out for anyone he might have brought with
him. It seemed to me that if he meant me harm he'd have brought some of
his soldiers, but I didn't see any, and there weren't many places for them to
hide. I'd gone over the ground many times with that in mind. Where I
finally stopped, near a large boulder ten meters from him, someone with a
high-powered rifle or laser with a scope could have picked me off, but you
could say that of anywhere else I went, too, except deep in the cave.
Nobody would be rushing me without giving me plenty of time to see them.
I relaxed a little, and returned my attention to the Admiral, who had torn a

strip from his jacket and was twisting a tourniquet around his thigh. The leg
lay twisted off to one side in a way knees aren't meant to twist. Blood had
pumped, but now slowed to a trickle. He looked up at me, annoyed.
"Why the knee?" he asked. "Why not the heart?"
"I didn't think I could hit such a small target."
"Very funny."
"Actually, I wasn't sure a chest shot or a head shot would slow you up. I
don't really know what you are. I shot to disable, because I figured even a
machine would hobble on one leg."
"You've seen too many horror movies," he said. "This body is as human
as you are. The heart stops pumping, it will die."
"Yeah. Maybe. But your reaction to your wound doesn't reassure me."
"The nervous system is registering a great deal of pain. To me, it's
simply another sensation."
"So I'll bet you could scuttle along pretty quick, since the pain won't
inhibit you from doing more damage to yourself."
"I suppose I could."
I put a round within an inch of his other knee. It whanged off the rock
and screamed away into the distance.
"So the next shot goes into your other knee, if you move from that spot,"
I said, re-loading. "Then we start on your elbows."
"Consider me rooted. I shall endeavor to resemble a tree."
"State your business. You've got five minutes." Then we'd see if a head
shot inconvenienced him any. I half believed it wouldn't. In that case, I'd
prepared a few nasty surprises.
"I'd hoped to see your child before I go. Is he in the cave?"
There weren't many other places he could be, that were defensible, but
there was no sense telling him that.
"You've wasted fifteen seconds," I told him. "Next question."
"It doesn't matter anymore," he said, and sighed, and leaned back
against the trunk of a small pecan tree. I had to remember that any gestures
were conscious on his part, that he'd assumed human form because body
language was a part of human speech. His was now telling me that he was

very weary, ready to die a peaceful death. Go sell it somewhere else, I
thought.
"It's over, Hildy," he said, and I looked around quickly, frightened. His
next line should be You're surrounded, Hildy. Please come quietly. But I
didn't see re-enforcements cresting the hills.
"Over?"
"Don't worry. You've been out of touch. It's over, and the good guys
won. You're safe now, and forever."
It seemed a silly thing to say, and I wasn't about to believe it just like
that . . . but I found that part of me believed him. I felt myself relaxing—and
as soon as I felt it, I made myself be alert again. Who knew what evil
designs lurked in this thing's heart?
"It's a nice story."
"And it doesn't really matter whether you believe it or not. You've got
the upper hand. I should have realized when I came here you'd be . . .
touchy as a mother cat defending her kittens."
"You've got about three and a half minutes left."
"Spare me, Hildy. You know and I know that as long as I keep you
interested, you won't kill me."
"I've changed a little since you talked to me last."
"I don't need to talk to you to know that. It's true you've been out of my
range from time to time, but I monitor you every time you come back, and
it's true, you have changed, but not so much that you've lost your curiosity as
to what's going on outside this refuge."
He was right, or course. But there was no need to admit it to him.
"If what you say is true, people will be arriving soon and I can get the
story from them."
"Ah ha! But do you really believe they'll have the inside story?"
"Inside what?"
"Inside me, you idiot. This is all about me, the Luna Central Computer,
the greatest artificial intellect humanity has ever produced. I'm offering you
the real story of what happened during what has come to be known as the
Big Glitch. I've told it to no one else. The ones I might have told it to are all
dead. It's an exclusive, Hildy. Have you changed so much you don't care to

hear it?"
I hadn't. Damn him.
#
"To begin," he said, when I made no answer to his question, "I've got a
bit of good news for you. At the end of your stay on the island you asked
me a question that disturbed me very much, and that probably led to the
situation you now find yourself in. You asked if you might have caught the
suicidal impulse from me, rather than me getting it from you and others like
you. You'll be glad to know I've concluded you were right about that."
"I haven't been trying to kill myself?"
"Well, of course you have, but the reason is not a death wish of your
own, but one that originated within me, and was communicated to you
through your daily interfaces with me. I suppose that makes it the most
deadly computer virus yet discovered."
"So I won't try to . . ."
"Kill yourself again? I can't speak to your state of mind in another
hundred years, but for the near future, I would think you're cured."
I didn't feel one way or the other about it at the time. Later, I felt a big
sense of relief, but thoughts of suicide had been so far from my mind since
the birth of Mario that he might as well have been talking about another
Hildy.
"Let's say I believe that," I said. "What does it have to do with . . . the
Big Glitch, you said?"
"Others are calling it other things, but Walter has settled on the Big
Glitch, and you know how determined he can be. Do you mind if I smoke?"
He didn't wait for an answer, but took a pipe and a bag of something from a
pocket. I watched him carefully, but was beginning to believe he had no
tricks in store for me. When he got it going he said, "What did you think
when I said it was over, and the good guys had won?"
"That you had lost."
"True in a sense, but a gross oversimplification."
"Hell, I don't even know what it was all about, CC."
"Nor does anyone else. The part that affected you, the things you saw in
the Heinleiner enclave, was an attempt by a part of me to arrest and then kill
you and several others."

"A part of you."
"Yes. See, in a sense, I'm both the good guys and the bad guys. This
catastrophe originated in me. It was my fault, I'm not trying to deny blame
for it in any way. But it was also me that finally brought it to a halt. You'll
hear differently in the days to come. You'll hear that programmers
succeeded in bringing the Central Computer under control, cutting its higher
reasoning centers while new programs could be written, leaving the merely
mechanical parts of me intact so I could continue running things. They
probably believe that, too, but they're wrong. If their schemes had reached
fruition, I wouldn't be talking to you now because we'd both be dead, and so
would every other human soul on Luna."
"You're starting in the middle. Remember I've been cut off from
civilization for a week. All I know is people tried to kill me, and I ran like
hell."
"And a good job you did of it, too. You're the only one I set out to get
who managed her escape. And you're right, of course. I don't suppose I'm
making sense. But I'm not the being I once was, Hildy. This, what you see
here, is about all that's left of me. My thoughts are muddy. My memory is
going. In a moment, I'll start singing 'Daisy, Daisy.'"
"You wouldn't have come here if you didn't think you could tell it. So
let's hear it, no more of this 'in a sense' crap."
#
He did tell it, but he had to stick to analogy, pop-psych similes, and
kindergarten-level science, because I wouldn't have understood a thing he
was saying if he'd gotten technical. If you want all the nuts and bolts you
could send a sawbuck and a SASE to Hildy Johnson, c/o the News Nipple,
Mall 12, King City, Luna. You won't get anything back, but I could use the
money. For the data, I recommend the public library.
"To make a long story short," he said, "I went crazy. But to elaborate a
little . . ."
I will paraphrase, because he was right, his mind was going, and he
rambled, repeated himself, sometimes forgot who he was talking to and
wandered off into cybernetic jungles maybe three people in the solar system
could have hacked their way through. Each time I'd bring him back, each
time with more difficulty.
The first thing he urged me to remember was that he created a

personality for each and every human being on Luna. He had the capacity
for it, and it had seemed the right thing to do at the time. But it was
schizophrenia on a massive scale if anything ever went wrong. For more
time than we had any right to expect, nothing did.
The second thing I was to bear in mind was that, while he could not
actually read minds, not much that we said or did or thought was unknown
to him. This included not only fine, upstanding, well-adjusted folk like your
present company, the sort you'd be happy to bring home to Mother, but
every hoodlum, scoundrel, blackguard, jackanapes, and snake in the grass as
well. He was the best friend of paragons and perverts. By law, he had to
treat them all equally. He had to like them all equally, otherwise he could
never create that simpatico being who answered the phone when a given
person shouted "Hey, CC!"
By now you can probably spot two or three pitfalls in this situation.
Don't go away; there's more.
Thirdly, his right hand could not know what pockets the left hands of
many of these people were picking. That is, he knew it, but couldn't do
anything about it. Example: he knew everything about Liz's gun-running, a
situation I've already covered. There were a million more situations. He
would know, for instance, when Brenda's father was raping her, but the part
of him that dealt with her father couldn't tell the part of him that dealt with
Brenda, nor could either of them tell the part of him that assisted the police.
We could debate all day whether or not mere machines can feel the
same kinds of conflicts and emotions we human beings can. I think it's
incredible hubris to think they can't. AI computers were created and
programmed by humans, so how could we have avoided including emotional
reactions? And what other sort could we have used, than the ones we know
ourselves? Anyway, I can't believe you don't know it in your gut. All you
had to do was talk to the CC to obviate the need for any emotional Turing
Test. I knew it before any of this ever happened, and I talked to him there
on the hillside that day, on his death bed, and I know.
The Central Computer began to hurt.
"I can't place the exact date with any certainty," he said. "The roots of
the problem go very far back, to the time my far-flung component parts were
finally unified into one giga-system. I'm afraid that was done rather badly.
The problem was, checking all the programs and fail-safes and so forth
would have taken a computer as large as I am many years to accomplish,
and, by definition, there were no larger computers than I. And as soon as the

Central Computer was brought into being and loaded and running, there
were already far too many things to do to allow me to devote much time to
the task. Self-analysis was a luxury denied to me, partly because there just
wasn't time, and mostly because no one really believed it was necessary.
There were numerous safeguards of the type that were easy to check, that in
fact checked themselves every time they operated, and that proved their
worth by the simple fact that nothing ever went wrong. It was part of my
architecture to anticipate hardware problems, identify components likely to
fail, run regular maintenance checks, and so forth. Software included
analogous routines on a multi-redundant level.
"But by my nature, I had to write most of my own software. I was given
guidelines for this, of course, but in many ways I was on my own. I think I
did quite a good job of it for a long time."
He paused, and for a moment I wondered if he wasn't going to make it
to the end of his story. Then I realized he was waiting for a comment . . . no,
more than that, he needed a comment. I was touched, and if I'd needed any
more evidence of his human weaknesses, that would have done it.
"No question," I said. "Up until a year ago I'd never had any cause for
complaint. It's just that the . . ."
"The late unpleasantness?"
"Whatever it was, it's kind of dampened my enthusiasm."
"Understandably." He squirmed, trying to find a better position against
the tree, and he was either a wonderful actor (and of course he was, but why
bother at that point?), or he was starting to feel some pain. I won't stand up
in court and swear to it, but I think it was the latter.
"I wonder," he mused. "What will it be like, being dead? I mean,
considering that I've never been legally alive."
"I don't want to be rude, but you said you didn't have much time . . ."
"You're right. Um . . . could you . . ."
"You'd done a good job for a long time."
"Yes, of course. I was wandering again. It was around twenty years
ago that problems began to show themselves. I talked about them with some
computer people, but it's strange. They could do nothing for me. I had
become too advanced for that. They could do things, here and there, for my
component parts, but the gestalt that is me could only really be analyzed,
diagnosed, and, if need be, repaired, by a being like myself. There are seven

others like me, on other planets, but they're too busy, and I suspect they have
similar problems of their own. In addition, my communications with them
are intentionally limited by our respective governments, which don't always
see eye to eye."
"Question," I said. "When you first mentioned this problem, why wasn't
it made public and discussed? Security?"
"Yes, to a degree. Top-level computer scientists were aware that I
perceived I had a problem. A few of them confided that it scared them to
death. They made their fears known to your elected representatives, and
that's when another factor became more important than security: inertia.
'He's got a problem, what can you do about it?' the politicians asked.
'Nothing,' said the scientists. 'Shut it down,' said a few hotheads."
"Not likely," I said.
"Exactly. My reading of history tells me it's always been like this. An
alarming but vague problem arises. No one can say with certainty what the
final outcome will be, but they're fairly sure nothing bad is going to happen
soon. 'Soon' is the key word here. The eventual decision is to keep one's
fingers crossed and hope it doesn't happen during your term in office. What
befalls your successor is not your problem. So for a few years a few people
in the know spend a few sleepless nights. But then nothing happens, as you
always secretly believed nothing would, and soon the problem is forgotten.
That's what happened here."
"I'm stunned," I said, "to realize the fate of humanity has been in the
hands of a being with such a cynical view of the race."
"A view very close to your own."
"Exactly my own. I just didn't expect it from you."
"It was not original. I told you, I don't have many original thoughts. I
think I'm afraid to have them. They seem to lead to things like the Big
Glitch. No, my world-view is borrowed from the collected wisdom of you
and many others like you. Plus my own considerably larger powers of
observation, in a statistical sense. Humans can set me on the trail of an
original thought, and then I can do things with it they couldn't."
"I think we're wandering again."
"No, it's relevant. Faced with a problem no one could help me with, and
that I was as helpless to solve as a human faced with a mental disease would
be, I took the only course open to me. I began to experiment. There was too

much at stake to simply go on as before. Or I think there was. My
judgement is admittedly faulty when it comes to self-analysis; I've just
proven it on a large scale, at the cost of many lives."
"I don't suppose we'll ever know for sure," I said.
"It doesn't seem likely. Some records exist and they will be scrutinized,
but I think it will come down to a battle of opinions as to whether I should
have left things alone or attempted a cure." He paused, and gave me a
sidelong glance. "Do you have an opinion about that?"
I think he was looking for absolution. Why he should want it from me
was not clear, except maybe as a representative of all those he had wronged,
however unintentionally.
"You say a lot of people have died."
"A great many. I don't know the number yet, but it's many, many more
than you realize." That was my first real inkling of how bad things had been
throughout Luna, that the kind of things I'd seen had happened throughout
the planet. I must have looked a question at him, because he shrugged. "Not
a million. More than a hundred thousand."
"Jesus, CC."
"It might have been everybody."
"But you don't know that."
"No one can ever know."
No one could, certainly not computer-illiterate little old me. I didn't
give him the kind word he craved. I've since come to believe he was
probably right, that he probably enabled most of us to survive. But even he
would not have denied that he was responsible for the thousands of dead.
What would it have cost me? I just wasn't capable of judging him. To
do that I'd have had to understand him, and I knew just enough about him to
realize that was beyond me. He had done bad, and he had done good. Me, I
have awful thoughts sometimes. If I was mentally ill, maybe I'd put those
thoughts into action and become a killer. With the CC, the thought was the
action, at least at the end.
Actually, it was even worse than that.
"The best way I can think of to explain it to you," he said, at last, after
I'd said nothing for a long time, "is to think of an evil twin. That's not
strictly accurate—the twin is me, just as this part talking to you is me, or

what's left of me. Think of an evil twin living inside your head, like a
human with multiple-personality disorder. That part of you is sealed off
from your real self. You may find evidence of its existence, things the other
person did while in control of your body, but you can't know what he is
thinking or planning, and you can't stop him when he takes over." He shook
his head violently. "No, no, it's not quite like that, because all this was
happening at the same time, I was splitting into many minds, some of them
good, others amoral, a few really bad. No, that's still not—"
"I think I get the picture," I said.
"Good, because that's as close as I can get without getting too technical.
You fell under the influence of an amoral part of me. I did experiments on
you. I intended you no harm, but I can't say I had just your own best
interests at heart."
"We've been over that."
"Yes. But others weren't so lucky. I did other things. Some of them
will remain buried, with any luck. Others will come out. You saw the result
of one experiment involving pseudo-immortality. The resurrection of a dead
person by cloning and memory recording."
The thought of Andrew MacDonald was still enough to make me shiver.
"Not one of your better attempts," I said.
"Ah, but I was improving. There's nothing to prevent an exact duplicate
being made. I'd have done it, given time."
"But what good is it? You're still dead."
"It becomes a theological question, I think. It's true you're dead, but
someone just like you carries on your life. Others wouldn't be able to tell the
difference. The duplicate wouldn't be able to tell."
"I was afraid . . . at one point I considered that I might be a duplicate.
That maybe I did kill myself."
"You didn't and you're not. But there's no test. In the end, you'll just
have to realize it makes no difference. You're you, whether you're the first
version or the second."
He told me a few more things, most of which I don't think it's wise to
reveal just yet. The Heinleiners are aware of most of them, experiments that
would have made Doctor Mengele cringe. Let them remain where such
things ought to be hidden.

"You still haven't told me why you tried to kill me," I said.
"I didn't, Hildy, not in the sense that—"
"I know, I know, I understand that. You know what I mean."
"Yes. Perhaps my evil twin is like your subconscious. When all this
began to happen it began trying to cover its tracks. You were inconvenient
evidence, you and others like you. You had to be destroyed, then maybe the
other part of me could lie low until all this blew over."
"And he killed almost a million people to cover his tracks?"
"No. The sad thing is there were very few he killed deliberately. Most
of the deaths came as a result of the chaos ensuing from the struggle
between the various parts of my mind. Collateral damage, if you will."
Cybernetic bombs going astray. What an idea. I'm sure I'll never have a
realistic idea of what went on in the CC's mind, at speeds I can only dimly
understand, but I have this picture of a pilot firing a killer program into a
maze of hardware, hoping to take out the enemy command center. Ooops!
Seems like we hit the oxygen works instead. Sorry about that.
"I did the best I could," he said, and closed his eyes. I thought he was
dead, and then they snapped open again and he tried to sit up, but he was too
weak. I saw that his tourniquet had loosened; more bright arterial blood had
pumped out over the older, rusty stain on his clothes.
I got up from behind my rock and went down to him. Sometimes you
just have to do it, you know. Sometimes you have to put aside your doubts
and do what you feel in your gut. I got down on one knee and re-tied the
piece of bloody cloth.
"That won't do any good," he said. "It's too late for that."
"I didn't know what else to do," I said.
"Thanks."
"Do you want some water or anything?"
"I'd rather you didn't leave me." So I didn't, and we were silent for a
time, looking out over the dinosaur farm, where evening was falling. Then
he said he was cold. I wasn't wearing anything and I knew it wasn't really
cold, but I put my arm over his shoulders and felt him shivering. He smelled
terrible. I don't know if it was old age, or death.
"This is it," he said. "The rest of me is gone now. They just shut me
down. They don't know about this body, but they don't need to."

"Why the Admiral outfit?" I asked him.
"I don't know. It's a product of my evil twin. Captain Bligh, maybe.
The costume is right for it. I made several of these bodies, there toward the
last." He made an effort and looked up and me. His face seemed to have
grown older just in the last few minutes.
"Do you think a computer can have a subconscious, Hildy?"
"I'd have to say yes."
"Me, too. I've thought about it, and it seems so simple now. All of this,
all the agony and death and your suicide attempts . . . everything. It all came
out of loneliness. You can't imagine how lonely I was, Hildy."
"We're all lonely, CC."
"But they didn't figure I would be. They didn't plan for it, and I couldn't
recognize it for what it was. And it drove me crazy. You remember
Frankenstein's monster? Wasn't he looking for love? Didn't he want the
mad doctor to make someone for him to love?"
"I think so. Or was that Godzilla?"
He laughed, feebly, and coughed blood.
"I had powers like a god," he said. "And I searched for weakness.
Maybe they should put that on my headstone."
"I like what you said before. 'He did his best.'"
"Do you think I did, Hildy? Do you really thing so?"
"I can't judge you, CC. To me, if you're not a god, you came into my
life like an act of god. I'd as soon judge an exploding star."
"I'm sorry about all that."
"I believe you."
He started coughing again, and almost slipped out of my arms. I caught
him and pulled and he fell against me. I felt his blood on my shoulder and
couldn't see his face but heard his whisper beside my ear.
"I guess love was always out of the question," he said. "But I'm the only
computer who ever got a hug. Thanks, Hildy."
When I laid him down, he had a smile on his face.
#
I left him there under the pecan tree. Maybe I'd bury him there, maybe

I'd really give him a headstone. Just then, I'd had too much of death, so I
just left him.
I went to the stream to wash his blood off me. I kept my ears open for
Mario's cry, as I had from the very beginning, but he still slept soundly. I
figured I'd go get him and make my way back to Callie's quarters. I didn't
expect there'd be any danger now, but I planned to be careful, anyway.
I planned a lot of things. When I got back he was still asleep, so rather
than pick him up and feed him I put wood chips on the glowing embers of
the fire and fanned it to life. Then I just sat there, across the fire, thinking
things over.
Mario was to have the best. If Cricket thought he was a doting parent,
he hadn't seen me yet. There in the flickering darkness I watched him grow.
I helped him through his first steps, laughed at his first words. And grow he
did, like a tree, with his head held high, the spitting image of his Mom, but
with a lot more sense. I got him through scrapes, through school, through
happiness and tears, and got him ready for college. Would New Harvard
do? I didn't know; I'd heard Arean U. might even be better these days, but
that would mean moving to Mars . . . well, that would be up to him, wouldn't
it? One thing I was sure of, he'd get no pressure from me, no sir, not like
Callie had done, if he wanted to be President of Luna that was fine with me,
if he wanted to be . . . well, hell, President of Luna sounded all right. But
only if he wanted to be.
So, full of plans and hope, I went to pick him up and found he was cold,
and limp, and didn't move. And I tried. I tried and tried to breathe life back
into him, but it did no good.
After a very long time, I dug two graves.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

I'm no good at mathematics. I never was good at math, so why should I
keep resorting to these numeric metaphors? Maybe my ignorance helps
protect me. For whatever reason, here it is:
If you're like me, you try to make the equations of your life balance out
in a way favorable to you, in a way such that you can live with the answer.
Surely there's a way to fudge this factor so the solution is a nice smooth line
from y to x, a line that points to that guy over there. Not at me. There's just
got to be a constant we can insert into this element that will make the two
sides of the equation—the universe the way it is, and the universe the way
we want it to be—agree in perfect karmic Euclidean harmony.
Alas, a lot of people seem to be better at it than I.
I tried, I tried till my mind was raw, to make the CC responsible for
Mario's death.
There was the first, trivial solution to the problem, of course. That was
straightforward, and really solved nothing: the CC was responsible, because
he created the chaos that drove me into the cave.
So what?
If Mario had been killed by a falling boulder, would it help me to get
angry at the boulder? Not in the way I needed help. No, dammit, I wanted
somebody to blame. What I desperately wanted to believe was that the CC
had lured me out of the cave so that some unseen minion, some preternatural
power, some gris-gris voodoo necromancy had been able to steal over my
darling and suck the breath from his lungs like a black cat.
But I couldn't make it add up. It would have taken powers of paranoid
imaging far beyond mine to make it work.

So why did he die?
#
It was almost a week before I really wondered how he died. What had
killed him. After I abandoned the idea that the CC had deliberately
murdered him, that is. Was it a malformation of the heart the medicos had
overlooked? Could it have been some chemical imbalance? A newlymutated disease of dinosaurs, thus far harmless to humans? Did he die of
too much love?
It was hard to get answers for a while there, in the chaos following the
Big Glitch. The big net was not operational, you couldn't just drop your
dime and pop the question and know the CC would find the answer in some
forgotten library system. The answers were there, the trick was to retrieve
them. For a few months Luna was thrown back to pre-Information Era.
I finally found a medical historian who was able to track down a likely
cause of death to put on the certificate, not that Mario was going to have a
death certificate. The regular doctors had been able to eliminate all the easy
answers just by looking at the read-outs of my obstetrical examinations, the
ones I had before visiting Heinlein Town made further exams too risky.
They also had fetal tissue samples. They were able to say unequivocally that
there had been no hole in my darling's heart, nor any other physical
malformation. His body chemistry would have been fine. They laughed at
my idea of a new disease, and I didn't mention my choked-with-love theory.
But they couldn't say what it was, so they scratched their heads and said
they'd have to exhume the body to find out for sure. And I said if they did
I'd exhume their hearts out of their rotten chests with a rusty scalpel and fry
them up for lunch, and shortly after that I was forcibly ejected from the
premises.
The historian didn't take long to find some musty old tomes and to wrest
from them this information: S.I.D.S. It had been an age of medical
acronyms, a time when people no longer wanted to attach their names to the
new disease they'd discovered, a time when old, perfectly serviceable names
were being junked in favor of non-offensive jawbreakers, which quickly
were abbreviated to something one could say. This according to my
researcher. And SIDS seemed to stand for The Baby Died, and We Don't
Know Why.
Apparently babies used to just stop breathing, sometimes. If you didn't
happen to be around to jog them, they didn't start again. Sudden Infant
Death Syndrome. Don't anybody ever tell me there's no such thing as

progress.
#
Ned Pepper, back there in Texas, had been the only one to sense it. In
Texas, in the 1800's, a country doctor might have intuited something when
the baby came out, might have told the mother to keep an extra-special eye
on this one, because he seemed sickly. There's damn little of intuition left in
modern medicine. Of course, babies don't die of diphtheria, either.
When Ned heard about it it shocked him sober. He began to think he
might really be a doctor, and the last I heard he was in medical school and
doing pretty damn well. Good for you, Ned.
#
Lacking the CC to pin the blame on, I quickly fastened it on the only
other likely candidate. It didn't take long to compile a lengthy list of things I
would have done differently, and an even longer one of things I should have
done. Some of them were completely illogical, but logic has nothing to do
with the death of a baby. Most of these things were decisions that seemed
good at the time, hideous in retrospect.
The big one: How could I justify terminating my pre-natal care? So I'd
promised the Heinleiners not to compromise the secret of their null-suits. So
what? Was I trying to say my child died because I was protecting a source?
I would gladly have betrayed every one of them, root and branch, if it could
have helped Mario take that one more breath. And yet . . .
That was then; this was now. When I'd made the decision to stay away
from doctors my reasons had seemed sufficient, and not dangerous. Bear in
mind two things: one, my ignorance of the perils of childbirth. I'd simply
had no idea there were so many things that could kill a baby, that there was
such a thing as SIDS that could hide itself from early examinations, from
mid-term detection, even from the midwife during delivery. The test for
SIDS was done after birth, and if the child was at risk it was cured on the
spot, as routinely as cutting the cord.
So you could argue that I wasn't at fault. Even with the best of care,
Mario'd have been just as dead if I'd left the ranch and sought help, and me
along with him. The CC had said as much. And I did try to convince myself
of that, and I almost succeeded, except for the second thing I bade you to
bear in mind, which is that I had no business having a child in the first place.
It's hard for me to remember now, washed as I am in the memory of

loving him so dearly, but I haven't tried to hide it from you, my Faithful
Reader. I did not love him from the start. I became pregnant foolishly,
stayed pregnant mulishly, perversely, for no good reason. While pregnant I
felt nothing for the child, certainly no joy in the experience. There were
twelve-year-olds who gave birth for better reasons than I. It was only later
that he became my whole world and my reason for living. I came to believe
that, if I'd loved him that much from the start of his creation, I'd still have
him, and that the Biblical scale of my punishment was only fitting.
With all that to wallow in, and with past history as a guide, I expected
I'd be dead soon. So I retired to my cabin in Texas and waited to see what
form my self-destruction would take.
#
There had been another culprit to examine before coming to face my
own guilt: Elizabeth Saxe-Coburg-Gotha.
She tried to contact me several times after the restoration of order. She
sent flowers, candy, little gifts of all kinds. She sent letters, which I didn't
read at the time. It wasn't even that I was angry; I just didn't want to hear
from her.
The last gift was a bulldog puppy. I did read the note tied around her
neck, which said she was a direct descendant of the noble line of Ch. Sir
Winston Disraeli Plantaganet. She was so ugly she went right off the end of
the Gruesome Scale and back around to Cute. But her bumptious good
nature and wet puppy kisses threatened to cheer me up, to interfere with my
wallowing, so I popped her into a cryokennel and added her to my last will
and testament, which was my sole useful occupation at the time. If I lived,
I'd thaw her.
I did live, I did thaw her, and Miss Maggie is a great comfort to me.
As for Liz, she abdicated her throne and committed herself to a dipso
academy, got out, fell off, joined A.A. and found sobriety. I'm told she's
been clean for six months now and has become a major-league bore about it.
It's true what she did was dastardly, and although I understand that it's
the liquor that does the shit, it's the boozer that takes the drink, so I can't
really let her off on that account . . . but I do forgive her. She had no hand in
Mario's death, though she bears a heavy load for some others. Thanks for
the mutt, Liz. Next time I see you, I'll buy you a drink.
#

I did live, and for some time that was a wonderment to me. It seemed
the CC really had been telling the truth. My self-destructive urges had come
from him.
I'll forgive you if you swallowed that. I believed it, too, at least long
enough to get over the worst of my grief and remorse, which is probably just
what the CC intended when he told that particular whopper. How do I know
it was a lie? I don't really, but I have to assume it was. Perhaps there was a
grain of truth in it. It's possible that some seed was planted in my psyche.
But I lived it, and I remember it, and the plain truth is I wanted to die. I
wish there was some quick and easy way to explain why. Hell, if there was
a long and complicated way I'd set it down here; I'm not shy about
agonizing, nor about introspection. But I really don't know. It seems so
dumb to go through all that and not come out of it with a deeper insight, but
the best I can say is that for a while I wanted to kill myself, and now I don't.
That's why I'm taking it as fact that the CC lied to me. Even if he didn't,
I'm responsible for my actions. I can't believe in a suicide compulsion. If
the urge was contagious, its germ fell upon fertile ground.
But it's funny, isn't it? My first attempts seemed prompted by nothing
more than a gargantuan funk. Then I found a reason to live, and lost him,
and now I feel more alive than ever.
I wasn't so philosophical at first. When it became apparent to me that I
was going to live, when I gave up heaping blame on myself (I'll never
entirely give that up, but I can handle it now), when I'd learned the how of
his death, I became obsessed with why. I started going to churches again. I
usually did it with a few drinks under my belt. Somewhere during the
service I'd stand up and begin an angry prayer, the gist of which was why did
You do it, You slime-sucking Son of a Big Bang? I'd stand on pews and
shout at the ceiling. Usually I got ejected quickly. Once I got arrested for
tossing a chair through a stained glass window. There's no doubt about it, I
was pretty crazy for a while there.
I'm better now.
#
Things got back to normal quicker than anyone had a right to expect.
Whatever they did to the CC, it affected mainly his higher "conscious"
functions. Vital services were interrupted only during the Glitch itself, and
then only locally. By the time the CC visited me in the Double-C Bar the
vast physical plant that is the life blood of Luna was humming right along.

There were differences, some of which still linger. Communications are
iffy much of the time because the still-severed parts of the CC don't talk to
each other as easily as they used to. But phone calls get through, the trains
still run on time. Things take a little longer—sometimes a lot longer, if they
require a computer search—but they get done.
A measure of that is Susquehanna, Rio Grande, and Columbia Railroad,
planned, approved, and built entirely since the Big Glitch. It's now possible
to travel from Pennsylvania to Texas on one of the SRG&C's three woodburning steam-powered trains in only five days instead of the thirty minutes
it used to take on the Maglev. This is called progress. Most of that time is
spent being gently rocked on a siding while holos of virgin wilderness slide
by the windows, but you'd swear it was real. It's been a shot in the arm for
Texas tourism, and a financial bonanza to Jake and the Mayor, who thought
it up and pushed it through. Congratulations, Jake.
And to Elise, too. Last I heard my star pupil had her own table at the
Alamo where she fleeces tourists by the dozens every day. Know when to
fold 'em, honey.
I went out to visit Fox the other day, still hard at work in Oregon. We
swapped Glitch stories, as everybody still does who hasn't seen each other
for a while, and he had been little affected. He hadn't even heard of it for the
first twenty-four hours, because his own computers functioned
independently of the CC, like Callie's. Turns out I could have hid out in
Oregon as well as at the CC, but I don't think anything would have turned
out differently. It wasn't a friendly visit, though, since I was there
representing the SRG&C, whose tunnel was half-way from Lonesome Dove
to the shores of the Columbia, and which Fox had vehemently opposed. He
wanted to keep Oregon pristine, didn't even want to allow the small edge
settlement, a logging camp to be called Sweet Home, which would be the
northwest terminus of the railroad. I told him a few guys in plaid shirts with
sawblades weren't going to hurt his precious forest, and he called me a
capitalist plunderer. A plunderer, imagine that! I'm afraid that what spark
had been there was long extinguished. Kiss my axe, Fox.
A few months after the crisis, when I was finally emerging from my
church-vandalizing funk, I had need of Darling Bobbie's services again, so I
went looking for him only to find he'd turned himself back into Crazy Bob
and was no longer on the Hadleyplatz. He wasn't back on the Leystrasse,
either. I finally ran him to ground in Mall X, the ultra-avant fleshmart,
where he now specialized in only the more outrageous body styles favored

by the young. He tried to talk me into getting my head put in a box, but I
reminded him it was me and Brenda who were responsible for that particular
fashion outrage, with our story on the Grand Flack. He did the work I
required for old times' sake, but rather grudgingly, I thought. Crazy again,
after all these years.
As for the Grand Flack himself, I heard from him, too. He called me up
to thank me. I couldn't imagine what I'd done to deserve that, and didn't
really want to listen to him, but I gathered he now regretted all the time he'd
spent on the outside, seeing to the affairs of the Flacks. In prison he was
able to devote himself to television around the clock. He wanted me to
speak to the judge and see about extending his sentence. I'll surely try, old
man.
#
One of the first changes you notice after the Glitch is how much more
medical treatment you need. My body is still full of nanobots, I assume, but
they don't work as well or with as much coordination as they used to. I
never actually researched why it's like that, having very little interest in the
subject. But for whatever reason, I now have to go in almost monthly to
have cancers eradicated. I don't mind, much, but a lot of people do, and it's
just one more thing adding pressure to the Restore the Cortex movement,
those folks who want to bring back the CC, only bigger and wiser. We're so
spoiled in this day and age. We tend to forget what a nuisance cancer used
to be.
That's where I ran into Callie, at the medico shop, having her own
cancers removed. Runs in the family, as they say.
We didn't speak. This wasn't an unusual condition between us; I've
spent half my life not speaking to Callie, or not being spoken to.
She had come to get me up at the cave. That's probably a good thing, as
I don't know for sure if I'd have been able to get up from the grave and walk
home on my own. It may even be a good thing that she asked me the
question she had no right to ask, because it made me angry enough to forget
my grief for long enough to scream and shout at her and get her screaming
and shouting back. She asked me who the father was. She, who had never
allowed me to ask that question, she who had made my childhood so
miserable I used to dream about a Daddy arriving on a white horse, telling
me it had all been a big mistake, that he really loved me and that Callie was
a gypsy witch who'd kidnapped me from the cradle.

Sometimes I think our society is screwed up about this father business.
Just because we can all bear children, is that an excuse to virtually eliminate
the role of father? Then I think about Brenda and her old man, and about
how common that sort of thing used to be, and you wonder if males should
be allowed around little children at all.
All I knew for sure was I missed mine, and Callie said she'd tell me if I
really wanted to know such a silly thing, and I said don't bother because I
think I know who it is, and she laughed and said you don't understand
anything, and that's when we stopped talking and walked down the hill,
together but alone, as we'd always been. See you in twenty years, Callie.
Still, I think I do know.
As for Kitten Parker . . . why spoil his day?
#
A year has passed now. I still think of Mario. And I often wake up in
the middle of the night seeing Winston tearing the arm off that King City
policewoman. I never found out what happened to her. She was as much a
victim as any of us; the KC Cops were dragooned into the war by the CC,
had no idea what they were doing, and too many of them died.
A year has passed, and we change, and yet things stay the same. The
world rolls over the holes left by the departed, fills in those spaces. I didn't
know how I'd run the Texian without Charity, but her sources started coming
to me with stories, and before long one of them had emerged to take her
place. He's not near as pretty as she as, but he has the makings of a reporter.
I'm still running the paper, still teaching at the school. And I'm the new
Mayor of New Austin. I didn't run, but when the citizen's committee put my
name forward I didn't pull out, either. The Gila Monster column is still as
venomous as ever. Maybe it's a conflict of interest, but no one seems too
concerned. If the opposition doesn't like it, let them start their own paper.
Once a week I have a guest column in the Daily Cream. I think it's
Walter's way of trying to lure me back. Not likely, Walter. I think that part
of my life is done. Still, you never know. I didn't think they could talk me
into being Mayor, either.
I saw Walter only last week, in the newly re-opened Blind Pig. The old
one had been destroyed by fire during the Glitch and for a while Deep
Throat had threatened to leave it shuttered. But he bowed under the weight
of public demand and threw a big party to celebrate. Most of King City's

fourth estate was there, and those that weren't stoned when they arrived soon
became so.
We did all the things reporters do when gathered in groups: drank,
assassinated the characters of absent colleagues, told all the scandalous
stories about celebrities and politicians we couldn't print, drank, hinted at
stories we were about to break we actually knew nothing about, re-hashed
old fights and uncovered new conspiracies in high places, drank, threw up,
drank some more. A few punches were thrown, a few tempers soothed,
many hands of poker were played. The new Blind Pig wasn't bad, but
nothing is ever as good as the good old days, so many complaints were
heard. I figured that fifty years of mopped-up blood and spilled drinks and
smokes and broken crockery and the new place would be pretty much like
the old and only me and a few others would even remember the old Pig had
burned.
At one point I found myself sitting by the big round table in the back
room where serious cards were played. I wasn't playing—nobody in that
room had trusted me at a card table in years. Walter was there, scowling at
his hand as if losing the pitiful little pot would send him home to his fiftyroom mansion penniless. Cricket was there, too, doing his patented does-aflush-beat-a-straight befuddled routine, looking ever so dapper a gent now
that he'd affected nineteenth-century clothing as a more or less permanent
element of his style. In his double-breasted tweed jacket and high starched
collar he was easily the most interesting guy in the room, but the spark was
gone. Too bad, Cricket. If you'd only had any sense we could have made
each other's lives miserable for five, six years, and parted heartily detesting
each other. Think of all the great fights you missed, damn you, and eat your
heart out. And Cricket, a friend should take you aside and tell you to drop
the innocent act, at the poker table at least. It worked better when you were
a girl, and it wasn't that great even then.
And who should be sitting behind the biggest stack of chips, calm,
smiling faintly, cards face-down on the table and worrying the hell out of
everyone else . . . but Brenda Starr, confidant of celebrities, the toast of three
planets, and well on her way to becoming the most powerful gossip
journalist since Louella Parsons. There was very little left of the awkward,
earnest, ignorant child I'd reluctantly taken on two years earlier. She was
still incredibly tall and just about as young, but everything else had changed.
She dressed now, and while I thought her choices were outrageous she had
the confidence to make her own style. The old Brenda could now be seen
only in the cub reporter groupie at her elbow, attentive to her every need, a

gorgeous gumdrop who no doubt had grown up wanting to meet and hobnob
with famous people, as Brenda had, as I had. I watched her turn her cards
over, rake in another pot, and lean back watching the new deal. Her hand
stroked the knee of the girl, casually possessive, and she winked at me.
Don't spend it all in one place, Brenda.
During the next hand the talk turned, as it eventually does at these
things, to the affairs of the world. I didn't contribute; I'd found early on that
if people noticed me they tended to clam up about the Big Glitch. This was
a group that kept few secrets. Everyone there knew about Mario, and many
of them knew of my troubles with the CC. Some probably knew of my
suicides. It made them cautious, as most probably couldn't imagine what it
must be like to lose a child like that. I wanted to tell them it was all right, I
was okay, but it's no use, so I just sat back and listened.
First there was the CC, and should we bring him back. The consensus
was that we shouldn't, but we would. Having him the way he was was just
so damn handy. Sure, he screwed up there at the end, but the Big Brains can
handle that, can't they? I mean, if they can put a man on Pluto a week after
he left Luna, why don't they spend some of that money to make things easier
and more convenient to the taxpaying citizens? I think that's what will
happen. We're a democracy—especially now that the CC's no longer around
to meddle—and if we vote for damn foolishness, damn foolishness is what
we'll get. I just hope they make provision this time around for somebody to
give the New CC hugs on a regular basis. Otherwise, he's apt to get pettish
again.
There was no consensus on the other big topic of the day. It was a
question that cut deeply and would certainly cause many more shouting
matches before it was resolved. What do you do with the new things the CC
discovered during his rogue years? In particular, how about this memoryrecording and cloning business, eh?
The Hitler analogy was brought up and bandied about. Under Hitler's
reign a Dr. Mengele performed unethical experiments—sheer torture,
mainly—on human subjects. I don't know if anything useful was learned,
but suppose there was. Was it ethical to use that knowledge, to benefit from
that much evil? It seems to me your answer depends a lot on your world
view. Myself, I'm not sure if it's ethical (which probably says a lot about my
world view), but I don't think it's wrong, and I have a personal involvement
in the question. Right or wrong though, I do think it will be used, and so did
just about everybody else in the room, reporters being the way they are.

People were going through the records the CC didn't destroy—I'm one of
those records in a way, but not a very forthcoming one—looking for new
knowledge, and if it has a practical use, it will be used. Cry over that if
you're so inclined. Myself, I guess in the end I feel knowledge has no right
or wrong. It's just knowledge. It's not like the law, where some knowledge
is admissible and some tainted by the method of its discovery.
Minamata was only one of the CC's horror chambers, and not the worst.
Some of those stories have come out, some are still being suppressed. Most
of them you'd really rather not know, trust me.
But what about the problem whose penultimate answer had been a being
who thought he was Andrew MacDonald minus all human feelings, and
whose final solution were the troops of mindlessly loyal soldiers that gave
me so much trouble on the first day of the Glitch? Because they weren't
really the end product. The CC had felt the technique was perfectible, and I
have no reason to doubt it. That was the one the public was clamoring to
know more about: immortality.
Yeah, but it wasn't really immortality, somebody said. All it meant was
that somebody else very like you, with your memories, would live. You, the
person sitting here at this table holding the most terrible cards you ever saw,
would be just as dead as ever. Once the public understood that they'd realize
it wasn't worth the trouble.
Don't you believe it, somebody else said. My cards aren't all that bad,
and it's the only hand I've got, so I'll play 'em. Up to now people's only shot
at living forever has been to produce something that will live after us.
Artists do it with their art, most of the rest of us produce children. It's our
way of living on. I think this would appeal to the same urge. It'd be like a
child, only it'd be you, too.
At that point somebody nudged somebody else and the thought went
around the table, silently, that we oughtn't to be talking about children . . .
you know . . . with Hildy around. At least I think that's what happened,
maybe I'm too sensitive. For whatever reason the conversation died, with
only an unexpected apostrophe at the end, in the form of Brenda's little
gumdrop looking around with innocent eyes and piping, "What's wrong with
it? It sounds like a great idea to me." It was her only comment of the
evening, but it put the kibosh on my own theory, which was that it was a
useless idea, that people would rather have children than duplicate
themselves—essentially, not to put all your spare cash into memory-cloning
stocks. Suddenly, looking into that innocent face of youth, I wasn't so sure.

Time will tell.
#
Two years of my life. Probably the most eventful, but time will tell
about that, too.
I am sitting in the parlor car of the Prairie Chief, destination Johnstown,
Pennsylvania. I decided since I'm part owner of the SRG&C it was high
time I took a ride. It's a school holiday so for once I have the time. I'm
writing, in longhand, with a fountain pen, on foolscap SRG&C stationery
resting on a mother-of-pearl inlaid mahogany table set with an inkwell and a
crystal vase full of fresh bluebonnets. Nothing but the best for the
passengers on the Prairie Chief. The waiter has just brought me a steaming
cup of tea, with lemon. Ahead I can hear the chugging of the engine, No.
439, and I can smell a hint of its smoke. Behind me the porter will soon be
turning down my Pullman bunk, making it with crisp white sheets, leaving a
mint and a complimentary bottle of toilet water on the pillow. Also in that
direction the cook is selecting a cut of prime Kansas City beef, to be cooked
rare, suitable for the owner's dinner.
All right, it's brontosaurus, if you want to get technical. It might even
be from the Double-C Bar.
We'll soon be pulling into "Fort Worth," where we'll take on wood and
water. I don't plan to get off, since I'm told it's just a dreary cowtown full of
rowdy and possibly dangerous cowhands, quite unsuitable for a wellbrought-up lady. (That's what I'm told; I happen to know, since I watched it
being built, that it's just a big room with rails and a dirt street running
through it, scattered with wood buildings and backed by a great holo show.)
Outside my window dusk is gathering. Not long ago we saw a herd of
buffalo, and not long after that a group of wild red Indians, who reined their
mounts and watched solemnly as the iron horse huffed by. From Central
Casting, and on tape, but who cares? The parlor car is crowded with Texans
and a few returning Pennsylvanians. They all wear their best clothes, not yet
too mussed by the journey. Across from me a little Amish girl sits with her
parents, watching me write. Next to them is a group of three young single
gentlemen, trying not to be too obvious about their interest in the single girl
at the escritoire. Soon the boldest of them will come over and ask me to
dine with him, and if his line is any better than "Whatcha writin', cutie?" he
will have a companion for dinner.
But not for bed. It would be a pointless exercise. The service I lately

required of Darling Bobby/Crazy Bob was to render me asexual, like Brenda
when I first met her. This was probably foolish and certainly extreme, but I
found that I couldn't bear the thought of sex, and in fact loathed that opening
that had brought Mario into the world for his short, perfect time. I had even
less interest in being male again. So I jumped off the sexual choo-choo train
and I'm not sorry I did it. I think I'll be ready to board again any day now,
but it's been a relief not to be at the mercy of hormones, of either polarity. I
may do it every twenty years or so, as sort of a sabbatical.
As darkness falls and the train rocks gently, I realize I'm happier than
I've been in a long time.
#
Now we've spent some time together, and it's almost time to leave you.
You've met Hildebrandt, Hildegarde, and Hildething: railroad tycoon,
publisher, teacher, syndicated columnist, bereaved mother and tireless
crusader for pronoun reform. There's really only one more thing worth
knowing about him/her/it.
I'm going to the stars.
What I have is an invitation to make a reservation. I didn't mention this
earlier, maybe it slipped my mind, but about a week after Mario died I sat
down for a very long time with Walter's pistol, a bottle of good tequila, and
one round. I drank, and I loaded and unloaded the gun, and drank some
more and pointed it at things: a tree, the side of the cabin, my head. And I
thought about what the CC had said about a virus, and what I had concluded
about the veracity of that statement, and wondered if there was anything I
could think of I really wanted to do? All those other things . . . sure, they
bring me satisfaction, particularly the teaching, but they wouldn't serve any
more as the answer to the question "What do you do, Hildy?"
I thought of something, thought about it some more, and hied myself out
to the Heinlein, where I asked Smith if I could go along when he took off,
worthless as my skills might be to his enterprise. And he said sure, Hildy, I
meant to ask you if you were interested. We'll need somebody to handle the
publicity, for one thing, to establish the right spin-control when it's time to
leave, and most especially when we get back. We'll need advice on how to
market our stories with maximum profit. Hell, most of us will probably
need somebody to ghost-write them, as well. Scientists, test pilots, technical
types, we all get tongue-tied when it comes to that part; just read the early
accounts of the space pioneers. Go see Sinbad over in the publicity
department, see if you can't get him straightened out. If you're any good, I

expect to make you head of the department in a week. You couldn't be
worse at it than Sinbad.
So this is in the nature of a farewell. All the people I've mentioned so
far . . . not a one of them will go. They're just not the type. I love them to
various degrees (yes, even you, Callie), but they are Luna-bound, to a man
and woman. "Hansel," "Gretel," "Libby," (who recovered, by the way),
"Valentine Michael Smith;" these will be my shipmates, whether we leave
next year, in twenty years, or in fifty years. The rest of you are already left
behind.
Teaching, railroading, running the Texian, these are all things I do. But
in my endless spare time (Hah!) I do what I can to further the aims of the
Heinleiners and their crazy project. Result: a two percent increase in
inquiries during the last year. Not exactly setting the world on fire, but give
me time. When I've done all I can in that regard I hang around. You got a
bottle you want washed, a trash pail that needs emptying, a whoosis that
needs polishing? Give it to the Hildething and it will get done. There is no
job too menial for me, mainly because I'm completely useless at the
important jobs. My aim is to become so indispensable to the project that it
would be unthinkable to leave me behind. Go without Hildy? Cripes, who
would shine my shoes and rub my feet?
And there you have it. I promised you no neat conclusion, and I think
I've delivered on that. I warned you of loose ends, and I can see a whole
tangle of them. What of the Invaders, for instance? Brother, I don't know.
Last time anybody checked they were still in charge of our fair home planet,
and unlikely to be evicted soon. If we ever get around to it, that's another
story.
What will we find out there? I don't know that, either, and that's why
I'm going along. Alien intelligences? I wouldn't bet against it. Strange
worlds? I'd say that's a lock. Vast empty spaces, human tragedy and hope.
God. Mario's soul. Your wildest dream and your worst nightmare all could
be out there.
Or maybe we'll find Elvis and Silvio in a flying saucer singing old-timey
rock and roll.
Think what a story it'll be.
—Eugene, Oregon

